OPINION OF THE GROUP OF ADVISERS
ON THE ETHICAL IMPLICATIONS OF BIOTECHNOLOGY
TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION

1(cid:131)(cid:22)

’DWH(cid:29)(cid:11)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:28)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:22)(cid:12)

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

23,1,21(cid:3)21(cid:3)(7+,&$/(cid:3)48(67,216(cid:3)$5,6,1*(cid:3))520(cid:3)7+(
&200,66,21(cid:3)352326$/(cid:3))25(cid:3)$(cid:3)&281&,/(cid:3)’,5(&7,9((cid:3)21
/(*$/(cid:3)3527(&7,21(cid:3))25(cid:3)%,27(&+12/2*,&$/(cid:3),19(17,216

5HIHUHQFH:

Own initiative of 12 March 1992.

5DSSRUWHXU:

Mrs Noëlle Lenoir

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

,(cid:17)

%$&.*5281’

(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:3)6FRSH(cid:3)RI(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)’LUHFWLYH

The  purpose  of  the  proposed  Directive,  the  first  version  of  which  was
presented  by  the  Commission  on  21 October 1988,  is  to  harmonize  patent
law relating to living matter throughout the Community.

As a single market measure, it seeks to ensure the free movement of goods
and prevent abuses of dominant positions.

Since  protecting  innovation  through  patent  law  is  an  important  part  of
promoting  research and  economic  growth, the Directive  is  also  intended  to
help  European  companies  compete  with  their  American  and  Japanese
counterparts in the very promising biotechnology industry.

The  Directive  would  appear  to  be  the  first  international  text  to  deal
specifically with biotechnological inventions.

(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:3)+LVWRU\(cid:3)RI(cid:3)SDWHQW(cid:3)ODZ(cid:3)DV(cid:3)D(cid:3)ZD\(cid:3)RI(cid:3)SURWHFWLQJ(cid:3)LQYHQWLRQV

The  beginnings  of  patent  law  can  be  traced  back  to  the  Age  of
Enlightenment.  Originally,  patents  were  seen  as  a  form  of  social  contract
between  the  inventor  and  society:  society  protected  the  inventor,  by
ensuring that  he  was  rewarded  for  the  disclosure  of  his  invention  and,  in
return, the inventor agreed to make his invention freely available.

Through the patent, the inventor shared the knowledge of his invention with
the  rest  of  society  (see  the  report  to  the  French  National  Assembly  for  the
debate  on  the  Act  of  7 January 1791,  one  of  the  first  to  establish  patent
protection of inventions).

The  first  three  to  pass  laws  on  patents  were  after  Venice.    (Statute  of
Inventors, 1474), England (Statute of Monopolies, 1623), the United States
(in 1790) and France in 1791.

Since  then,  all  of  the  industrialized  countries  and  many  developing
countries have enacted patent legislation.

(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:22)(cid:3)7KH(cid:3)VLWXDWLRQ(cid:3)WRGD\

Patent law today is complex in the extreme.

First,  in  addition  to  all  the  domestic  legislation,  there  is  a  myriad  of
international  conventions,  covering  many  different  fields  and  geographical
areas.

such 

It  established 

The  basic  agreement  is  the  1883  Paris  Convention  for  the  Protection  of
the
Industrial  Property. 
international protection  of  intellectual  property  rights  as  the  principle
of national  treatment,  the  right  of  priority  and  other  minimum  rights.  It
also led  to  the  setting  up  of  an  International  Bureau  in  Berne.  This  has
since developed  into  the  World  Intellectual  Property  Organization  (WIPO),
with its headquarters  in Geneva.  The  Convention has  been  ratified  by  over
100 countries.

corner 

stones 

for 

Patent  law,  whether  domestic  or  international,  generally  applies  across  the
board  to  inert  and  living  matter  alike.  The  Budapest  Treaty  (1977),
ratified by some  thirty  countries,  would  appear  to  be  the  only  treaty  to
deal exclusively  with  patents  on  living  matter,  albeit  only  with  the
procedure for  filing  patents.  It  does  no  more  than  require  international
recognition  of  the  deposits  of  microorganisms  with  the  relevant  institutes
and offices by contracting States.

However,  in  countries  which  are  member  states  of  the  International  Union
for the  Protection  of  new  Varieties  of  Plants  an  obligation  for  legislation
has been  established  to  distinguish  between  inventions  relating  to  plant
varieties  on  the  one  hand  and  to  other  living  matter  (microorganisms,  for
instance) on the other hand. Due to the originally established ban on double
protection  under  the  so-called  UPOV  Convention,  member  states  were
obliged  not  to  protect  plant  varieties  belonging  to  the  same  botanical
species or  genera  by  utility  patents  and  plant  variety  certificates  along
the lines of the UPOV Convention. This ban on double protection, however,
has been removed from the UPOV Convention through the new UPOV Act
adopted in March 1991.

(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:23)(cid:3)(XURSHDQ(cid:3)UHJXODWLRQV

While  there  is  not  as  yet  Community  patent  law  as  such,  there  are  many
European  conventions  covering  more  than  just  the  twelve  Community
Member States.

The  first  of  these  to  be  concluded  was  the  Strasbourg  Convention  on  the
Unification  of  Certain  Points  of  Substantive  Law  on  Patents  of  Invention,
signed  by  the  Member  States  of  the  Council  of  Europe  in  1963.  The
Strasbourg  Convention  has  established  an  obligation  of  contracting  parties
to protect  microbiological  processes  and  the  resulting  products,  but  left
open to  the  contracting  states  to  protect  plant  or  animals  and  essentialy
the  protection  of  plants  or  animals.  This
biological  processes  for 
Convention laid  down  the  criteria  for  the  patentability  of  inventions.  It
also specified  the  circumstances  under  which  an  invention  was  not
patentable.

However,  the  main  convention  at  European  level  is  the  European  Patent
Convention  (EPC),  which  was  concluded  in  Munich  in  1973  and  entered
into  force  in  1978.  It  was  signed  by  seventeen  states,  all  the  Community
Member States, Austria, Sweden, Switzerland, Lichtenstein and Monaco.

The  EPC  also  included  specific  provisions  on  biotechnology.  Although  it
essentially  followed  the  basic  lines  of  the  Strasbourg  Convention,  it
introduced  an  essential  change  in  so  far  as  plant  or  animal  varieties  and
essential  biological  processes  for  the  production  of  plants  or  animals  have
been  declared  unpatentable.  It  also  laid  the  foundation  for  the  setting  up
of the  European  Patents  Office  (EPO),  which  is  known  for  the  very
important part it has played in developing European patent law.

The European Community is about to adopt its own rules in two areas.

First,  the  Directive  under  consideration  here  lays  down  rules  concerning
biotechnology in general.

The  second  set  of  rules  is  concerned,  in  particular,  with  the  protection  of
new  varieties  of  plants.  Special  protection  for  new  varieties  of  plants,  as
distinct from  general  patent  protection,  is  already  afforded  by  the  "UPOV"
Convention, a major international convention adopted in Paris in 1961. The
new Community legislation would take the form of a Regulation (currently
at the drafting stage) establishing a Community system for the protection of
new plant varieties.

A  comparison  of  European  legislation  (existing  and  draft)  with  US  laws
reveals that:

(a) as  regards 

the 

tests  of  patentability  -  apart  from  novelty,  a
universal condition,  US law  requires  also  "non-obviousness"  which
equals  our  prerequisite  of  an  inventive  step.  US  requires  that  the
invention  be  useful,  whereas,  under  European  law,  it  must  be  capable
of industrial  application    ("if  it  can  be  made  or  used  in  any  kind  of
industry, including agriculture", art. 57 EPC);

(b) US  law  makes  no  provision  for  the  many  exceptions  to  be  found  in
European  law (particularly the  EPC)  which  make  certain  products  and
processes  involving  living  matter  unpatentable.  Those  exclusion
clauses (art. 53 b EPC) have been the main obstacles for EPO’s work.

The  Directive  under  consideration  in  this  Opinion  does  not  set  out  to
revise these  exceptions.  Its  stated  aim  is  merely  to  harmonize  the
interpretation  of  existing 
the
Community.  The  Directive  even  includes  certain  provisions  taken  over
verbatim from existing European conventions (in particular the EPC).

international  conventions 

throughout 

The  Group  notes  that,  in  spite  of  this,  the  drafting  process  has  taken
longer than  expected,  mainly  as  a  result  of  the  ethical  objections  raised
by Parliament.

Several  new  provisions,  mostly  on  ethical  questions  relating  to  the
patentability  of  living  matter,  were  added  to  the  Directive  at  the
committee stage  in  Parliament  (particularly  in  the  Committee  on  Legal
Affairs and Citizens’ Rights, acting on the Rothley Report).

Most  recently,  Parliament  adopted  a  resolution  at  the  beginning  of  1993
condemning the production of transgenic animals outright and calling for  a
moratorium.

shows 

This 
considerations now outweigh the purely legal and economic concerns.

the  discussions  on 

the  Directive,  ethical

that, 

in 

,,(cid:17)(cid:3),668(6(cid:3)72(cid:3)%((cid:3)7$.(1(cid:3),172(cid:3)&216,’(5$7,21

(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:3)*HQHUDO(cid:3)TXHVWLRQV

The  Group  is  aware  how  important  it  is  for  Europe  to  step  up
biotechnological  research  and  develop  the  industry  as  a  whole.  It  feels,
therefore,  that  the  Community  should  have  its  own  legislation  on  the  legal
protection of biotechnological innovation.

The  Group  welcomes  the  fact  that,  during  discussion  on  the  Directive  in
question,  the Community  institutions, particularly Parliament, have had  the
opportunity  to  express  their  concern  about  the  ethics  of  advances  in
biology and  genetics.  Lastly,  the  Group  sees  it  as  a  democratic  imperative
that  the  public  be  provided  with  clear  up-to-date  information  on  the
science and the related ethical issues.

(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:3)(WKLFDO(cid:3)TXHVWLRQV

2.2.1 Patentability of living matter

Since its birth in the 1970s, genetic engineering has given man tremendous
power  -  power  to  manipulate  living  matter.  The  apprehension  about  this  is
reflected in the debate on the Directive.

Some  people  are  so  concerned  as  to  question  the  legitimacy  of  patenting
living matter. "You cannot invent nature", was how one French lawyer put it
in a highly critical commentary on the judgment given by the Supreme Court
of  the  United  States  on  16 June 1980  in  Diamond v Chakrabarty,  which
upheld the patentability of a microorganism per se (Ananda M. Chakrabarty,
a  researcher  of  general  Electric,  had  discovered  plasmids  which,  when
incorporated  into  bacteria,  were  capable  of  breaking  down  the  components
of  petroleum,  and  had  patented  their  invention  as  a  useful  anti-pollution
agent).

The Group is of course unable to subscribe to such a utopian and simplistic
view of nature, described as being never modified by humankind.

Its view on this is set out in greater detail below.

1.

2.

The  practice  of  granting  patents  on  living  matter  goes  back  a  long
way.  It  certainly  predates  the  emergence  of  genetic  engineering  and
was  explicitly  endorsed 
the
UPOV Convention  (1961)  and  subsequently  by  the  Strasbourg
Convention (1963).

the  early  1960s, 

first  by 

in 

One should but note that the first known patent of a living organism
was granted in Finland  in 1843 and  Louis Pasteur received a patent
from US Patent Office for a yeast free from organic germs of desease
as early as in 1873.

Of  course,  the  opening  up  of  so  many  new  possibilities  for  altering
living organisms does justify changing patent law, which is what the
Directive rightly sets out to do.

The Group sees no ethical grounds for opposing the patentability of
inventions  relating  to  living  matter  in  principle,  even  though  there
are certain  types  of  genetic  manipulation  which  should,  in  its  view,
be strictly prohibited.

This should be mainly a matter to be dealt with under the competent
branches of public law dealing with the use and commercialization of
research  results  in  respect  to  public  safety,  health,  environment  and
animal  welfare. Nevertheless if patent law cannot  substitute  laws  in
the  respective  fields,  it  is  useful  to  mention  in  the  directive  the
ethical concerns raised by genetic engineering.

The Group is mindful of the reservations some people have  had  for
some  time  now  about  biological  inventions.  But  it  is  also  worth
considering that,  originally,  chemical  and  pharmaceutical  inventions
were  also  denied  all  protection  under  patent  law.  The  value  of
biotechnology  for 
the  environment  and
medicine cannot be denied. The Group is of the opinion that, in order
not  to  hinder  its  development,  the  principle  of  the  patentability  of
inventions relating to living matter must be upheld wherever ethically
possible.

industry,  agriculture, 

2.2.2 Non-patentability  of  inventions  whose  publication  or  exploitation

would offend against public policy or morality

The Directive reproduces Article 53(a) of the EPC prohibiting the patenting
of any invention the  publication or  application of which would be contrary
to public policy or morality.

When  the  Directive  was  going  through  the  Parliamentary  committees,
provisions  were  added  prohibiting  the  granting  of  patents  for  certain
products and processes involving humans and animals.

The group shares the  ethical  considerations behind the provisions added as
reaction  to  the  debate  in  the  european  Parliament.  Yet,  it  is  wondering
wether the amendments are to be considered as part of the directive’s body.

The  appropriate  place  to  address  and  resolve  some  of  those  considerations
seems  to  be  the  recitals  of  the  directive.  Moreover,  attention  is  drawn  to
the fact  that  a  patent  does  not  confer  on  the  patent  owner  the  right  to
make use  of  the  patented  invention  but  only  to  prohibit  its  use  by  others.
There is no positive right to make use linked with a patent.

2.2.3 Protection of human dignity

The concept of human dignity appears for the first time in Community law in
Article 2(3)(a)  of  the  amended  proposal  for  a  Directive,  which  states  that
"processes for modifying the genetic identity of the human body for a non-
therapeutic  purpose  which  is  contrary  to  the  dignity  of  man"  are
unpatentable (implicit reference to cloning and chimera-production, etc.)

Human dignity was already expressly protected by a variety of international
conventions  (e.g.  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights)  and  certain
domestic  legal  instruments  (e.g.  the  Basic  Law  of  the  Federal  Republic  of
Germany,  adopted  in  1949)  but  not,  it  would  appear,  by  Community  law.
Hitherto,  the  concept  has  figured  only  in  the  two  following  declarations  of
principle:

(i)

the  Parliament  resolution  of  16 March 1989  on  the  ethical  and  legal
problems of genetic engineering; and

(ii) Council  Decision  90/395/EEC  of  29 June 1990  adopting  a  specific
research  and  technological  development  programme  in  the  field  of
health: human genome analysis.

While  it  may  seem  strange  that  the  first–ever  reference  to  the  principle  of
respect  for  human  dignity  should  be  made  in  a  directive  on  patents,  it  is
an indication  of  the  concern  aroused  by  certain  developments  in  the  fields
of human genetics and medicine. That is not to say  that  the attention given
to ethical considerations in the Directive does not constitute a new departure
in patent law.

(a) Article 2(3)(a) prohibiting the patenting of the human body or parts of

the human body per se.

It  is  necessary  that  the  question  of  the  patentability  of  human  genes  and
partial  gene  sequences  should  be  dealt  with  in  the  recitals  to  the
Directive. The  controversy  over  this  issue  started  with  the  American
National Research  Institutes’  decision  to  file  patent  applications  with  the
US Patent  Office.  It  must  be  made  clear  that  identifying  genes  or  partial
gene sequences  without  discovering  their  function  does  not  constitute  an
"inventive step" and is not patentable. Any ambiguity on this point must be
cleared  up  in  order  to  uphold  the  freedom  of  research  and  the  freedom  of
researchers to exchange information.

Furthermore,  the  acknowledgement  at  a  community  level  of  the  principle
that  parts  and  products  of  the  human  body  may  not  be  commercially
exploited (e.g. in the case of organ transplants) should be studied.

(b) Article 2(3)(b) on human genetic engineering

The  Group  acknowledges  the  need  to  reaffirm  the  ban  on  genetic
engineering for non-therapeutic purposes, contrary to the dignity of man, but
feels that the Directive is not the right place  to  deal  with the very complex
issue of the legitimacy of germinal therapy.

On  a  different  note,  it  is  questionable  whether  Article 2(3)(b),  which
seemingly  endorses 
is
compatible with  the  other  provisions  of  the  Directive  prohibiting  the
granting of  patents  for  surgical  and  therapeutic  methods  of  treatment  and
diagnostic methods practised on the human (or animal) body.

the  patenting  of  genetic 

techniques, 

therapy 

The same methods are also unpatentable under Article 52(4) of the EPC, the
original  purpose  of  which  was  to  protect  medical  practitioners  from
prosecution  for  infringement  in  the  exercise  of  their  profession.  Today,
however, the medical profession would appear to be adequately protected by
the laws on the use of inventions for private purposes.

Nevertheless, 
the  remaining  restrictive  provisions  concerning  human
medicine should  be  removed  from  the  Directive  in  the  interests  of
consistency.

2.2.4 Transgenic animals

By  making  it  possible  to  mix  genetic  material  from  separate  species,
genetic engineering has given man the power to produce an endless range of
plant and animal varieties, all tailor-made to suit his own needs.

In recent years, a number of transgenic animals have been created by micro–
injection  and  embryo-fusion  (in  the  United  States,  four  patents  have
been issued for Onco-mice, including the Harvard mouse, and in May 1992
the  EPC  agreed  to  grant  a  patent  to  the  mouse's  inventor).  Transgenic
animals open up a number of possibilities:

(i)

they can be used in medical research to study human disease patterns;

(ii)

they can be used to synthesize chemical substances needed for human
medicines,  which  can  easily  be  obtained  from  their  physiological
fluids;

(iii) in  agriculture,  there  is  scope  for  rearing  fast-growing,  high–weight
animals  yielding  predetermined  nutritional  values  or  with  in-built
resistance to disease.

Despite  the  fact  that  animals  have  always  been  used  by  man  as  a  resource
(at one  time,  they  constituted  his  main  source  of  food),  the  production  of
transgenic animals arouses strong feelings among the public.

Parliament's  resolution  calling  for  a  moratorium,  adopted  at  the  beginning
of 1993,  relayed 
the  feelings  expressed  by  various  groupings  (e.g.
associations opposing animal experimentation).

The Group cannot ignore this reaction or the people expressing it.

At the same time, it does not feel it would be advisable to ban transgenesis
on animals as this would bring medical progress to a standstill or, worse still,
result  in  experiments  being  carried  out  on  humans  before  essential
preliminary tests had proved them safe.

Thus,  there  is  a  strong  case  for  making  transgenic  animals  patentable  (the
animals  rather  than  just  the  process  of  transgenesis  because  of  the  need  to
protect the inventor for successive generations).

The  Group  does,  however,  feel  that  the  legal  and  ethical  questions
surrounding transgenic animals do require some clarification.

1. The  Directive  should  make  clear  that  it  is  possible  to  patent  the
production  of  a  transgenic  animal  if  it  is  at  the  end,  useful  to  man,
particularly in the field of scientific research, medicine and agriculture.

2. A  more  detailed  study  should  be  carried  out  at  Community  level  into
the uses of transgenic animals, with reference to the objectives pursued in
the various areas in question.

3. Effective  inspection  arrangements  should  be  devised  to  ensure  that
animals  are  not  subjected  to  unnecessary  or  excessive  suffering  in
laboratories.

4. It is essential to address the question what constitutes an animal species,
a stock or a "breed" and what exactly should remain non-patentable.

It is to this end that the Commission has just officially requested an opinion
from the Group.

2.2.5 Biological diversity

Biodiversity  has  come  to  be  seen  as  ethically  desirable.  Some  people  fear
that it  is  threatened  by  advances  in  biology  and  genetic  engineering.  As
the Group  sees  it,  however,  there  is  no  direct  link  between  patent  law  and
biodiversity.

,,,(cid:17)(cid:3)23,1,21

The Group’s opinion is set out below.

After examination of the ethical questions relating to:

the legitimacy of patenting living matter;
the need to protect human dignity;
the production of transgenic animals; and
the preservation of biodiversity,

the Group of Advisers on the Ethics of Biotechnology:

-

-

-

is  of  the  opinion  that  there  are  no  ethical  objections  to  the
patenting of  biotechnological 
that,
furthermore, in  pursuit  of  its  economic  and  social  objectives,  it  is
essential  for  the  Community  to  harmonize  patent  law  relating  to
biotechnology;

inventions  per 

se;  and 

acknowledges  the  ethical  questions  raised  by  biological  and  genetic
research  and  the  applications  thereof,  and  considers  it  right  that,  at
the  initiative  of  Parliament,  in  touch  with  people’s  concerns,  these
questions should be addressed mostly in the recitals of the Directive;

considers that, since these issues have never previously arisen in the
field  of  patent  law,  some  clarifications  are  urgently  needed  on
certain concepts  and  on  the  scope  of  certain  provisions  in  the
Directive.

Human genetics

Genes  and  partial  gene  sequences  whose  functions  are  unknown  should  be
made expressly unpatentable to end the international debate on the matter. In
due course, the Community should try to arrange an international agreement
on  the  patentability  tests  for  inventions  resulting  from  genetic  research
programmes.

Furthermore,  the  Community  should  take  a  stand  against  the  commercial
exploitation of the human body.

Transgenic animals

There  is  no  need  to  impose  a  complete  ban  on  the  production  of
transgenic animals.  Extreme  care  must  be  taken  to  ensure  that  they  are
used for  adequate  purposes,  not  suffer  inadequate  pain  or  cause  damage
for the general public.

Biodiversity

The  Directive  itself  poses  no  threat  to  biodiversity.  However,  with
ratification of 
the
Community would  be  well  advised  to  start  considering  the  matter  with
view to clarifying what it understands the concept to mean in practical terms.

the  UN  Convention  on  Biological  Diversity, 

**********

None of the other themes dealt with in the Directive (e.g. farmer’s privilege)
raises ethical questions which fall within the Group’s remit.

The  Group  wishes  to  draw  the  Commission’s  attention  to  the  need  for
measures  to  familiarize  the  public  not  only  with  the  scientific  and
economic side  of  biotechnology  but  also  with  the  social,  legal  and  ethical
implications. This is a democratic imperative.

In  accordance  with  its  remit,  the  Group  submits  this  opinion  to  the
Commission.

One  member  of  the  group  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  demands  worded  in
Section  II,  par.  2.2.4.,  points  n°  1  to  3  should  be  addressed  to  general
public law, not to patent law.

Concerning  Section  III,  3rd  par.,  second  dash,  one  member  of 
the  group
emphasizes that  respective  provisions  must,  as  a  matter  of  principle,  be  made  in
general public law, not, however, in patent law.

The Members:

Anne McLaren

Margareta Mikkelsen

Luis Archer

Octavi Quintana-Trias

Stefano Rodota

Egbert Schroten

Dietmar Mieth

Gilbert Hottois

The Chairman,

Noëlle Lenoir

