OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS

IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES

TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION

1R(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:20)

(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:3)-XO\(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:27)

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

(7+,&$/(cid:3)$63(&76(cid:3)2)(cid:3)+80$1(cid:3)7,668((cid:3)%$1.,1*

Reference:

Initiative of the Group

Rapporteur: M. Octavi Quintana-Trias

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

7+((cid:3)(8523($1(cid:3)*5283(cid:3)21(cid:3)(7+,&6(cid:3),1(cid:3)6&,(1&((cid:3)$1’(cid:3)1(:(cid:3)7(&+12/2*,(6(cid:3)(cid:11)(*((cid:12)(cid:15)

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Having  regard  to  the  Treaty  on  European  Union  as  amended  by  the  Treaty  of
Amsterdam,  and  in  particular  Article 6  (formerly  Article F)  of  the  common
provisions, and the new Article 152 (formerly Article 129) of the EC Treaty on public
health, and in particular paragraph 4(a) referring to substances of human origin;
Having regard to Council Directive 89/381/EEC of 14 June 1989 extending the scope
of  Directives  65/65/EEC  and  75/319/EEC  on  the  approximation  of  provisions  laid
down  by  law,  regulation  or  administrative  action  relating  to  proprietary  medicinal
products  and  laying  down  special  provisions  for  medicinal  products  derived  from
human blood or human plasma;
Having regard to Council Directive 76/768/EEC of 27 July 1976 on the approximation
of the laws of the Member  States  relating to cosmetic  products, and in  particular  its
6th amendment of 1993;
Having regard  to  Council  Directive 93/42/EEC of  14 June  1993  concerning  medical
devices,  and  the  proposal  of  19 April  1995  for  a  Directive  on  in  vitro  diagnostic
medical devices amending Directive 93/42/EEC;
Having regard to Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of  the  European  Union  of  24  October  1995  on  the  protection  of  individuals  with
regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data;
Having  regard  to  the  Resolution  of  the  European  Parliament  on  prohibiting  trade  in
transplant  organs  (A3-0074/93)  of  14 September  1993,  and  in  particular  point 2
thereof, which calls for a ban on imports, use and/or transplants of organs and tissues
whose origin and state of health is not known with certainty;
Having  regard  to  Recommendation  R(94) 1  of  the  Committee  of  Ministers  of  the
Council of Europe on Human Tissue Banks adopted on 14 March 1994;
Having regard to Resolution (78) 29 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe on harmonisation of legislation of Member States relating to removal, grafting
and transplantation of human substances, adopted on 11 May 1978;
Having  regard  to  Recommendation  (79) 5  of  the  Committee  of  Ministers  of  the
Council  of  Europe  to  Member  States  concerning  international  exchange  and
transportation of human substances, adopted on 14 March 1979;

-

-

-

-

-

Having  regard  to  the  Council  of  Europe  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and
Biomedicine, signed on 4 April 1997;
Having  regard  to  the  Universal  Declaration  on  the  human  genome  and  the  rights  of
man adopted by the UNESCO on 11 November 1997;
Having  regard  to  the  various  laws  and  rules  applying  in  some  Members  States
concerning human tissues or organs;
Having  regard  to  the  round-table  that  the  Group  organised  with  Members  of  the
European  Parliament,  experts,  representatives  of  industry,  research,  professional
associations  and  patients  on  27 November  1996,  and  to  the  hearing  of  experts  and
Commission departments on 17 March 1998;
Having heard the rapporteur Mr O. Quintana-Trias,

(cid:20)(cid:17)

:+(5($6(cid:29)

(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:20) :KDW(cid:3)DUH(cid:3)KXPDQ(cid:3)WLVVXHV"

Human tissue is defined as a functional group of cells.

For the purposes of this Opinion, human tissues means constituent parts of the human body
such as: bones, skin, heart valves, cornea, tendons, arteries, veins, dura mater as well as foetal
tissues obtained following abortions, placenta and umbilical cord (the cord itself and the cells
it contains).

The  Opinion  also  covers  cells  intended  for  grafting  (in  particular  for  somatic  gene  therapy
and cell therapy), cell  lines from cell  cultures  as  well as cells  used to  produce proteins and
other substances (e.g. monoclonal antibodies).

(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:21)

3DUWV(cid:3)DQG(cid:3)SURGXFWV(cid:3)RI(cid:3)KXPDQ(cid:3)RULJLQ(cid:3)QRW(cid:3)FRYHUHG(cid:3)E\(cid:3)WKLV(cid:3)2SLQLRQ

This  Opinion  does  not  cover  organs  for  transplantation,  which  are  already  covered  by
comprehensive, detailed national legislation in all Member States of the European Union.

Neither does the Opinion cover:

- blood and blood products, which are currently covered by national rules and by Community
rules pursuant to the above-mentioned Directive of 14 June 1989;

-  hair,  nails,  breastmilk  and  body  waste  (urine,  sweat,  saliva),  which  are  treated  differently
because their removal does not give rise to major ethical problems;

- gametes, reproductive tissues (such as ovaries) and embryos, which are covered by specific
national rules and give rise to quite specific ethical problems.

Every  stored  tissue  is  a  potential  source  of  genetic  information  (DNA).  However,  this
Opinion does not cover genomic banks (DNA banks or “biobanks”), which give rise to many
important  legal  and  ethical  questions  (particularly  as  regards  the  confidentiality  of  data,
access  to  such  data,  and  possible  uses  even  in  the  very  long  term).  The  Group  intends  to
consider these in a subsequent Opinion.

2

(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:22)

9DULRXV(cid:3)XVHV(cid:3)RI(cid:3)WLVVXHV

This Opinion covers a wide variety of human tissues, which can be used for a wide variety of
purposes:

- for diagnostic purposes: e.g. to determine whether a tumour is cancerous or not by removing
tissue  (biopsy).  In  order  to  establish  the  cause  of  death,  forensic  medicine  also  analyses
human  tissues.  Likewise,  human  tissues  are  the  subject  of  toxicological  studies  to  test  the
effects on them of certain products: insecticides, cosmetics, medicines;

-  for  therapeutic  purposes:  in  this  case,  tissues  are  mostly  used  for  transplantation.  For
example, orthopaedic surgery uses fragments of bone, while skin grafts are used to treat burn
victims  or  as  dressings  in  the  treatment  of  diabetics.  Tissues  are  also  used  as  sources  of
proteins or other therapeutic substances. Today they are only very rarely used  as sources  of
hormones in the European Union;

- for research  purposes: basic, epidemiological  and clinical research.  Such research has,  for
example, made it possible to establish a link between asbestos and a lung cancer.

Nevertheless,  tissues  may  no  longer  be  used  to  make  non-medicinal  products.  The  use  of
human  tissues  in  the  manufacture  of  cosmetics  was  banned  in  Europe  by  the  above-
mentioned  Directive  on  the  approximation  of  the  laws  of  the  Member  States  relating  to
cosmetic  products  of  1976,  which  was  amended  in  1995,  and  applies  in  this  respect  from
30 June  1997.  The  Directive  gives  as  grounds  for  the  ban  the  risk  of  transmission  of
“Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, human spongiform encephalopathy, and certain viral diseases”.

(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:23)

2ULJLQ(cid:3)DQG(cid:3)UHPRYDO(cid:3)RI(cid:3)WLVVXHV

The most common source of human tissue is removal from the body as part of diagnosis or
treatment. It may be affected tissues or surplus tissues, mainly surgical residues.

Tissues are also  frequently  removed  from dead donors.  Other  sources  include  foetal  tissues
obtained  following  abortions  (spontaneous  or  induced),  as  well  as  placenta  and  umbilical
cords obtained at childbirth.

Exceptionally, tissues may also be obtained from healthy volunteers (skin, for example).

Tissues  are  generally  removed  or  obtained  in  health  care  institutions  or  medical  analysis
laboratories.

3

(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:24)

7LVVXH(cid:3)EDQNV

Unlike organs, which cannot be conserved, tissues can easily be stored for long periods. Once
removed  or  collected,  tissues  are  subject  to  a  series  of  operations  which,  particularly  when
they are intended for transplantation, comprise the following functions:

- 

- 

- 

- 

processing

preserving and storage

registration (to collect the data which will enable in particular the source of the tissues
to be traced)

distribution and delivery.

These are the functions performed by “tissue banks”. Tissue banks are units or services which
may be operated by public or private, profit-making or non-profit-making bodies (hospitals,
blood transfusion centres, and even, in some cases, large laboratories …).

At  present  there  is  insufficient  information  on  tissue  storage  and  distribution  conditions
across Europe, as no general inventory of human tissue banks has been made.

(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:25)

3URFHVVLQJ(cid:3)RI(cid:3)WLVVXHV

The processing of tissues is primarily intended to enable them to be preserved and stored in
tissue  banks.  Where  the  tissues  are  intended  for  transplantation  into  another  person,
processing  also  includes  clinical,  microbiological  and  immunological  tests  intended  to
safeguard the safety of the recipient. These tests are intended to prevent the transmission of
infectious, neoplastic (cancer) and immunological diseases.

Tissues  collected  for  diagnostic  or  research  purposes  are  generally  studied  in  their  original
state in order to identify the illness affecting them.

Products  can  also  now  be  obtained  by  increasingly  sophisticated  techniques  which  enable
certain  properties  of  the  tissues  to  be  modified.  To  that  end  the  tissues  undergo  prior
processing. This is the case in particular for skin cultures, which enable large areas skin to be
made available for grafting.

(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:26)

’LVWULEXWLRQ(cid:3)RI(cid:3)WLVVXHV

It  is  the  function  of  tissue  banks  to  organise  the  distribution  of  tissues  to  the  professionals
who will be using them for various purposes.

(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:27) 0DLQ(cid:3)HWKLFDO(cid:3)LVVXHV

Wherever  tissues  are  removed  from  human  beings,  and  possibly  transplanted  into  other
human beings, the activities involved in the collection and use of such tissues are subject to
ethical  requirements  intended  to  safeguard  respect  for  human  beings,  their  dignity  and
autonomy, and for the common good.

4

The  issue  of  safety  is  also  vital,  as  the  European  Union  has  set  itself  the  objective  of
guaranteeing  each  citizen  a  “high  level  of  human  health  protection”.  This  protection  must
extend  to  tissue  donors  and  recipients,  and  to  all  health  care  professionals  -  whose  work
involves collecting, manipulating and using human tissues.

At present we cannot be sure that the health safety of tissues is properly ensured throughout
the European Union. This is due to the shortcomings of the existing national rules. As a result
tissues  move  freely  within  Europe  and  are  sometimes  even  imported  from  non-member
countries, in many cases without detailed information on their origin, and in particular on the
state of health of the donor.

(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:28)

3URWHFWLRQ(cid:3)RI(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)GRQRU(cid:3)DQG(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)UHFLSLHQW

With regard to the removal of tissues, the main ethical principles from the donor’s point of
view are:

-

-

-

-

-

- 

respect for the human body, even after the person’s death;

respect for the autonomy of the donor; thus, tissue may not be removed whenever the
person refuses. For deceased persons, this implies that tissues may not be removed if
the person refused consent during her/his lifetime;

protection of vulnerable people, namely people unable to give consent;

respect for private life and medical confidentiality, which is a fundamental right;

the right to prior information on the conditions of removal and the expected use of the
tissues;

the  right  not  to  be  subjected  to  unfair  discrimination,  which  could  result  from  the
revelation  of  data  collected  from  the  donor,  or  the  family,  to  third  parties  (e.g.
employers and insurance companies).

The main principles affecting recipients of allografts are:

- 

- 

- 

- 

respect for the autonomy of the person concerned, which requires clear information on
the risks and advantages of the proposed transplant;

respect  for  private  life  and  medical  confidentiality,  which  applies  to  all  medical
treatment;

the  right  to  safety,  which  requires  prior  verification  of  the  quality  and  safety  of  the
tissue to be transplanted with regard to the risk of transmission of infectious diseases,
neoplasms and immunological diseases;

the right of patients to have fair access to the therapeutic possibilities offered by the
transplantation of human tissues; the effectiveness of this right depends partly on the
greater or lesser availability of tissues.

5

(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:19) 7KH(cid:3)SUREOHP(cid:3)RI(cid:3)FRPPHUFLDOLVDWLRQ(cid:3)RI(cid:3)KXPDQ(cid:3)WLVVXHV

All Member States  of  the  European  Union  adhere  to  the  principle  that  donations  of  human
tissues must be free, following the example of blood, and this rules out any payment to the
donor.  However,  the  donor  may  receive  compensation  for  the  constraints  associated  with
tissue removal (e.g. travel expenses, loss of earnings, etc.). Some parties maintain that for the
sake of fairness, when the tissues become even indirectly a source of profit, donors should be
paid.  Furthermore,  donor’s  remuneration  might  increase  the  supply  of  tissues.  So  far,
however,  the  arguments  in  favour  of  the  altruistic  nature  of  tissue  donation  (like  organ
donation) have prevailed. They are based on a regard for solidarity. Also they are  inspired by
the  desire  to  avoid  the  human  person  being  regarded  as  an  object  (a  source  of  organs  and
tissues). Another argument in favour of free donations is to avoid all risk of exploitation of
the most underprivileged who might be led, in doubtful conditions of health, to donate tissue
exclusively or primarily for financial reasons.

As an example, a debate arose a few years ago in the United States with regard to the removal
of tissues from an individual whose cells had rare features (the Moore case). These  tissues,
ostensibly removed as part of a medical treatment, had in reality enabled profitable industrial
applications, and this information was withheld from the donor. The deficient and misleading
information given to the donor was condemned by the Court, even though the judge did not
accept that Moore  should  participate  in the economic  benefit  derived  from  the  use  of  these
tissues.  However,  this  case  leads  some  commentators  to  call  for  payments  to  be  made  to
tissue donors for the sake of equity.

The issue of the commercialisation of human tissues which have been processed and prepared
for therapeutic purposes is even more controversial.

For  some,  tissue  banks  must  be  operated  only  by  non-profit-making  bodies,  as  the  tissues
have originally been obtained free of charge in a spirit of altruism.

For others hold that the processing and conversion of tissues involve costs which they believe
justify their commercial sale, in the same way as blood derivatives. The commercialisation of
human tissues has the added advantage, according to its proponents, of encouraging industry
to  invest  in  areas  which  will  result  in  greater  availability  of  tissues  on  the  market.  This
argument is most often advanced with regard to “engineered” tissues requiring sophisticated
industrial processing techniques.

Currently, although no surveys of tissue banks in Europe have been carried out, it seems that
most  of  the  banks  are  non  profit,  nevertheless  some  of  them  have  been  set  up  by  private
industries, particularly for the production of engineered tissues.

* * * * * * * * *

6

,1(cid:3) 7+,6(cid:3) &217(;7(cid:15)(cid:3) $1’(cid:3) ,1(cid:3) 9,(:(cid:3) 2)(cid:3) 7+((cid:3) 85*(17(cid:3) 1((’(cid:3) 72(cid:3) 5(*8/$7((cid:3) 7+(
(cid:21)(cid:17)
&21’,7,216(cid:3) 81’(5(cid:3) :+,&+(cid:3) +80$1(cid:3) 7,668(6(cid:3) &,5&8/$7((cid:3) :,7+,1(cid:3) 7+((cid:3)(8523($1(cid:3) 0$5.(7(cid:15)
7+((cid:3)*5283(cid:3)68%0,76(cid:3)7+((cid:3))2//2:,1*(cid:3)23,1,21(cid:29)

(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:20)

(WKLFDO(cid:3)LPSHUDWLYH(cid:3)WR(cid:3)SURWHFW(cid:3)KHDOWK

No substance of human origin is free from the risk of disease transmission. Thus tissues, in
particular  those  intended  for  transplantation  to  third  parties  or  for  the  preparation  of
pharmaceutical  specialities,  must  undergo  advance  testing  to  provide  maximum  health
guarantees in accordance with the state of the art.

To this end, the health safety rules to be drawn up at Community level must at least comprise:

*   research  on  the  personal,  medical  and  family  history  of  the  donor  in  order  to  detect  all
possible transmissible diseases (e.g. to ascertain any occurrence in the donor of a subacute
spongiform encephalopathy  -  Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease  for which  no  valid  test on  living
donors exists or a state of dementia before death that could be a symptom of this disease);

*   thorough  biological  analyses  according  to  recommendions  of  good  medical  practice  in
order  to  detect,  for  example,  HIV  viruses  and,  more  generally,  transmissible  infectious
diseases;

*   any  additional  analyses  that  may  be  necessary  in  view  of  the  donor’s  history  or  of  the

nature of the tissue in question.

 The  use  of  certain  types  of  tissue  for  allografts  or  as  a  basis  for  the  production  of
pharmaceutical substances should be banned or at least limited. This includes tissues whose
safety  cannot  be  proved  due  to  the  absence  of  valid  tests  (dura  mater,  auditory  ossicles,
tympanic and petrosal tissue used for grafting.)

 Tissue retrieval should be supervised by a physician. In addition, all tissue procurement must
be carried out by qualified staff under strict conditions (in particular, licensed premises which
meet technical health standards).

 The  conduct  of  the  necessary  tests  must  be  supplemented  by  surveillance  mechanisms  to
detect  any  accidents  and  their  origin  at  the  earliest  possible  stage:  donor  documentation,
monitoring  of  recipients,  registers  of  accidents  and  remedial  procedures  in  place.  Such  a
surveillance and traceability system should be an integral part of the health rules drawn up at
Community level.

 The  establishment  of  a  European  structure  for  the  protection  of  health  should  also  be
envisaged,  in  collaboration  with  the  European  Agency  for  the  Evaluation  of  Medicinal
Products.

 (cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:21)

%RG\(cid:3)LQWHJULW\

 The  integrity  of  the  human  body  should  be  ensured  when  procuring  human  tissue  from  an
individual, living or dead. When tissues are procured from the deceased, due regard should be
paid for the feelings of relatives.

7

 (cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:22)

,QIRUPDWLRQ(cid:3)DQG(cid:3)FRQVHQW

 The  procurement  of  human  tissues  requires,  as  a  principle,  the  prior,  informed  and  free
consent  of  the  person  concerned.  This  does  not  apply  in  the  case  of  tissue  procurement
ordered by a judge in the context of judicial, in particular criminal, proceedings.

 While  consent  is  a  fundamental  ethical  principle  in  Europe,  the  procedures  involved  and
forms of such consent (oral or in writing, before a witness or not, explicit or presumed, etc.)
are a matter for national legislation based on the legal traditions of each country.

 2.3.1 Living donors

 In order to be informed, the donor’s consent must have been given on the basis of information
provided  in  as  clear  and  precise  lay  terms  as  possible  by  the  doctor  supervising  the
procurement.

 The information provided to the donor should concern:

*   the procurement arrangements, in particular concerning the free nature of the donation, and

the extent of its anonymity.

*   possible  tissue  storage  time  and  conditions,  and  conditions  of  registration  of  data  in
databases,  in  conformity  with  requirements  of  private  life  protection  and  medical
confidentiality;

*   foreseeable use of the tissues (diagnostic, allograft or autograft, pharmaceutical products,
research,  production  of  cellular  lines  for  various  uses,  etc.).  The  donor  may  at  any  time
withdraw her/his consent.

 2.3.2 Deceased donors

 Consent of a donor for retrieval of tissues after death may take different forms depending on
the national systems (“explicit” or “presumed” consent). However, no retrieval of tissues may
take  place,  with  the  exception  of  judicial  proceedings,  if  the  party  concerned  formally
objected while alive. Furthermore, if there has been no expression of will and the applicable
system is that of “presumed” consent, doctors must ensure as far as possible that relatives or
next of kin have the opportunity to express the deceased person’s wishes, and must take these
into account.

 2.3.3 Special cases

 Special provision must be made in the following three cases:

•  Foetal tissue procured after an abortion

 No  abortion  should  be  induced  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  foetal  tissue.  In  the  case  of
deliberate or spontaneous abortion, the retrieval of the tissue requires the specific free and
informed consent of the woman and, where appropriate, of the couple. The timing of the
termination and the way in which it is carried out must not be influenced by the retrieval of
the tissues.

8

•  Placenta and umbilical cord procured during delivery

 The  placenta  can  be  an  important  source  of  vessels  for  transplant  purposes.  In  these
conditions, its procurement must be subject to prior information to the woman.

 Umbilical cord may  increasingly be  procured because of its therapeutic interests.  Umbilical
cord  blood  banks  are  already  being  set  up.  The  hematopoïetic  stem  cells  in  the  cord  blood
may  be  useful,  for  example  in  the  case  of  leukaemia,  for  autografts  or  allografts.  In  this
respect, the information  provided  to  the woman or to the couple  must  clearly  explain  these
prospective new treatments, but stress that they are still very much at the experimental stage.

•  Surgical residues

Surgical residues are currently one of the major source of tissues for allografts. Nonetheless,
their procurement during operations (e.g. head of the femur, in the course of hip operations)
is frequently unregulated.

The provision of information to the donor is all the more necessary today as the tests to verify
the safety of the tissues can only be carried out with the consent of the donor.

(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:23)

5HVSHFW(cid:3)RI(cid:3)SULYDF\(cid:3)DQG(cid:3)SURWHFWLRQ(cid:3)RI(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)FRQILGHQWLDOLW\(cid:3)RI(cid:3)LQIRUPDWLRQ(cid:3)FROOHFWHG
GXULQJ(cid:3)WLVVXH(cid:3)SURFXUHPHQW

In the interests of anonymity, it is prohibited to disclose  information that  could  identify the
donor, and the recipient. In general, the donor should not know the identity of the recipient,
nor should the recipient know the identity of the donor.

Procurement  and  storage  of  tissues  in  tissue  banks  leads  to  the  collection  and  storage  of  a
growing number of personal and family data. This is the case, for example, when tissues are
stored following analysis for diagnostic purposes. It is also the case when tissues are removed
for  use  in  allografts,  for  health  reasons.  In  the  event  of  subsequent  sanitary  or  health
problems,  there  is  a  need  to  find  the  donor’s  identity  and  the  medical  file  (traceability
requirement).

In  order  to  reconcile  the  traceability  requirement  and  the  need  to  protect  the  donor’s  rights
(medical  confidentiality  and  privacy),  tissue  banks  must  take  the  necessary  steps  to  protect
confidentiality of the data by developing appropriate coding systems.

(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:24)

3UHYHQWLQJ(cid:3)SRVVLEOH(cid:3)GLVFULPLQDWLRQ

As with all health information, personal data relating to tissues stored by tissue banks may be
the cause of unwarranted  discrimination  if  revealed  to third parties (in particular  employers
and insurance companies). Tissue banks must therefore take all appropriate steps to prevent
misuse of the personal data at their disposal.

9

 
(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:25)

3URPRWLQJ(cid:3)VROLGDULW\(cid:3)DQG(cid:3)WLVVXH(cid:3)DYDLODELOLW\(cid:3)LQ(cid:3)(XURSH

Anonymous and free tissue donation - like organ donation - basically remains a voluntary act
of solidarity. Therefore it is necessary in each Member State and at European Union level to
encourage people to donate tissue as an act of solidarity. To this end, public should be given
clear information on the conditions under which the donated tissues will be used and on the
likely  public  health  benefits.  The  information  in  question  must  also  stress  the  specific
responsibility of the tissue banks with regard to the safeguarding of ethical principles.

(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:26)

5ROH(cid:3)DQG(cid:3)UHVSRQVLELOLWLHV(cid:3)RI(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)WLVVXH(cid:3)EDQNV

Activities  of  procurement,  which  are  non-commercial,  as  well  as  activities  carried  out  by
tissue banks require an authorisation. This authorisation must be subject to compliance with
basic  ethical  principles  and  with  health  safety  standards,  which  themselves  are  an  ethical
imperative. Safety rules must be uniform throughout the European Union.

Tissue  banks  have  an  eminent  responsibility  to  monitor  implementation  of  these  rules  and
principles.  They  should  refuse  to  accept  tissues  the  procurement  of  which  does  not  satisfy
ethical principles and safety rules.

Tissue banks also have specific responsibilities as regards protecting the confidentiality of the
personal data they keep on donors and their families.

In view of their  responsibility  for  the  quality and  safety  of  the  tissues  they  provide  to  third
parties, banks should be obliged to keep a register of the tissues stored and distributed. This
register should be available for presentation to the national inspectorates at all times.

(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:27)

3URILW(cid:3)RU(cid:3)QRQ(cid:16)SURILW(cid:3)WLVVXH(cid:3)EDQNV

In  principle,  tissue  bank  activities  should  be  reserved  to  public  health  institutions  or  non-
profit-making  organisations.  In  such  case,  this  means  that  the  delivery  price  of  the  tissues
only covers the bank’s expenses relating to the tissues in question.

Nevertheless,  given  the  current  state  of  development  of  the  sector,  it  is  difficult  to  exclude
tissue banking activities by commercial organisations, such as large private laboratories. This
is  particularly  true  where  human  tissues  are  used  as  a  basis  for  “engineered”  products
requiring the use of sophisticated medical techniques. Tissue banks set up by industry should
be subject to the same licensing and monitoring requirements as non-commercial operators.

(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:28)

7RZDUGV(cid:3)HTXLWDEOH(cid:3)DFFHVV(cid:3)WR(cid:3) WKH(cid:3) WKHUDSHXWLF(cid:3) RSSRUWXQLWLHV(cid:3) SUHVHQWHG(cid:3) E\(cid:3) WKH(cid:3) XVH
RI(cid:3)KXPDQ(cid:3)WLVVXHV

The medical use of products of human origin is inevitably constrained by limited availability,
owing to the precautions that have to be taken to guarantee safety and to the voluntary nature
of donations.

10

According to the principle of justice, it is necessary to define the criteria for priority access to
such  tissue  products  in  the  most  transparent  manner  possible,  on  the  basis  of  an  objective
evaluation  of  medical  needs,  taking  into  consideration  the  objectives  for  public  health  in
Europe.

(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:19) 7LVVXH(cid:3)LPSRUWV(cid:3)IURP(cid:3)RXWVLGH(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)(XURSHDQ(cid:3)8QLRQ

Tissue imports or exports should be licensed by Public  authorities. Authorisation  should  be
subject to at least equivalent ethical and health rules to those outlined above.

(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:20) &RPPXQLW\(cid:3)VXUYH\(cid:3)RQ(cid:3)WLVVXH(cid:3)EDQNV

The  European  Union  should  promote  periodic  surveys  in  the  Member  States  to  obtain  and
diffuse  data  on  practices  relating  to  human  tissues,  from  procurement  to  distribution,  the
organisation of tissue banks, particularly concerning the profit-making or non-profit making
aspect and the true dimension of imports and import controls.

These surveys should be used to provide better information to the public on the ethical and
safety controls in place, as well as on perspectives in therapy, diagnosis and research offered
by uses with human tissues.

The European Group on Ethics in Science and new Technologies:

The Members:

Paula Martinho Da Silva

Anne McLaren

Marja Sorsa

Ina Wagner

Göran Hermeren

Gilbert Hottois

Dietmar Mieth

Octavi Quintana-Trias

Stefano Rodota

Egbert Schroten

Peter Whittaker

The Chairman,

Noëlle Lenoir

11

