OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS

IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES

TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION

1R(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:21)

(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)

(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)

(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:3)1RYHPEHU(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:27)

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)
(7+,&$/(cid:3)$63(&76(cid:3)2)(cid:3)5(6($5&+(cid:3),192/9,1*(cid:3)7+((cid:3)86((cid:3)2)(cid:3)+80$1
(0%5<2(cid:3),1(cid:3)7+((cid:3)&217(;7(cid:3)2)(cid:3)7+((cid:3)(cid:24)WK(cid:3))5$0(:25.(cid:3)352*5$00(

Reference:       Opinion requested by the European Commission on 11 September 1998
Rapporteurs: Dr. Anne McLaren

Ms Paula Martinho Da Silva
Prof. Egbert Schroten

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)
The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE),

Having  regard  to  the  request  for  an  Opinion  by  the  European  Commission  of  11
September  1998  on  amendment  N°36  tabled  by  the  European  Parliament  which
proposes  to  exclude  from  Community  funding  research  projects  that  “result  in  the
destruction  of  human  embryos",  in  the  context  of  deciding  on  the  5th  Framework
Programme,

Having  regard  to  the  Treaty  on  European  Union  as  amended  by  the  Treaty  of
Amsterdam  to  be  ratified,  and  in  particular  Article  6  (formerly  Article  F)  of  the
common  provisions  concerning  the  respect  for  fundamental  rights,  and  the  Articles
163-173 (formerly Articles 130f-130p) on research and technological development,

Having  regard  to  the  proposal  for  a  European  Parliament  and  Council  Decision
concerning  the  Fifth  Framework  Programme  of  the  European  Community  for
Research, Technological Development and Demonstration Activities (1998 – 2002) of
30  April  1997,  and  in  particular  Article  6  concerning  compliance  with  fundamental
ethical principles, and footnote 2 of Annex II on  Scientific  and  Technical objectives
concerning ethical requirements,

Having regard to the Common Position of the Council of Ministers of 23 March 1998
and the second reading of the European Parliament of 17 June 1998, concerning  the
above mentioned proposal for a Fifth Framework Programme,

Having  regard  to  the  proposal  for  a  Council  Decision  concerning  a  specific
programme for research, technological development and demonstration on "Quality of
life and management of living resources" of 10 June 1998, and in particular footnote 8
on ethical requirements,

Having  regard  to  Directive  98/44/EC  of  6  July  1998  on  the  legal  protection  of
biotechnological inventions, in particular Article 6,

 
Having regard to the Resolutions of the European Parliament namely the Resolution
on  the  ethical  and  legal  problems  of  genetic  engineering,  and  the  Resolution  on
artificial insemination "LQ(cid:3)YLYR" and "LQ(cid:3)YLWUR", both of 16 March 1989,

Having  regard  to  the  Council  of  Europe  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and
Biomedicine signed on 4 April 1997, and the additional protocol to the Convention on
the prohibition of cloning human beings signed on 12 January 1998,

Having regard to the Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights
adopted by the General Conference of UNESCO on 11 November,

Having  regard  to  national  regulations  and  opinions  expressed  by  national  ethical
bodies within the European Union on the use of embryonic tissues,

Having  regard  to  the  report  of  the  HER  working  party  (Human  Embryo  Research)
(1993) set up by the European Commission,

Having  regard  to  the  hearing  held  on  3  November  1998  by  the  EGE,  with  experts,
representatives of the European Institutions and of interest groups (health, consumers,
industry, religions),

Having heard the rapporteurs.

(cid:20)(cid:17)

:+(5($6(cid:29)

S C I E N T I F I C   B A C K G R O U N D

1.1 

The first baby to be conceived by LQ(cid:3)YLWUR fertilisation (IVF) outside the mother’s body
was not born until 1978 in the UK, research on human gametes and embryos donated
by infertile couples had been carried out for the previous 10 years.  During this period
there were no specific regulations concerning human embryo research.

’LIIHUHQW(cid:3)REMHFWLYHV(cid:3)RI(cid:3)KXPDQ(cid:3)HPEU\R(cid:3)UHVHDUFK

1.2

1.3 

Nowadays, human embryo research in which the embryo does not survive is permitted
in  several  Member  States,  in  particular  with  the  applied  objectives  of  alleviating
infertility in the  couple or diagnosing  serious genetic  or  chromosomal  defects in  the
embryo.

Some Member States only allow an IVF embryo to be used for research if the research
is intended for the benefit of that particular embryo, and if the embryo is subsequently
replaced  in  the  uterus.  If  there  existed  the  possibility  that  procedures  might  damage
the embryo,  this  type  of  experimentation  conducted  on  the  embryo  LQ(cid:3) YLWUR(cid:15)(cid:3) fetus(cid:3) LQ
YLYR(cid:3) or  the  mother,  is  generally  judged  as  being  unethical.  In  practice  therefore,  the
procedures  used  in  this  so-called  "therapeutic  research"  are  very  limited.  For  the
purposes of this Opinion, we confine the use of the term "research" to experiments on
embryos which are not intended for transfer to the uterus, and which do not survive.

2

1.4

1.5

In  other  Member  States,  where  research  is  authorised,  research  that  is  not  for  the
benefit of the particular embryo may be permitted under licence. Most of this licensed
research  is  aimed  at  either  improving  the  success  rate  and  the  safety  of  IVF  as
treatment for infertility, and investigating the causes of infertility and miscarriage.

Other research projects  are  concerned with the diagnosis of genetic or  chromosomal
defects.  Some  Member States  also  allow  human  embryo  research  for  the  purpose  of
increasing knowledge of human development.

&RPPRQ(cid:3)UXOHV(cid:3)RQ(cid:3)UHVHDUFK(cid:3)LQ(cid:3)(XURSH

1.6

In the Member States where embryo research is allowed, regulations normally require
that any embryos used for research must not be implanted in the uterus, nor may they
be cultured LQ(cid:3) YLWUR for longer than  14 days after  fertilisation, a stage that in normal
development  would  mark  the  end  of  the  implantation  process  and  the  last  stage  at
which twinning could occur. Most research projects involve culturing the embryos for
a few days only.

5HVHDUFK(cid:3)RQ(cid:3)VXSHUQXPHUDU\(cid:3)HPEU\RV

1.7

In most cases, couples undergoing IVF treatment may have embryos that are in excess
of  the  number  that  can  safely  be  transferred  to  the  woman’s  uterus,  so-called
supernumerary  embryos.  The  couple  may  decide  to  store  these  for  their  own  future
use, if cryopreservation is an option, or they may donate them to other couples, or they
may  donate  them  for  research,  or  they  may  decide  to  let  them  perish.  These
supernumerary  embryos  are  the  main  source  of  embryos  contributing  to  research
projects.

These projects have a number of different aims.

1.8

One objective is to increase the "take-home baby" rate after IVF.

The possible beneficial effect of enriching the culture medium with additives (such as
growth  factors),  or  culturing  them  together  with  supporting  cells  from  the
reproductive tract, can be assessed by continuing to grow the supernumerary embryos
for  a  few  days  longer  in  vitro.  The  normality  of  the  cultured  embryos  can  then  be
assessed by biochemical studies or chromosomal analysis. 

Another objective is concerned with identifying features of the cultured embryos that
might have predictive value for subsequent developmental potential.

3

Research  on  supernumerary  embryos  has  also  led  to  the  development  of  safe  and
reliable  procedures  for  freezing  embryos  (cryopreservation),  so  that  women/couples
may increase the chances of achieving a successful pregnancy by choosing to have any
supernumerary  embryos 
later  stage.  These
to 
cryopreservation methods, developed by the use of human embryo research, are now
routinely  used  in  clinical  practice  of  most  Member  States,  and  enhance  the  success
rate of IVF.

the  uterus  at  a 

transferred 

1.9

Different  research  projects  on  supernumerary  embryos  have  been  carried  out  to
establish  the  safety  for  embryo  development  of  removing  one  or  more  cells  during
embryo cleavage for the diagnosis of serious genetic or chromosomal disorders. This
technique  of  preimplantation  genetic  diagnosis  is  now  used  throughout  the  world.
New methods of using enzymes or other gene products to diagnose genetic diseases,
and  more  efficient  methods  to  identify  aberrant  chromosome  constitutions,  and  to
circumvent the problems of chromosomal mosaicism, are under investigation.

1.10 Other research projects on supernumerary embryos is carried out in order to produce
cell  lines  (so-called  “embryonic  stem  cells”)  which  are  capable  LQ(cid:3) YLWUR  of  forming
many different cell types and tissues. Various studies along these lines have recently
been  reported  in  the  US.  In  the  future,  such  cell  lines  may  be  of  value  in  the
therapeutic  treatment  of  damage  due  to  accident  or  degenerative  disease  affecting
skin, heart, kidney or nervous tissue.

5HVHDUFK(cid:3)RQ(cid:3)XQIHUWLOLVHG(cid:3)HJJV(cid:3)WKDW(cid:3)DUH(cid:3)VXEVHTXHQWO\(cid:3)IHUWLOLVHG(cid:3)LQ(cid:3)YLWUR

1.11 Other research  projects  are  carried out on unfertilised eggs donated for research and
subsequently  fertilised  LQ(cid:3) YLWUR.  This is an additional  source  of  embryos  for  research
projects,  and  the  only  source  that  can  be  used  for  projects  involving  the  process  of
fertilisation itself, or the early stages of cleavage.

There are both clinical and ethical arguments in support of developing safe methods to
cryopreserve unfertilised eggs rather than embryos, for example for their later use by
women undergoing cancer treatment. After which, these women become sterile.

Different protocols for freezing and thawing may be followed by attempts to fertilise
the  eggs  LQ(cid:3) YLWUR.  Tests  to  see  whether  they  develop  normally  after  fertilisation  are
carried out LQ(cid:3)YLWUR, as an alternative to transfer to the uterus with the risk of abnormal
development LQ(cid:3)YLYR.

Other  research  projects  examine  the  safety  of  removing  first  and/or  second  polar
bodies as a possible alternative to embryo biopsy for the purposes of preimplantation
genetic diagnosis. They also analyse the risks of using immature sperm for ICSI (Intra
Cytoplasmic Spermatid Injection) in cases of severe male infertility.

4

With  the  aim  of  minimising  the  need  for  hormone  stimulation  of  women,  LQ(cid:3) YLWUR
maturation  of  immature  eggs  is  also  being  studied,  combined  with  tests  on  the
fertilisability  of  the  LQ(cid:3) YLWUR  matured  eggs,  and  the  normality  of  their  subsequent
development LQ(cid:3)YLWUR(cid:17)

3RVVLEOH(cid:3)IXWXUH(cid:3)GHYHORSPHQWV

1.12

In  the  past,  research  on  human  eggs  and  embryos,  without  any  existing  legal
framework at the time, played a large role in the development of IVF as a treatment
for  the  alleviation  of  infertility.  Today  licensed  human  embryo  research  is  more
closely linked to new and constantly evolving techniques of assisted reproduction.

In the near future, other objectives of human embryo research may become extremely
important.  Basic  research  in  this  area  increases  our  understanding  of  early  human
development, for example the expression of “cancer genes” in human development.

L E G A L   B A C K G R O U N D

&RQWURYHUVLHV(cid:3)RQ(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)FRQFHSW(cid:3)RI(cid:3)EHJLQQLQJ(cid:3)RI(cid:3)OLIH(cid:3)DQG(cid:3)(cid:5)SHUVRQKRRG(cid:5)

1.13 Existing  legislation  in  the  Member  States  differs  considerably  from  one  another
regarding the question of when life begins and about the definition of "personhood".
As  a  result,  no  consensual  definition,  neither  scientifically  nor  legally,  of  when  life
begins exists.

Two  main  views  about  the  moral  status  of  the  embryo  and  thus  regarding  the  legal
protection afforded to them with respect to scientific research exist:

•  human  embryos  are  not  considered  as  human  beings  and  consequently  have  a

relative worth of protection;

•  human embryos have the same moral status as human beings and consequently are

equally worthy of protection.

1.14 The  discussion  of  common  rules  on  embryo  research  is  continuing.  Recently  many
European countries, when discussing and signing the Council of  Europe  Convention
on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine,  failed  to  reach  a  consensus  concerning  the
definition  of  the  embryo,  and,  therefore,  were  unable  to  find  common  ground  on
which  to  place  the  admissibility  of  human  embryo  research  within  the  Convention.
Hence, it is up to the Member States to legislate in this area. Yet, nevertheless, Article
18.1 of the Convention stipulates “where the law allows research on embryos LQ(cid:3)YLWUR,
it shall ensure adequate protection of the embryo”.

5

,QLWLDO(cid:3)’RFXPHQWDWLRQ(cid:3)RQ(cid:3)HPEU\R(cid:3)UHVHDUFK

1.15 The  first  important  report  published  regarding  embryo  research  was  the  Warnock
Report  in  1984,  which  studied  this  issue  in  order  to  examine  the  social,  ethical  and
legal  implications  and  potential  developments  in  the  field  of  human  assisted
reproduction. This report recommended important rules on embryo research.

1.16 The  first  specific  legislation  regarding  embryo  research  was  published  in  1988  in
Spain  on  artificial  reproduction  and  on  donation  and  use  of  human  embryos  and
foetuses, including derived tissues, cells and organs. This permitted for the first time
research on the “pre-embryo” (“pre-embryo is defined as the initial stage which starts
at fertilisation and lasts until 14 days afterwards). Since then, several legislations have
come into force, with different approaches regarding embryo research.

’LIIHUHQW(cid:3)DSSURDFKHV(cid:3)UHJDUGLQJ(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)GHILQLWLRQ(cid:3)RI(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)KXPDQ(cid:3)HPEU\R

1.17

In  most  Member  States  there  is  presently  no  legal  definition  of  the  human  embryo
(Belgium,  Denmark,  Finland,  France,  Greece, 
Italy,  Luxembourg,
Netherlands,  Portugal  and  Sweden).  Among  those  Member  States  which  define  the
embryo  in  their  legislation,  the  existing  definitions  vary  considerably  from  one
country to another (Austria, Germany, Spain, United Kingdom):

Ireland, 

• 

In  Austrian  law,  the  embryo  is  not  defined  and  the  term  “developable  cells”  is
defined as inseminated ova and cells developed from them.

•  The German law defines the embryo as “the fertilised human egg cell capable of

development, from the moment of fusion of the pronuclei”;

•  The  Spanish  law  makes  a  distinction  between  “pre-embryo”  (group  of  cells
resulting from the fertilisation of ovum until the implantation and formation of the
primitive streak – 14 days), “embryo” (process of forming organs which continues
for about two and a half months) and the “fetus” (from two and a half months on);
•  The  British  law  defines  the  embryo  as  a  “live  embryo  where  fertilisation  is
complete (i.e. completion is when a two cell zygote appears), including an egg in
the process of fertilisation".

/HJDO(cid:3)VLWXDWLRQ(cid:3)LQ(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)0HPEHU(cid:3)6WDWHV

1.18 Within the EU, there are seven countries with legislation referring to embryo research,
which  is  either  treated  in  a  law  regarding  specifically  the  embryo  (Germany),  or
included  in  a  law  referring  particularly  to  medically  assisted  reproduction  (Austria,
Denmark, France, Spain, Sweden and United Kingdom);

The  other  eight  countries  do  not  have  legislation  referring  to  embryo  research
(Belgium,  Finland,  Greece,  Italy,  Ireland,  Luxembourg,  Netherlands  and  Portugal);
from  this  last  group,  there  are  countries  where  embryo  research  is  implicitly
prohibited by the application of constitutional rules (Ireland);

However,  five  of  these  countries  are  at  the  moment  drafting  legislation  which
specifically  aims  to  regulate  activities  in  the  field  of  human  embryo  research
(Belgium)  or  to  insert  embryo  research  in  the  framework  of  the  medically  assisted
reproduction law (Italy, the Netherlands and Portugal) or, alternatively, in the domain
of medical research (Finland).

6

 
’LIIHUHQW(cid:3)VFRSH(cid:3)RI(cid:3)QDWLRQDO(cid:3)OHJLVODWLRQ

1.19 Among the Member States with legal provisions on embryo research, there are many

differences regarding the activities allowed and prohibited.

There  are  countries  where  embryo  research  is  allowed  only  for  the  benefit  of  the
particular  embryo  (Austria,  Germany).  There  are  Member  States  where  embryo
research  is  exceptionally  allowed  (France,  Sweden,),  or  allowed  under  strict
conditions (Denmark, Finland, Spain United Kingdom).

’LYHUVLW\(cid:3)LQ(cid:3)DSSOLFDEOH(cid:3)UXOHV

1.20 There  are  some  Member  States  where  embryo  research  is  only  allowed  with  the
approval by a national authority (Finland, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom), and/or of
a national or local ethics committee (Denmark, United Kingdom).

In other Member States where no legal provisions exist, recommendations (which are
not  legally  binding)  from  national  or  local  ethics  committees  or  codes  of  practice
promulgated by professional bodies apply (Belgium, Italy and Portugal).

&RPPRQ(cid:3)UXOHV(cid:3)RI(cid:3)H[LVWLQJ(cid:3)OHJLVODWLRQ(cid:3)LQ(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)0HPEHU(cid:3)6WDWHV

a. 

1.21 Despite the different legal approaches, existing legislations in the Member States have
some common principles based on similar ethical and scientific understandings which
lead to common limitations and prohibitions on embryo research, such as:
the time limit for the use of human embryos – including the carrying out of research
activities – is generally only allowed until 14 days after fertilisation;
the prohibition of genetic modification of normal pre-implanted embryos;
the  prohibition of  the creation of developing human-animal hybrids;
the prohibition to replace embryos LQ(cid:3)XWHUR(cid:3)of embryos that have been previously used
for research;
the need to obtain the consent of each person whose gametes were used to bring about
the creation of the embryo.

b. 
c. 
d. 

e. 

/HJDO(cid:3)SURYLVLRQV(cid:3)ODLG(cid:3)GRZQ(cid:3)DW(cid:3)(XURSHDQ(cid:3)OHYHO(cid:3)UHODWLQJ(cid:3)WR(cid:3)+XPDQ(cid:3)(PEU\R(cid:3)5HVHDUFK

1.22
-

-

Some rules applicable directly or indirectly to embryo research, such as:
The  Directive  98/44/EC  of  6  July  1998  on  the  legal  protection  of  biotechnological
inventions, in which Article 6 (2)(c) stipulates:  "…shall  be  considered  unpatentable:
…uses of human embryos for industrial or commercial purposes …"
The Council of Europe Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, 4 April 1997,
and  the  additional  protocol  to  the  Convention  on  the  prohibition  of  cloning  human
beings,  12  January  1998,  which  refers  in  Article  18.2  to  “the  prohibition  of  the
creation  of  embryos  solely  for  research  purposes".  The  UK  placed  a  reservation  on
this  Article  and  therefore,  the  creation  of  embryos  solely  for  research  purposes  is
allowed but subject to approval by its public authority.

7

E T H I C A L   B A C K G R O U N D

’LYHUVLW\(cid:3)RI(cid:3)YLHZV

1.23 The  diversity  of  views  regarding  the  question  whether  or  not  research  on  human
embryos LQ(cid:3)YLWUR is morally acceptable, depends on differences in ethical approaches,
philosophical  theories  and  national  traditions,  which  are  deeply  rooted  in  European
culture.  Two  contrasting  approaches  exist:a  deontological  approach,  in  which  duties
and  principles  control  the  ends  and  consequences  of  our  actions;  and  utilitarian  or
consequentialist approaches in which human actions are evaluated in terms of means
and ends or consequences.

1.24 These views depend on how the status of the embryo is seen. Two tendencies can be
distinguished.  One  stressing  that  an  LQ(cid:3) YLWUR  embryo  must  be  protected  as  a  human
being from the very beginning, i.e. after an egg has been fertilised. The other stating
that the status of the human embryo, and thus the degree of protection, depends on the
stage and the context of development, for example, when the primitive streak appears
after approximately two weeks. Also the degree of protection depends on whether an
embryo transfer is intended or not.

1.25 The diversity in policies and regulations concerning embryo research in the Member
States  of  the  EU  reflects  fundamentally  differing  views  as  to  the  question  whether
research  on  human  embryos  LQ(cid:3) YLWUR  is  morally  acceptable  or  not.  The  EC  Working
Group on Human Embryos and Research, set up by the European Commission, states,
in  its  first  Report  [1992,3],  that  "(t)hese  views  are  fundamentally  different  and  it  is
difficult to see how, at these extremes, the differences can be reconciled". This is also
reflected  in  the  different  discussions  going  on  within  the  national  ethics  committees
that exist in various Member States.

&RPPRQ(cid:3)YDOXHV

1.26

In  spite  of  these  fundamental  differences  in  viewpoints,  there  are  some  common
values and principles. These values and principles include:
the respect for human life, from the embryonic stage;
-
the relief of human suffering;
-
the need to garuntee the quality and safety of medical treatment;
-
freedom of research;
-
free and informed consent of the women or couples concerned.
-

3OXUDOLVP

1.27

Pluralism  may  be  seen  as  a  characteristic  of  the  European  Union,  mirroring  the
richness of its tradition and asking for mutual respect and tolerance.

8

(WKLFDO(cid:3)TXHVWLRQV(cid:3)UHODWHG(cid:3)WR(cid:3)UHVHDUFK(cid:3)OHDGLQJ(cid:3)WR(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)GHVWUXFWLRQ(cid:3)RI(cid:3)WKH(cid:3)HPEU\R

1.28

1.29

IVF  technology,  as  it  is  applied  in  most  Member  States  of  the  EU,  usually  entails
having  spare  embryos,  a  decision  as  to  what  should  (not)  be  done  with  them  is
unavoidable.  If  other  possibilities,  including  storage  (cryopreservation)  for  later
transfer or donation, cannot be implemented, in the end there only exist two options:
research (leading to eventual destruction) or destruction.

In  spite  of  the  aforementioned  stipulations  on  the  Convention  of  the  Council  of
Europe,  the  debate  continues  concerning  the  source  of  embryos  used  for  research
purposes:  supernumerary  embryos  on  the  one  hand,  and  unfertilised  ova  that  is
subsequently fertilised LQ(cid:3)YLWUR on the other hand.

9

(cid:21)(cid:17)

7+((cid:3)*5283(cid:3)68%0,76(cid:3)7+((cid:3))2//2:,1*(cid:3)23,1,21(cid:29)

2.1

2.2

2.3

2.4

In  the  preamble  it  appeared  crucial  to  recall  that  the  progress  of  knowledge  of  life
sciences,  which  in  itself  has  an  ethical  value,  cannot,  in  any  case,  prevail  over
fundamental  human  rights  and  the  respect  which  is  due  to  all  the  members  of  the
human family.

The  human  embryo,  whatever  the  moral  or  legal  status  conferred  upon  it  in  the
different European cultures and ethical approaches, deserves legal protection. Even if
taking into account the continuity of human life, this protection ought to be reinforced
as the embryo and the fetus develop.

The Treaty on European Union, which does not foresee legislative competence in the
fields  of  research  and  medicine,  implies  that  such  protection  falls  within  the
competence  of  national  legislation  (as  is  the  case  for  medically  assisted  procreation
and voluntary interruption of pregnancy). However, Community authorities should be
concerned with ethical questions  resulting from  medical  practice  or  research  dealing
with early human development.

However,  when  doing  so,  the  said  Community  authorities  have  to  address  these
ethical  questions  taking  into  account  the  moral  and  philosophical  differences,
reflected by the extreme diversity of legal rules applicable to human embryo research,
in  the  15  Member  States.  It  is  not  only  legally  difficult  to  seek  harmonisation  of
national  laws  at  Community  level,  but  because  of  lack  of  consensus,  it  would  be
inappropriate to impose one exclusive moral code.

2.5

The  respect  for  different  philosophical,  moral  or  legal  approaches  and  for  diverse
national culture is essential to the building of Europe.

From an ethical point of view, the multicultural character of European society requires
mutual  tolerance  to  be  shown  by  the  citizens  and  political  figures  of  the  European
Nation States that have chosen uniquely to tie their destiny together, while at the same
time ensuring mutual respect for different historical traditions which are exceedingly
strong.

From  a  legal  point  of  view,  this  multiculturalism  is  based  upon  Article  6  of  the
Amsterdam Treaty (ex Article F of the Treaty on European Union) which recognises
fundamental rights at Union level notably based on “constitutional traditions common
to  the  Member  States”.  It  also  declares  that  “the  Union  shall  respect  the  national
identity of its Member States”.

2.6

It results from the aforementioned principles, that, in the scope of European research
programmes, the question of research on the human embryo has to be approached, not
only  with  regard  to  the  respect  for  fundamental  ethical  principles,  common  to  all
Member States, but equally taking into consideration diverse philosophical and ethical
conceptions, expressed  through  the  practices and the national regulations  in  force  in
this field.

10

2.7

2.8

2.9

As  for  the  scope  of  the  amendment,  concerning  the  funding  of  human  embryo
research, on which the Group has been consulted, the Group is of the opinion that the
distinction that could be made between research which implies the destruction of the
embryo and research that would enable the embryo to develop to full term would be
artificial.  With  a  view  to  current  knowledge  and  new  techniques,  it  would  be  an
unacceptable risk to implant into a woman’s uterus an embryo which previously has
been  the  subject  of  research  and  hence  may  have  been  damaged.  Consequently,  the
amendment  in  question  proposes  not  to  finance  research  projects  at  European  level
that ultimately end in the destruction of the embryo and in doing so, covers practically
all research on human embryos.

In the light of the aforementioned principles and specifications, the  Group considers
that  according  to  the  ethical  dimension  of  the  Community's  Fifth  Framework
Programme Community funding should not a priori exclude human embryo research
which  is  the  object  of  different  ethical  choices  in  different  countries  but  that  this
funding should, nevertheless, only be granted under the strict conditions set out in the
following paragraphs.

The respect of pluralism does not justify a ODLVVH](cid:16)IDLUH attitude. Therefore, the Group
repeats the recommendation given in the Opinion n° 10 of 11 December 1997 by the
Group  of  Advisers  on  the  Ethical  Implications  of  Biotechnology  (GAEIB)  on  the
“Ethical aspects of the Fifth Framework Programme on Research”, according to which
“particular  attention  must  be  given  to  the  ethical  evaluation  of  research  projects
concerning the most sensitive fields…”.

This  presupposes  systematic  ethical  evaluation,  at  Community  level,  of  protocols  of
research  on  human  embryos  presented  for  Community  funding.  Besides,  such  a
recommendation could be included in the Framework Programme itself.

2.10 However,  the  Group  considers  that  amongst  the  fundamental  ethical  principles  that
ought to guide this ethical evaluation, priority should be given to the principle of the
respect due to human life, as well as, respect regarding the consent of the woman or
couple concerned.

It should also be assured that the project complies, in all circumstances, with national
regulations,  and  that,  in  particular,  the  approval  from  the  ethical  committee(s)
competent at national level has previously been sought.

2.11 Moreover, according to the Group, it is crucial to place human embryo research, in the
countries where it is permitted, under strict public control, while ensuring maximum
transparency,  whether  the  research  in  question  is  carried  out  by  either  the  public  or
private sector. Indeed, such transparency should be a compulsory requirement of any
proposal  funded  by  the  5fth  Framework  Programme,  since  it  provides  the  best
guarantee against major risks of arbitrary experimentation.

11

2.12 However  promising  the  medical  perspectives,  recent  manipulations  of  human  stem
cell lines  carried out  in  the  US raise  a number of  ethical questions.  These  questions
emphasise the urgency to enlarge the debate, which is just getting underway. European
citizens have a right to be clearly informed about the conflicting values that research is
currently  facing,  as  well  as  to  be  put  in  a  position  to  evaluate  the  responsibilities
implied for society as a whole.

2.13

In order to clearly set out the most appropriate terms of this debate at European level,
specific  resources  should  be  made  available  within  the  Framework  Programme,  to
permit a global scientific and ethical evaluation of research projects carried out on the
human  embryo,  such  as  are  presently  performed  in  all  countries  of  the  European
Union where it is permitted. This evaluation should be made public.

2.14 The  Group  re-affirms  the  desire,  already  expressed  in  the  aforementioned  Opinion
n°10,  that  the  European  Commission  provides  itself  as  rapidly  as  possible  with  a
system  of  information,  which  it  seriously  lacks  at  present,  regarding  all  ethical  and
legal aspects relative to life sciences, at both national and international level. Without
such  information,  the  Union  would  no  longer  be  able  to  promote  the  crucial  debate
concerning the future of our society.

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies:

The Members

Paula Martinho da Silva

Anne McLaren

Marja Sorsa

Ina Wagner

Göran Hermerén

Gilbert Hottois

Dietmar Mieth

Octavi Quintana Trias

Stefano Rodota

Egbert Schroten

Peter Whittaker

The Chairperson

Noëlle Lenoir

12

