A great deal of additional information on the European Union is available on the Internet.
It can be accessed through the Europa server (http://europa.eu.int).

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication.

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, 2002

ISBN 92-894-2063-4

© European Communities, 2002
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Printed in Luxembourg

PRINTED ON WHITE CHLORINE-FREE PAPER

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

(cid:22)(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:20)

I. Patents and Products of Nature 

II. The Plant Patent Act 

III. The (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:8) Case 

   1

  4

14

IV. Plant and Animal Patents                                   39

V.  Ethics and Economics 

VI. Ethics and Europe 

VII. Echoes in Canada 

47

57

      61

VIII. Gene Patenting                                               77

.

(cid:31) (cid:2)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:12)(cid:14)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:11)(cid:8)(cid:7)(cid:19)(cid:27)!(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:29)(cid:12)(cid:6)(cid:27)(cid:8)(cid:13)

During a congressional hearing on patenting animals in 1987, the late Congressman

Mike Synar, a wry Democrat from Oklahoma, remarked that few lawyers knew anything about

patent law. “Everyone knows it is not part of the bar exam, so to hell with it.”1 But while patent

law is arcane, like many other branches of law in the United States – for example, business,

regulation, and civil rights – it is also a branch of the more familiar political economy. And in

recent years, the part of it that concerns the patenting of life, especially animals and genes, has

also become, for the first time, a branch of ethics.

What is patentable in the United States according to statute dates back to the patent law

of 1793, which declared, in language written by Thomas Jefferson, that patents could be

obtained for "any new and useful art, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, or any

new or useful improvement thereof." Jefferson's phrasing remained -- and remains -- at the core

of the U.S. patent code, except for the eighteenth-century word "art," which was replaced in a

1952 Congressional overhaul of patent law by the word "process."2

The code said nothing about patenting life, but a key precedent discouraging it was

established in 1889, when, in a landmark ruling, the U.S. Commissioner of Patents rejected an

application for a patent to cover a fiber identified in the needles of a pine tree. He noted that

ascertaining the composition of the trees in the forest was "not a patentable invention,

1 U.S. Congress, House, Hearings before the Subcommittee on Courts, Civil Liberties, and the Administration of
Justice, Committee on the Judiciary. Patents and the Constitution: Transgenic Animals. 100th Cong., 1st Sess.,
June 11, July 22, Aug. 21, and Nov. 5, 1987, p. 27 (hereafter, HJSH, 1987).

2 Fritz Machlup, "Patents," International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, ed., David L. Sills (New York:
Macmillan, 1968), XI, 461-64; Bruce W. Bugbee, Genesis of American Patent and Copyright Law (Washington,
D.C.: Public Affairs Press, 1967), p. 152.

                                                
2

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

recognized by statute, any more than to find a new gem or jewel in the earth would entitle the

discoverer to patent all gems which should be subsequently found."  The commissioner added

that it would be "unreasonable and impossible" to allow patents upon the trees of the forest and

the plants of the earth.3  The commissioner’s ruling formed the basis for what came to be known

as the "product-of -nature" doctrine -- that while processes devised to extract what is found in

nature can be patented, objects discovered there can not. They are not inventions, nor can they

as a class be made anyone’s exclusive property.

In 1891, in a report to the American Association of Nurserymen, the respected plant

scientist Liberty Hyde Bailey, of Cornell University, added technical weight to the legal

discouragement. Two years earlier Bailey had told the nurserymen that an obstacle to any type

of intellectual property protection for plants was that new types of plants were difficult to define

or specify. Now he pointed out that most new varieties were accidents that the nurseryman

found rather than the product of systematic breeding, adding, however, that "when the time

comes that men breed plants upon definite laws and produce new and valuable kinds, then plant

patents may possibly become practicable."4

The rediscovery of Mendel’s laws at the turn of the century encouraged breeders to

think that the era of controlled plant innovation had arrived. Nurserymen first asked Congress

for protection in the form of plant patents in 1906. Indeed, the power of Mendel’s laws was

3 (cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:11)(cid:14)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:5), March 12, 1889, C.D., 46 O.G. 1638, U.S. Patent Office, Decisions of the Commissioner of
Patents and of the United States Courts in Patent Cases. . . 1889 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office, 1890), pp. 123-27. See also H. Thorne, "Relation of Patent Law to Natural Products," Journal of Patent
Office Society, 6 (1923), pp. 23-28.

4.Richard P. White, A Century of Service: A History of the Nursery Industry Associations of the United States
(Madison, Wis.: American Association of Nurserymen, 1975), p. 129.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

3

invoked by one Hyland C. Kirk, a horticultural spokesman, when he testified before the

House Committee on Patents when it considered the 1906 bill to establish intellectual

property protection for plants. The measure, originally aimed at strengthening plant

trademarks against infringement, had been revised to allow patents for horticultural plants,

trees, and vines. Kirk advanced a claim that would be repeated frequently in the debates over

plant patenting and that had a certain degree of ethical content: the originator of a "new

variety of plant, tree, or vine . . . is as truly an inventor and, as such, as justly entitled to

protection as the originator of a new motor, a new chemical compound, or any other valuable

combination of materials requiring experiment, deliberation, and design."5 

Nevertheless, the bill died in committee. Evidently, few Congressmen considered

breeding distinct enough from the practice of farming to warrant special protection. Farmers

and horticulturalists often found plant sports or mutations in the field and routinely exploited

them.  Both breeders and farmers continued to benefit from the importation of new plant

varieties from abroad and from the expanding activities of public breeders in the agriculture

department and state universities, colleges, and experiment stations. Then, too, by practice

and tradition, farmers assumed that they should enjoy free and unencumbered access to new

seed varieties. And urban Americans probably tended, like Europeans, to think of food as a

5. The bill had originally been designed to authorize the Commissioner of Patents to register, and allow the
exclusive use of, new plants for twenty years under the Trade Mark Law. It was amended into a plant patent bill.
Hyland C. Kirk, "Brief on House Bill 18851 . . . , " and discussion, U.S. Congress, House, Committee on
Patents, Arguments on H.R. 18851, May 17, 1906, pp. 5-7, 12-13; Jack Doyle, Altered Harvest: Agriculture,
Genetics, and the Fate of the World’s Food Supply (New York: Penguin Books, 1986), p.50.

                                                
4

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

scarce resource and to be reluctant to grant anyone a monopoly right over food products, even

for a limited period.6

(cid:31)(cid:31) (cid:2)(cid:30)(cid:17)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:11)"(cid:12)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:1)!(cid:6)

Although an immediate failure, the 1906 venture did lead to the formation of a lobbying

group, the National Committee on Plant Patents, which was organized and kept alive by

Archibald Augustine of Augustine Nurseries in Bloomington, Illinois. By the late 1920s,

nurserymen were especially interested in patents, not least because the potential American

market for their stocks was estimated -- according to a report delivered to the 1928 convention

of the American Association of Nurserymen -- at one billion dollars, mostly for ornamental

plants.7  When Augustine was elected president of the American Association of Nurserymen in

1929, he was succeeded in the chairmanship of the National Committee by Paul Stark.

Stark was a principal in the Stark Brothers Nursery, which was now a century-old and,

capitalized at one million dollars, was the largest breeder in the country. Stark brothers

continued to derive some of its stock by running competitions for prize fruit specimens;

bonanzas came in the mail, notably the yellow apple that arrived at the nursery in a box one day

in the spring of 1914 and that they soon marketed as the Stark Golden Delicious. But the firm

6. Dickson Terry, The Stark Story: Stark Nurseries’ 150th Anniversary (Columbus, Mo: Missouri Historical
Society, 1966), pp. 48-51; Marie-Angèle Hermitte, "Histoires juridiques extravagantes: La reproduction
végétale," in La Gestion des Ressources Naturelles d'Origine Agricole, eds. J.-C. Fritz and Ph. Kahn (Paris:
Librairies Techniques, 1983), pp. 272-3.

7. Some 10,000,000 homes were said to need the services of nurserymen: Only 22% of front yards were planted;
of rear yards, only 7%. "American Association of Nurseryman's Convention, Billion Dollar Market Indicated by
Survey," The National Nurseryman, 36(July 1928), 201.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

5

also relied on more consistent sources, notably the famed plant breeder Luther Burbank.8 Paul

Stark had met Burbank in 1893, when Burbank was worried about making enough money to

continue his research. A friendship and business arrangement blossomed.  Stark Brothers came

to own exclusive licenses to many of Burbank’s cultivars. When Burbank died, in 1926, his will

stipulated that his farm, in Santa Rosa, California, be converted into the Stark-Burbank

Research Laboratories and Experimental Grounds. Stark thus inherited hundreds of varieties of

plums, peaches, apples, cherries, pears, roses and gladiolas that had never been marketed -- and

that might be patented if only patent protection were available. It was Stark, who became the

prime mover behind the 1930 Plant Patent Act.9

Stark himself drafted the measure. It was introduced in the Senate by John G.

Townsend, Jr., of Delaware, who probably knew Stark and certainly had reason to sympathize

with his purpose, since he owned 130,000 acres of apple orchards, which made him the

second largest orchardist in the country.10  Endorsements of the bill rained down upon the

Congress from horticulturalists, nurserymen, farmers, agricultural experiment stations, and

their organized representatives, including the American Farm Bureau Federation, the National

8. Terry, The Stark Story , pp. 48-51, 66.

9. Ibid., pp. 84-86;  Doyle, Altered Harvest, pp. 51-53.

10. Richard B.Carter, Clearing New Ground: The Life of John G. Townsend, Jr. (privately printed, n.d.), pp. 349-52,
401-403; Doyle, Altered Harvest, pp. 51-53; Peter Dreyer, A Gardener Touched with Genius: The Life of Luther Burbank,
rev.ed. (Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1985), p. 218. The largest orchardist in the country was reputedly Harry
Flood Byrd, a Senator from Virginia and Townsend’s good friend. Carter, Clearing New Ground, p. 352. Townsed
celebrated the brains among the one third of the American poplation who worked on the land, noting: "Today we
are, and for a century we have been, wasting this dormant talent that needs ony to be awakened by the hope of
ultimate reward to bring into being marvels of plant life comparable in value to anything that the industrial genius
has given to our civilization." "The Importance of Plant Patents to Agriculture: A Statement by Hon. John G.
Townsend, Jr. . . . ," The National Nurseryman, 38(April 1, 1930), p. 5.

                                                
6

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

Grange, the International Appleship Association, and the Peony and Iris Association.  Thomas

Edison wired that Congress could do nothing better for American agriculture than "to give the

plant breeder the same status as the mechanical and chemical inventors now have through the

patent law."  Luther Burbank’s widow sent a telegram of her own declaring that her late husband

would have been "unable to do what he did with plants had it not been for royalties from his

writings and from other by-product lines of activity" and declared that most other plant

developers were unlikely to derive such ancillary revenues from their work.11

In brief hearings, perfunctory floor debate, and the reports on the bill, its Congressional

promoters noted the considerable dependency of plant breeding and research on governmental

money, emphasizing that the establishment of a breeder’s legal right in his innovations might

stimulate private investment in these activities and make it possible for the breeder to reduce his

prices. They pointed to the incentives that patent protection would give plant breeders to

develop varieties resistant to blight and disease and rich in food or medicinal qualities; varieties

that would strengthen public health, prosperity, and national defense -- and all without the

expenditure of federal money. With sentimental nods to Luther Burbank, who was said to have

made no money from his plants, the bill’s enthusiasts invoked the ethical premise in a right to

intellectual property, saying that it would rescue plant breeders from vulnerability to piracy and

the fate of an impoverished death.12

11.U.S. Congress, Senate,  Congressional Record, 71st Cong. 2d Sess., April 9, 1930; April 17, 1930; May 12,
1930, 6765, 7200-7201, 8750.

12. U.S. Congress, House Committee on Patents, Plant Patents, 10 April 1930, House Report 1129, pp. 11-12;
and idem, Hearing on H.R. 11372: A Bill to Provide for Plant Patents, 71st Cong., 2d Sess., 9 April, 1930, p. 3.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

7

In these first few months of the 1930s Depression, the measure appealed as a farmer’s

and plant breeder’s relief bill, Hoover-Republican style. With Republicans still in control of the

Congress, the prevailing wisdom around Washington about how to respond to the worsening

economic slide was: encourage private enterprise, reduce government costs and activities. There

was only scattered opposition to the bill, including some biting harassment from Congressman

Fiorello Laguardia, who was hazy in his understanding of heredity in plants but who understood

well that the measure did nothing for direct farm relief. The Plant Patent Act passed easily on a

voice vote some three months after it had first been introduced. Edison cheered in The New

York Times, "Luther Burbank would have been a rich man if he had been protected by such a

patent bill."13

In a report on the bill, the House Committee on Patents, mindful of the product-of-

nature doctrine, had addressed the constitutionality of the measure, asking: Would a new variety

of plant be a discovery, and could its originator be considered an inventor or a discoverer? The

report’s answer: Yes, on both counts. In the reasoning of the document, while a new variety of

plant found in the field was a product of nature and, hence, not patentable under the meaning of

the word "discoveries" in Article I, Section 8, a new variety arising from cultivation was such a

discovery -- and its cultivator a discoverer -- since it was created by human agency.  The report

saw no difference between "the part played by the plant originator in the development of new

plants and the part played by the chemist in the development of new compositions of matter."

13. Congressional Record, 71st Cong., 2d Sess., 5, 12, and 13, May 1930, pp. 8391, 8751, 8866; and Doyle,
Altered Harvest (cit. n. 15), p. 55. Identical bills for plant patents were introduced in the House and the Senate
on 11 February 1930. Robert Starr Allyn, The First Plant Patents: A Discussion of the New Law and Patent Office
Practice (Brooklyn, N.Y.: Educational Foundations, 1934), p. 60.

                                                
8

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

Both took the materials of nature, exploited its laws, and, by applying a variety of techniques,

devised a new and useful product.14

However, in the 1930s chemical products and plants differed from each other in ways

that affected the type of patent protection that plants could obtain. Patent law insisted that an

invention be disclosed specifically enough to be identically reproducible. Chemical products, as

dead matter, were highly specifiable as to composition and methods of production and

reproduction.  Plants, as living matter, were difficult to specify in either regard. These

differences were reflected in the Plant Patent Act, which accommodated the basic tenets of

patent law to the fundamental problem of biological specificity. The act limited patent

protection to those plants that could be reproduced asexually. Often termed cloning, asexual

reproduction was accomplished by budding, grafting, rooting of clippings, or dividing bulbs; it

yielded progeny genetically identical to the parent plant or tree.

The act also explicitly excluded from patentability tuber-propagated plants -- a provision

that would substantially affect only Irish potatoes, which was a major cash crop, and Jerusalem

artichokes, a type of sunflower that was widely used as a vegetable and a livestock feed.

Resistance to allowing monopoly control over major food stocks may have figured in the

exclusion. However, to advocates of plant patenting, authorizing patents on tuber-propagated

plants like the Irish potato threatened the enforceability of plant patents in general, mainly

because the part of them that is involved in reproduction is also widely sold as food. Paul Stark

later explained the reasoning behind the exclusion: Because potatoes were available everywhere

14. Plant Patents, House Report 1129, pp. 16-17.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

9

"for use as food or for growing the plants," infringement of a potato-plant patent would be

"easy" and "widespread," making enforcement "a farce." He added, "This would reflect

unfavorably on enforcement with the other types of asexually reproduced plants -- so for that

reason potatoes were excluded from the original Plant Patent Act in 1930."15

Stark and his allies had perceived an equally vexing enforcement problem for patents on

sexually reproduced plants -- that is, plants reproducing by pollination and seeds. Such plants

could not generally be relied upon to breed identically true to type from one generation to the

next. (Sexual reproduction joins half the genes from one plant with half from another; over

several generations, the progeny can easily drift genetically far from the original parental type.) 

Patents on sexually reproduced plants could not be enforced because the progeny would be

different from the patented parent. The likely unenforceability prompted a special committee of

the American Society for Horticultural Science to oppose flatly the provision of patent

protection for seed-propagated plants, and it convinced key members of the Patent Office and

the Department of Agriculture that no plant patent bill with such a provision could pass.16  The

Congressional stewards of the bill, although they may not have understood the genetics, were

15. Paul Stark, "Report," attached to Stark to Tom Brennan, 8 March 1968, U. S. Congress, Patent Law Revision:
Hearings ,  Subcommittee on Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary,
90th Cong., 2d Sess., 30 and 31 Jan., and 1 Feb. 1968, Part 2, p. 865. [The report was filed after the hearings
were held but before they were printed.] In 1930 there was no processed potato industry to object to the
exemption on tuber-propagated plants as there was in 1959, when a potato chip company tried to overturn it. 
Congress reaffirmed the exemption, however, after seed certifying agencies argued that if farmers could simply
buy their buds in bags in grocery stores, potato breeders could circumvent regulations on seed trade.  U.S.
Congress, Senate, Subcommittee on Patents, Trademarks and Copyrights of the Committee on the Judiciary,
Hearings: Plant Patents, 86th Congress, 1st Sess., 9 July 1959.

16. U. S. Congress, Patent Law Revision: Hearings ,  Subcommittee on Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights of the
Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 90th Cong., 2d Sess., 30 and 31 Jan., and 1 Feb. 1968, Part 2,., pp. 862-63.

                                                
10

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

evidently sufficiently aware that like did not necessarily breed like to omit from the final

measure protection for plants that were reproduced sexually.

Despite the restricted coverage provided by the act, it was a boon to nurserymen like

Paul Stark. While narrow, the category of asexually reproducible plants was capacious enough

to include much of such breeders’ stock in trade -- that is, virtually all fruit and nut trees; most

small vinous fruits such as grapes, strawberries, and blueberries; and numerous ornamental

shrubs, vines, and perennials, among them lilacs, wisterias, and peonies as well as roses.17

 According to The First Plant Patents, a survey published in 1934 by a New York

patent lawyer named Robert Starr Allyn, the government had granted eighty-four plant

patents by the beginning of that year, including one to Secretary of the Interior Harold L.

Ickes, for a red dahlia.  Nine of the patents went to Burbank’s estate for certain of his fruits

and flowers. His widow assigned the patents to Stark Nurseries, which acquired rights to an

additional five from other breeders.18

Since the wares of seedmen comprised sexually reproducing plants, the act disappointed

the American Seed Trade Association, which had allied itself with Stark in the plant-patent

legislative drive. Stark defended the omission of sexually reproduced plants from the coverage

of the act, telling the association that "it seemed to be the wise thing to get established the

principle that Congress recognized the rights of the plant breeder and originator," predicting that

17. "Patents on Plants," Science -- Supplement, 71(April 25, 1930), xiv.

18. Allyn, The First Plant Patents, pp. 52, 55, 86, 90, 92, 97. Burbank’s estate obtained a total of 15 plant patents
through 1944. As of 1966, Stark Nurseries had acquired exclusive rights to 89 plant patents. Allyn, Plant
Patents, 1934-1944 (Brooklyn, NY: Corsi Press, 1944), p. 9; Terry, The Stark Story, p. 87.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

11

once the principle was in place, it would be "much easier" to get protection for plants

propagated by seed.19

However, while the act installed the principle, the intellectual property protection it

provided was no better than the degree of biological specificity -- which was to say the least

limited -- with which plants could then be identified. The act was extremely permissive in

inventive definition, allowing patents on plants, even naturally occurring ones, that might be no

more than minimally distinguishable from others, so long as human intervention had been

required to reproduce the plant asexually. Its disclosure requirements, adapted to the elusiveness

of biological definition, were also, of necessity, loose. The act called for the submission of a

color painting or photograph as well as a written description of the plant that was as "complete

as is reasonably possible." It called for an historical preamble describing how the plant was bred

or where the sports from which it was asexually reproduced had been found, and how it differed

from the plants that comprised its pedigree. It asked for data concerning when the plant bloomed

and which soils and climates best suited it.  It expected a technical description outlining the

color and shape of the bush, leaves, and flower.20  The early applications included a few

objective descriptions -- for example, lengths and the tones listed on Ridgway’s Color Chart, a

commercially manufactured set of cards, much like paint-sample cards, that breeders held

against a plant to identify and match a name to its colors. it. Fruit, which was mostly described

19. Jack R. Kloppenburg, Jr., First the Seed: The Political Economy of Plant Biotechnology, 1492-2000 (New
York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1988), p. 133.

20. Allyn, The First Plant Patents, pp. 18-38; Robert C. Cook, "Other Plant Patents," Journal of Heredity,
24(February 1933), 49-54.

                                                
12

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

by external appearance, might be more objectively specified by such intrinsic characteristics as

acidity and sugar levels.21 

Given the relaxed nature of the disclosure requirements, critics questioned whether the

Patent Office would be able to administer the act so as to distinguish genuine from counterfeit

intellectual property. Their doubts were perhaps accentuated when the first examiner assigned to

plant patents proved to be not a botanist but a mechanical engineer who was also charged with

oversight for "Closure Operators, Fences, Gates, Tillage and Handling Implements."  After a

year, Herbert Hoover ordered the Department of Agriculture to assist the Patent Office.  The

first plant patent -- on a rose called the ’New Dawn’ -- confirmed the critics’ fears. An amateur

gardener had found a bud mutation on the ’Van Fleet’ rose, which had been painstakingly

developed by an established breeder, that supposedly extended the life of the flower.  Save for

this "everblooming" quality, the New Dawn was identical to the Van Fleet.  Most patents were

issued to amateur gardeners who, finding sports and mutations on well established cultivars,

assigned them to large nurseries.22

Robert C. Cook, the editor of the Journal of Heredity, feared that plant patents would

become the conceits of amateur gardeners rather than real protection for professional breeders. 

In the hope of making plant patents more like industrial patents, he proposed "type plants" as in

situ deposits, much as the patent office in the 1800s had demanded patent models when written

21 Allyn, First Plant Patents, pp. 18-38; 35 USCA [U.S. Code, Annotated] Appendix, rule 162-3; and 37 CFR
[Code of Federal Regulations, Section] 1.163.  The reasonability exception to the general patent law was upheld
in Kim Bros. v. Hagler, 120 USPQ 210 (21 November 1958); on the need to prove active and willful
infringement, see Armstrong Nurseries, Inc. v. Smith, 120 USPQ 220. 

22. "Patenting of Plants Promises Big Profits--and Big Problems, Business Week, Aug. 26, 1931, p.26.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

13

descriptions were inadequate.23  However, the imprecise disclosure of the plant patent

application limited the protection that the federal government could offer to patent holders. 

In practice, the Plant Patent Act only prevented unauthorized advertising by the

patented name.  It functioned more as a registration system than as the kind of rigorous

examination and screening system characteristic for industrial inventions. Because the

descriptions of patented plants were so poor, the cornerstone of most case law surrounding

the act was not whether an alleged infringer’s plant looked like a patented one but whether it

could be proved to have been cloned from it. The definition of the inventive act was that a

plant, even one found in the wild, had been asexually reproduced, in a sense reduced to

practice. Many applications jointly listed the discoverer and the reproducer. The written

descriptions advertised the commercial identity of the plant because breeders had to supply a

name for the new cultivar -- usually it was a fancy one, like Delmass Peach or Peace Rose.24 

All that the breeders really got from the act was the ability to use a tradename and a legal

basis for infringement suits. The weakness of the protection provided by the Plant Patent Act

was perhaps revealingly expressed by the small number of patents issued under it -- 911 in the

twenty years following its passage.25

23. Botanical gardens increasingly allied themselves with variety associations to maintain type plants.  For
instance, in 1946 the Huntington Gardens in Pasadena, California became the repository of all known varieties of
camellias, a project sponsored by the Southern California Camellia Society.  Botanical Gardens/Henry E.
Huntington Library Institutional Archives, Henry E. Hungtington Library, San Marino, CA, file 50.1.1.1.

24. Allyn, The First Plant Patents, especially pp. 14, 18.

25. U.S. Patent Gazette, 635(January 1950). On the principle of asexual reproduction as reduction to practice, see
Dunn v. Ragin v. Carlile, (PO Bd Inter Exam) 50 USPQ 472; on the allowance of joint applications, see Ex Parte
Kluis & Kluis, (PO BdApp) 70 USPQ 165.

                                                
14

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31) (cid:2)(cid:30)(cid:17)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:2)(cid:22)(cid:12)(cid:5)(cid:13)

There was no other extension of patent law to vital entities for forty years, but in 1970

Congress established a system -- through the Plant Variety Protection Act (PVPA) – for

granting intellectual property rights in sexually reproducing plants.26 The protection was weaker

than what patents provided; it was nevertheless a step forward for plant breeders. More

important, during that period it became possible to identify living organisms with a high degree

of specificity through such markers as blood types and, in the 1970s, their DNA. Then, in the

early seventies, Ananda Chakrabarty, a biochemist at the General Electric Company, having

genetically modified the bacterium (cid:12)(cid:17)(cid:13)(cid:18)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:3)(cid:17) to consume oil slicks, filed for a patent on the

living, altered bacterium.

Chakrabarty judges that companies long accustomed to the product-of-nature barrier to

patents -- say, companies such as the major drug firms, which deal in biological products --

would not have filed a patent application on his new bugs. They would have limited the

application to the process of constructing them. However, General Electric, not being a

biological company, operated in a different patent culture. The General Electric patent lawyer

assigned to the case was Leo I. MaLossi, who had been with the firm since 1963, was used to

filing patent applications on items like refrigerators, plastics, jet engines, and nuclear power

plants, and thought that if you invented something new and useful, you deserved a patent

covering whatever claims about it you could legally make.  Chakrabarty recalls telling

26 Glenn Bugos and Daniel J. Kevles, "Plants as Intellectual Property: American Law, Policy, and Practice in
World Context," (cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:15)(cid:17), 2nd Series, Vll (1992), 119-48.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

15

MaLossi, during numerous consultations, that living creatures could not be patented. MaLossi

would say, Why not? 27

MaLossi remembers, "When I first proposed to introduce the claims to the organism per

se, I had occasion to speak to various patent attorneys who had worked in that type of

technology. . . .  What intrigued me was that all of them said that such claims were

unpatentable, but they all gave me different reasons why. Now that got me to thinking that

there’s something funny here. So I read all the case law I could lay my hand on that had any

pertinence to the subject and then I became convinced that I was right. What had happened is

that [the inadmissability of claims to live matter] had become a canon of patent law and nobody

questioned it."28

To MaLossi, aware that by now scientists understood living matter, including bacteria,

to be chemicals, Chakrabarty’s bugs were manufactures, new compositions of matter -- and,

hence, patentable. On June 7, 1972, Chakrabarty filed for a patent to cover not only the process

by which he had constructed his oil-eating bacteria but also the product -- the living, genetically

modified bacteria.29

In September 1973, Alvin E. Tanenholtz, the patent examiner supervising the review of

Chakrabarty’s application, rejected the product claims for the bacteria per se, though not for the

27 Author’s telephone interview with Ananda Chakrabarty, August 8, 1988; author’s telephone interview with Leo
I. Malossi, August 18, 1988.

28 Author’s telephone interview with MaLossi, Aug. 23, 1988.

29 "Application of Ananda M. Chakrabarty, Filed June 7, 1972, Serial Number 260,563, for Microorganisms
Having Multiple, Compatible Degradative Energy-Generating Plasmids and Preparation Thereof," in U.S. Court
of Customs and Patent Appeals, Transcript of Record, Patent Appeal Docket No. 77-535. In the Matter of the
Application of Ananda M. Chakrabarty, Applicant (Hereafter, Transcript of Record . . . Chakrabarty), pp. 6-7.

                                                
16

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

process of producing them; in April 1974, after several legal counters from MaLossi, he rejected

the product claims finally.30  Throughout the legal jockeying, Tanenholtz’s principal ground for

rejection was that the bugs were products of nature; their four plasmids had made them different

in degree from naturally occurring Pseudomonas but not in kind. He also implied that living

creatures were not patentable, if only because neither legislative nor case law had made them so.

Leo MaLossi, in a protest brief filed in June 1974 to the Patent Office’s internal Board of

Appeals, insisted that the bugs were not products of nature because Chakrabarty’s manipulations

of their plasmids had altered them fundamentally. He also argued that nothing in case law

disallowed a patent purely on grounds that the product was alive and he contended that the bugs

were patentable because Chakrabarty’s alterations had turned them into new compositions of

matter.31

The three-man Board, ruling almost two years later, on May 20, 1976, conceded that

Chakrabarty’s bacteria did not occur naturally and, hence, were not products of nature, but it

upheld Tanenholtz’s rejection of the claims on a new explicit ground -- that the bacteria were

not patentable because they were living organisms. Partly behind the Board’s reasoning was a

presumptive apothegm: In so many words, what the law did not prohibit, it did not necessarily

allow. Although statutory patent code did not proscribe patents on plants, Congress had felt the

30 Ray Penland was the patent examiner working on the case, but, according to Tanenholtz, Penland did not then
have signatory authority and he, Tanenholtz, was responsible for the main arguments advanced against the grant
of a patent for the bacteria up through the decision of the Board of Appeals. Author’s telephone interview with
Alvin E. Tanenholtz, August 29, 1988.

31 "Letter of Examiner," Sept. 19, 1973; Chakrabarty,"Amendment," Dec. 6, 1973; "Letter of Examiner," Jan.
11, 1974; Chakrabarty, "Amendment," April 5, 1974; Malossi, "Brief," June 24, 1974; "Examiner’s Answer,"
Sept. 23, 1974; Malossi, "Reply Brief," Oct. 10, 1974; "Opinion and Decision of Board of Appeals," May 20,
1976, all in Transcript of Record . . . Chakrabarty, pp. 59-61, 65-66, 68-73, 78-80, 82-84, 86-97.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

17

need to enact a special Plant Patent Act to reward plant breeders. Yet the Board was also

gripped by a specter of implications that Tanenholtz had raised in a reply to Malossi’s brief: To

adopt a broad interpretation of phrases such as "new composition of matter" would "open the

flood gates to patentability for all newly produced microorganisms as well as for all newly

developed multi-cellular animals such as . . . chickens and cattle." The Board’s ruling reiterated

Tanenholtz’s warning and added that if patents could be granted to single-cell organisms with

additional plasmids, so might they be given for "multicellular organisms (including human

beings)" with transplanted livers or hearts. Chakrabarty’s bugs might not occur naturally, but the

Board chose to emphasize "that a human being with a transplanted liver or heart is also not

naturally occurring."32

The Board’s ruling had changed the complexion of the case for MaLossi and his boss,

Charles Watts, the General Electric Patent Counsel for Materials Science and Engineering. For

MaLossi, prior to the Board’s ruling, Chakrabarty’s had just been another workaday patent

application. Now that the Board had shifted the issue to the patentability of living matter,

MaLossi recognized with Watts that the G.E. patent department had been presented with an

opportunity to participate in the making of new case law -- an opportunity, Watts later reflected,

that "you don’t often get in a career as a lawyer, especially in a large corporation."33  General

32 "Examiner’s Answer," Sept. 23, 1974; "Opinion and Decision of Board of Appeals," May 20, 1976, in
Transcript of Record . . . Chakrabarty, pp. 86-89, 92-97.

33 Author’s telephone interviews with Leo I. MaLossi, August 18, 1988, and with Charles Watts, August 18,
1988.

                                                
18

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

Electric decided to take Chakrabarty’s case to the United States Court of Custom and Patent

Appeals, which was seated in Washington, D.C.

By this point, late 1976, Chakrabarty’s claim had become entwined with a

complementary case advanced by Malcolm E. Bergy and fellow scientists at the Upjohn

Company. They had developed a process for obtaining a purified strain of the newly discovered

fungus Streptomyces vellosus, whose metabolic chemistry generated the antibiotic lyncomycin.

In June 1974, Upjohn had applied for a patent on the method, but an Upjohn patent lawyer

named Roman Saliwanchik thought the claim incomplete. Saliwanchik had been trained as an

undergraduate in microbiology and biochemistry. From the time he had begun to study cases in

law school, he had been puzzled why a living organism should not be patentable simply because

it was living. He saw an opportunity to test that doctrine with Bergy’s fungus: since it did not

exist in nature as a biologically pure culture, it seemed to qualify for a patent as a manufacture.

In January 1975, Salwanchik enlarged Bergy’s claim to include the product -- the purified strain

of the organism itself.34

The product application was initially rejected by a patent examiner on grounds that the

fungus was a work of nature. In a brief addressed to the Board of Patent Appeals, on March 18,

1975, Saliwanchik insisted that the fungus was "not a product of nature" but "the product of a

microbiologist."  The Board sidestepped that issue to reject the claim, on June 22, 1976, for the

deeper reason that the fungus was alive -- employing much the same arguments that it had used

34 "Application of Malcolm E. Bergy . . .," June 10, 1974, in United States Court of Customs and Patent
Appeals,  Transcript of Record, Patent Appeal Docket No. 76-712, In Re Application of Malcolm E. Bergy, et
al, Filed August 16, 1976, p. 6; telephone conversation with Roman Saliwanchik, Oct. 14, 1988.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

19

to deny Chakrabarty’s product claim the previous month and warning, similarly, that a liberal

interpretation of the code would lead to the patenting of "new types of insects, such as

honeybees, or new varieties of animals produced by selective breeding and crossbreeding." The

Upjohn lawyers promptly brought their case to the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals --

promptly enough, as it happened, to arrive ahead of Chakrabarty’s, which had been delayed in a

further skirmish with the Patent Office Board. However, having been framed in almost the same

terms, the Bergy case became a proxy for the issue that Chakrabarty’s had initially raised.35 

Indeed, in arguments before the Court, on March 3, 1977, the battle line was drawn precisely

across the question of whether living organisms qualified for patent protection under the

Jeffersonian core of the patent code.36

On October 6, 1977, the Court ruled three to two in favor of Bergy. The majority

opinion was delivered by Judge Giles S. Rich, who, before his appointment to the federal bench,

in 1956, had distinguished himself as a patent attorney during some thirty years of practice in

New York City and who manifestly recognized that, to a considerable extent, life was

chemistry. Rich viewed it as "illogical" to allow patents for processes that relied upon the

functions of living organisms but to deny patents to a living manufacture or new composition of

matter as such. He contended that in their nature and commercial uses biologically pure cultures

35 "Letter of Examiner, Feb. 6, 1975"; Roman Saliwanchik, "Brief," March 18, 1975; "Opinion and Decision of
Board of Appeals, June 22, 1976," in United States Court of Customs and Patent Appeals,  Transcript of Record,
Patent Appeal Docket No. 76-712, In Re Application of Malcolm E. Bergy, et al, Filed August 16, 1976, pp. 34,
54, 62-63; In the Matter of the Application of Malcolm E. Bergy et al, Patent Appeal No. 76-712, U.S. Court of
Customs and Patent Appeals, 563 F. 2d, 1032-1035 (1977); Application of Ananda M. Chakrabarty, Patent
Appeal No. 77-535, U.S. Court of Customs and Patent Appeals, 571 F. 2d, 42 (1978).

36 In the Matter of the Application of Malcolm E. Bergy et al, 563 F. 2d, 1034-1035 (1977).

                                                
20

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

of microroganisms were "much more akin to inanimate chemical compositions such as

reactants, reagents, and catalysts than they are to horses and honeybees or raspberries and

roses." He found nothing in the language of the patent laws that excluded such tools from patent

protection solely on grounds of their being alive; it was being alive that made them useful. He

held, "In short, we think the fact that microorganisms, as distinguished from chemical

compounds, are alive is a distinction without legal significance." Rich took note of the fear that

allowing patents for microorganisms would make patentable "all new, useful, and unobvious

species of plants, animals, and insects created by man." He  called the fear "far-fetched," while

observing that, in any case, "that question is not before us."37

MaLossi argued Chakrabarty’s case on December 5, 1977, and on March 2, 1978 the

Court ruled three-to-two in Chakrabarty’s favor. Judge Rich, speaking for the majority, saw only

one issue --- the patentability of living organisms. The Court had dealt with the identical issue in

the Bergy case and found its reasoning there sufficient and controlling. In a concurring opinion,

Judge Howard T. Markey declared, "The [patent] statute is not ambiguous. No Congressional

intent to limit patents to dead inventions lurks in the lacuna of the statute, and there is no grave

or compelling circumstance requiring us to find it there." And he added, "As with Fulton’s

steamboat ‘folly’ and Bell’s telephone ‘toy,’ new technologies have historically encountered

resistance. But, if our patent laws are to achieve their objective, extra-legal efforts to restrict

wholly new technologies to the technological parameters of the past must be eschewed."38

37Ibid., pp. 1037-1038.

38 Application of Ananda M. Chakrabarty, 571 F 2d, 43-44 (1978).

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

21

Ranking lawyers in the U.S. Patent Office now had to decide whether to appeal the

decision to the Supreme Court, and it was at this point that considerations of the political

economy of biotechnology began to figure in the case. The scientific key to the

commercialization of molecular biology was the technique of recombinant DNA that had been

co-invented, in 1973, by Herbert Boyer and Stanley Cohen, biologists at, respectively, the

University of California San Francisco Medical School and Stanford University. The advent of

the technology provoked controversy, as scientists warned that its use might lead to the release

of dangerous new organisms into the environment or throw evolution off course. The

apprehensions spread rapidly through the lay community, stimulating moves in state legislatures

and the United States Congress to impose severe restrictions on research with recombinant

DNA. By 1978, most molecular biologists were convinced that the dangers had been

exaggerated. The National Institutes of Health had established regulations for the confinement

to safe facilities of whatever recombinant research. And the trend to acceptance of recombinant

techniques was being reinforced by the growing commercial interest in them.

Herbert Boyer had helped lead the way. In 1976, Boyer and a venture capitalist named

Robert A. Swanson formed the biotechnology firm Genentech -- short for "genetic

engineering technology." In 1977, the company used recombinant techniques to engineer a

bacterium so that it generated the mammalian hormone somatostatin, which is produced at the

base of the brain and is involved in the regulation of growth. In 1978, it announced in a press

conference that its scientists had succeeded in producing human insulin by similar means.

The achievement with insulin was heralded in every major newspaper and magazine in the

United States except The New York Times, which was on strike. Newsweek typically

22

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

proclaimed that "recombinant DNA technology can undoubtedly be used to make scores of

other vital proteins, such as growth and thyroid hormones, as well as antibodies against

specific diseases."39

By now, new biotechnology companies were being founded at a high pace, while major

pharmaceutical firms as well as several oil and chemical giants were plunging into recombinant

DNA, initiating research programs of their own, letting research contracts to the startups, and

even obtaining an equity interest in some of them.40  Biotechnology firms and firms eager to get

into biotechnology sought connections with campuses.41 In return, the campuses could expect

dividends from the biotechnology industry in the form of gifts, research grants, and license fees

for the use of patents covering the valuable research products of their laboratories.

However, the dissent from recombinant DNA had not disappeared entirely, either

among scientists or the lay community. The critics kept warning that genetically engineered

microorganisms threatened the environment and could pose hazards to human health. Some also

predicted that genetic engineering would eventually be applied to human beings, ushering in a

new era of eugenics, and that essential features of the organic world would fall under the control

of profit-making corporations. An increasingly prominent critic was the social activist Jeremy

Rifkin, a graduate of the Wharton Business School who had turned left and who headed a

39Steven S. Hall, Invisible Frontiers: The Race to Synthesize a Human Gene (New York, NY: The Atlantic
Monthly Pres, 1987), pp. 87-88, 199-203, 213-22, 231-35, 241-48, 266, 269-83; Matt with Joseph Contreras,
"Making Insulin," Newsweek, 92(September 18, 1978), p. 93.

40Martin Kenney, Biotechnology: The University-Industrial Complex (New Haven: Yale University Press,
1986), pp.44-45, 56, 61-67, 73, 78-80, 140, 191; Nicholas Wade, "Recombinant DNA: Warming Up for the Big
Payoff," Science 206(Nov. 9, 1979), 663,665; The Wall Street Journal, May 10, 1979.

41Susan Wright, "Recombinant DNA Technology and Its Social Transformation, 1972-1982," Osiris, 2nd Series,
2(1986), 303-60.

 
                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

23

public-interest group called the People’s Business Commission. A newcomer to the issues of

genetic engineering, he predicted eugenic and corporate capture of recombinant DNA and was

resolutely opposed to the patenting of life.

The Patent Office lawyers, well aware of the controversy over genetic engineering and

of its commercial prospects, recognized that the stakes in patenting life now reached far

beyond purely legal questions. Gerald Bjorge, the Associate Solicitor in the Patent Office,

remembered a key point in the discussions about whether to appeal the Bergy and

Chakrabarty cases to the U.S. Supreme Court: The belief that living products could be

patented would call forth considerable investment in biotechnological enterprises. However,

while the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals might today decide in favor of the

patentability of living microorganisms, federal appeals courts elsewhere might in the future

decide against it, placing the issue in legal limbo. An adverse ruling by the Supreme Court at

that point would throw the biotechnology industry into turmoil. Better to have the high court

clarify the issue now rather than leave the matter to the uncertain future. If it ruled against

Bergy and Chakrabarty, the issue could be referred to the Congress, where the Patent Office,

of course, thought it belonged anyway.42

On April 20, 1978, on behalf of the Patent Office, the Solicitor General of the United

States moved to appeal the Bergy decision to the United States Supreme Court, warning, in his

petition, that "since the number of living things is vast, the decision opens an enormous range of

subject matter to patentability," that policymaking concerning the extension of the patent laws to

42 Telephone interview with Gerald Bjorge, March 12, 1989.

                                                
24

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

new fields was for Congress, not the courts, and that allowing the Bergy ruling to stand would

further complicate the "policy problems" -- the brief noted the 1976 NIH guidelines -- "of

genetic engineering, already highly controversial."43  On June 26, on the last day of its term, the

Court ordered that the Bergy decision be vacated and it sent the case back to the patent appeals

court for reconsideration in light of a decision that it had rendered four days earlier, in another

patent case, Parker v. Flook."44  In August, over MaLossi’s objections, the appeals court vacated

its judgment in Chakrabarty’s case, too, also compelling reconsideration of it in light of Flook.

Though the two cases were not formally consolidated, the appeals court chose to deal with them

together, receiving briefs from the parties in September and October and hearing arguments on

both, on November 6, 1978.45

The Supreme Court had given no specific indication of the relevance of Flook to Bergy’s

claim, which left the matter somewhat shrouded in mystery, all the more so since the case

concerned the patentability of a mathematical algorithm for the control of a production process.

Under the circumstances, each of the principal parties in the proceeding found in Flook what

suited its interest. The government’s lawyers locked onto a point in one of the precedents that the

high court had cited in the case -- that an expansion of patent rights "would require a clear and

certain signal from Congress" -- and contended yet again that, since Congress had not provided for

43 Solicitor General, Petition for a Writ of Certiorari . . ., In the Supreme Court of the United States, October
Term 1977, Lutrelle F. Parker v. Malcolm E. Bergy et al, Docket No. 77-1503,  filed April 20, 1978, pp. 6-7.

44 Parker v. Flook, 437 U.S. 584, 98 Ct. 2522, at 2528; "Application of Malcolm E. Bergy . . ., Application of
Ananda M. Chakrabarty," Appeal Nos. 76-712, 77-535, U.S. Court of Customs and Patent Appeals, March 29,
1979, 596 Federal Reporter, 2d Series, 952, at 957.

45 "Supplemental Brief for Appellant," U.S. Court of Customs and Patent Appeals, Patent Appeal Docket No.
77-535, In Re Application of Ananda M. Chakrabarty, Appellant," [filed fall 1978], p. 4.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

25

the patenting of living matter, neither Bergy’s nor Chakrabarty’s claim should be allowed. But

while introducing the precedent, the Court had observed that "we must proceed cautiously when

we are asked to extend patent rights into areas wholly unforeseen by Congress."46

Leo MaLossi ingeniously turned that observation to Chakrabarty’s advantage by pointing

out, in his brief, that Chakrabarty’s oil-eating bugs did not fall into an area of innovation that

Congress had not foreseen. They had not been produced by recombinant DNA in the sense of

contemporary genetic engineering but had been devised by a traditional method of recombining

DNA -- by the interbreeding of different strains, hybridization.  Congress had been familiar with

plant and animal breeding since the founding of the republic -- George Washington himself had

been instrumental in the promotion and improvement of mule breeding, MaLossi noted -- and yet

it had never prohibited the patenting of living organisms. On the contrary, Congressional

committee reports drawn up in connection with the last major overhaul of U.S. patent law, in

1952, had declared that an invention could be "anything under the sun." MaLossi concluded that

Flook had no bearing on Chakrabarty’s claim, and Saliwanchik concluded similarly about his client

Bergy’s claim, too, arguing that, since it concerned only the purification of a microrganism, it was

irrelevant to disputes about either mathematical algorithms or genetic engineering.47

46 Parker v. Flook, 437 U.S. 584, 98 Ct. 2522, at 2528; "Supplemental Brief for the Commissioner of Patents and
Trademarks," filed Oct. 20, 1978, U.S. Court of Customs and Patent Appeals, Patent Appeal No. 77-535, In the
matter of the Application of Ananda M. Chakrabarty, p. 4.

47 "Supplemental Brief for Appellant," U.S. Court of Customs and Patent Appeals, Patent Appeal Docket No.
77-535, In Re Application of Ananda M. Chakrabarty, Appellant," [filed fall 1978], p. 4, 6-8, 15, 22;
Saliwanchik, "Brief in Opposition to Petition for Writ of Certiorari . . .," In the Supreme Court of the United
States, October Term 1977, No. 77-1503, Lutrelle F. Parker v. Malcolm E. Bergy, filed May 11, 1978, p.5;
"Supplemental Brief for Appellants," U.S. Court of Customs and Patent Appeals, Patent Appeal Docket No. 76-
712, In Re Application of Malcolm E. Bergy, et al, Appellants, pp. 2-4; telephone interview with Gerald Bjorge,
March 12, 1989.  

                                                
26

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

MaLossi and Saliwanchik hewed to narrow legal ground because each wanted to win for

his respective client, yet Saliwanchik, alive to the longrange interests of Upjohn, permitted

himself a word or two in praise of the genetic engineering of microorganisms and the allowance

of patents for its living products. Indeed, both cases were taken to be weighted with sufficiently

broad import for the future of biotechnology as to prompt Genentech and the University of

California to file amicus briefs -- the former’s within two weeks of the insulin press conference -

- on the side of Bergy and Chakrabarty. Under the terms of Genentech’s contracts for the

somatostatin project, UC San Francisco and City of Hope could patent the results, giving

Genentech an exclusive license to produce the hormone. Genentech itself would seek the patent

on the recombinant insulin developed in its own laboratory. Now, the university and Genentech

each declared that it had a vital stake in the outcome of the matter -- the university, because it

expected to realize income on patents for genetically engineered products invented in its

laboratories; the company, because the patent incentive would be "an important if not

indispensable factor in attracting private capital support for life-giving research in the

pharmaceutical field."  Neither proposed to argue the particular merits of the Bergy or

Chakrabarty claims, preferring to address the key principle at stake -- that is, the patentability of

living organisms. The university stressed that at issue was only the patentability of "single-cell

organisms which are mindless, soulless and brainless," not that of higher life forms. Along with

Genentech but more expansively, it also contended that the line between dead chemicals and

living microrganisms was "well-nigh imperceptible," adding that, in this respect, even skilled

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

27

scientists could only with difficulty draw "a bright line between life and its absence" and that

recognition of that fact "destroys the argument that life itself . . . precludes patentability."48

Both amicus briefs conceded that recombinant genetic engineering was a new

technology. In the view of the university, however, it was unimaginable that the Congress of

1793 had intended to disqualify from patent protection "the fruits of human creativity in then

unknown technologies, whether airplanes, space craft, or, now, genetically engineered

microorganisms. Genentech’s counsel -- he was Thomas D. Kiley, of the Los Angeles firm of

Lyon & Lyon -- acknowledged that the courts might be doubly cautious in permitting patents in

areas of innovation that, like genetic engineering, were both unanticipated by Congress and

somewhat controversial. He also shrewdly countered that, still, it was "not the job of the Patent

System to regulate new technologies, but rather to bring them into being, and into public view,"

continuing, "Congress is quite capable of regulating the use of technology without judicial

gerrymandering of the System that inspires its creation. A veritable alphabet soup of other

Agencies attests to that." In Kiley’s view, the government’s concern with the controversialism of

genetic engineering was "a red herring."49

48 Kenney, Biotechnology, pp. 94-96; The Wall Street Journal, September 7, 1978, p. 17; Saliwanchik, "Brief in
Opposition to Petition for Writ of Certiorari . . .," In the Supreme Court of the United States, October Term
1977, No. 77-1503, Lutrelle F. Parker v. Malcolm E. Bergy, filed May 11, 1978, pp. 6-7; "Brief Amicus Curiae
of the Regents of the University of California," U.S. Court of Customs and Patent Appeals, Patent Appeal
Dockets Nos. 76-712 and 77-535, In the Matter of . . . Bergy and In the Matter of . . . Chakrabarty, pp. 1, 2, 14-
20; "Motion for Leave to Appear as Amicus Curiae and Brief Amicus Curiae of Genentech, Inc.," In the Matter
of . . . Chakrabarty, Patent Appeal No. 77-535, United States Court of Custom and Patent Appeals, filed Sept.
20, 1978, pp. 1b-1d, 6, 8-9, 12-13.

49 "Brief Amicus Curiae of the Regents of the University of California," U.S. Court of Customs and Patent
Appeals, Patent Appeal Dockets Nos. 76-712 and 77-535, In the Matter of . . . Bergy and In the Matter of . . .
Chakrabarty, pp. 1, 2, 14-20; "Motion for Leave to Appear as Amicus Curiae and Brief Amicus Curiae of
Genentech, Inc.," In the Matter of . . . Chakrabarty, Patent Appeal No. 77-535, United States Court of Custom
and Patent Appeals, filed Sept. 20, 1978, pp. 1b-1d, 6, 8-9, 12-13.

                                                
28

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

On March 29, 1979, the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals held by a three-to-two

majority that it could find nothing in Flook that shed light on the Bergy and Chakrabarty cases.

In a fifty-page opinion on behalf of the majority -- the length of the opinion was unusual and

was perhaps prompted by the likelihood that the cases would return to the Supreme Court --

Judge Giles Rich noted that in oral argument the government’s solicitor had admitted that the

technologies at issue were not new, and Rich stressed that it was not necessary anyway for

Congress to have foreseen a new field of technology to make inventions in it patentable. The

majority scoffed at moral pitfalls, rejecting as "hyperbole" the solicitor’s warning that if patents

were allowed for microorganisms, they might have to be permitted for an enormous range of

living matter. On the substantive merits, the majority’ position was unchanged from what it had

been in the first round. Indeed, if anything, the position had been reinforced by Genentech’s

triumphs with somatostatin and insulin, which Rich’s opinion endorsed by quoting from an

enthusiastic report of them in Kiley’s brief. Rich reiterated that "life is largely chemistry,"

declaring that the court could see "no legally significant difference between active chemicals

which are classified as ‘dead’ and organisms used for their chemical reactions which take place

because they are ‘alive.’"  The court once again reversed the Patent Appeals Board,  upholding

Bergy and Chakrabarty’s claims -- but this time by a majority of four to one, since another

justice, although disagreeing with parts of Rich’s opinion, concurred on the key issue of the

patentability of living products.50

50 "Application of Malcolm E. Bergy . . ., Application of Ananda M. Chakrabarty," Appeal Nos. 76-712, 77-535,
U.S. Court of Customs and Patent Appeals, March 29, 1979, 596 Federal Reporter, 2d Series, 952, at 952-53,
955, 967, 973-75, 984-5, 986, 999.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

29

Most high officials in the Patent Office agreed that the decision in the Bergy and

Chakrabarty cases should once again be appealed to the Supreme Court, for much the same

reasons as had moved them to do so the first time. According to the recollection of a staff

member in the Patent Office, the principal exception in the Office was Donald Banner, the U.S.

Commissioner of Patents, who had come to his post, in 1978, from the Borg-Warner

Corporation, where he had been general patent counsel, and who liked the decision of the

appeals court. Determined to keep it away from the uncertainties of judgment by the Supreme

Court, he wanted to let it stand. However, a discreet telephone call from the Patent Office

brought Banner’s obstructionist attitude to the attention of the Office of the U.S. Solicitor

General, who, after determining Banner’s views directly, promptly reminded the Patent

Commissioner that the Solicitor General controlled the legal proceedings of federal agencies

and that this Solicitor General -- he was Wade McCree -- intended to appeal the Bergy and

Chakrabarty cases. On July 27, 1979, McCree petitioned the Supreme Court for review of the

two cases and, on October 29, review was granted.51

In December, the Upjohn lawyers amended their patent application to omit the product

claim on Bergy’s purified lyncomycin --a move that rendered the company’s case moot and

saved it the not inconsiderable cost of an appeal to the Supreme Court. Roman Saliwanchik later

explained that the company thought its claim for the purified natural fungus was weak and

might drag Chakrabarty’s case, which was much stronger but which had become legally joined

with Bergy’s, down to defeat. However, Chakrabarty, though now unencumbered, did not have

51 Interview with a staff member in the Patent Office who does not wish to be identified.

                                                
30

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

to fight on alone. By the end of January 1980, ten amicus briefs, most of them in support of his

case, had been filed by various individuals and organizations, including, once again, Genentech

and the University of California, but now also the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association,

the American Patent Law Association, the New York Patent Law Association, and the

American Society for Microbiology. The Supreme Court chambers were packed when, on

March 17, 1980, the Justices heard oral arguments in the case, which was by then known as

(cid:23)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:11)(cid:24)(cid:25)(cid:11)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:8)  -- Sidney Diamond was the new Commissioner of Patents -- and

which had acquired a degree of economic and social interest far transcending the particulars of

Ananda Chakrabarty’s oil-eating bugs.52

The first amicus brief to be filed came from Rifkin’s People’s Business Commission and

was the only one to take the government’s position. It attacked genetic engineering as such,

warning for example, that it might "irreversibly pollute the planetary gene pool in radical new

ways" -- yet several of its arguments were embraced and given credibility in the brief of the U.S.

Solicitor General, which otherwise repeated the objections it had advanced against patenting life

before the appeals court.53  As a result, the brief of the People’s Business Commission -- the

PBC, as it referred to itself in the document -- drew pointed attention, not only from MaLossi

but also from several of the amici who filed on Chakrabarty’s side.

52 In the Supreme Court of the United States, October Term, 1979, Docket No. 79-136, Motion to Discuss and
Vacate as to Respondents Malcolm E. Bergy, et al, Dec. 20, 1979, pp. 1a-2a; The Wall Street Journal, Jan. 15,
1980, p.4; telephone interview with Roman Saliwanchik, Oct. 14, 1978; "Supreme Court Hears Argument on
Patenting Life Forms," Science, 208(April 4, 1980), 31. The amicus briefs are with Diamond v. Chakrabarty,
Docket No. 79-136, 447 U.S. 303.

53 In the Supreme Court of the United States, October Term, 1979, Parker v. Bergy et al and Parker v.
Chakrabarty, Brief on Behalf of the People’s Business Commission, Amicus Curiae, Dec. 1979, pp. 17-18;
Diamond v. Bergy et al and Diamond v. Chakrabarty,  Brief for the Petitioner, pp. 10, 20-21.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

31

What most exercised the other amici was the PBC’s claim that patenting life was not in

the public interest -- a claim that the PBC sought to support by alleging that the Plant Patent

Act, of 1930, and the Plant Variety Protection Act, of 1970, were directly responsible for a

dangerous trend in the world’s agriculture. The trend was the steady reduction in the number of

varieties cultivated in major food crops -- for example, the number of different strains of wheat -

- and the resultant narrowing of each crop’s genetic diversity.  Many native strains of plants were

being lost as farmers replaced them with a few superior varieties. And the less genetically

diverse a crop, the more susceptible it was to one or another disease. Indeed, in 1970, a corn

blight had wiped out nearly fifteen percent of that crop in the United States, which prompted a

study by the National Academy of Sciences to note that "genetic uniformity is the basis of

vulnerability to epidemics" and to add that "most crops are impressively uniform genetically and

impressively vulnerable."54

According to the PBC, the reduction in crop varieties was the consequence of plant

patents (the brief casually lumped together under the term "patents" both the genuine patents

established by the 1930 act and the weaker protection certificates provided by the 1970 act). In

the brief’s analysis, seed and grain companies bred only those plants that could be patented -- a

small number, it held  -- and then (somehow) persuaded farmers to buy and substitute them for

native strains. Furthermore, a few large corporations -- frequently the same drug and chemical

54 In the Supreme Court of the United States, Parker v. Bergy et al and Parker v. Chakrabarty, Brief on Behalf of
the People’s Business Commission, Amicus Curiae, Dec. 1979, p.pp. 5-9; National Research Council, Committee
on Genetic Vulnerability of Major Crops, Genetic Vulnerability of Major Crops (Washington, D.C.: National
Academy of Sciences, 1972), p.1. See also U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Plant Genetics Resources
Board, Plant Genetic Resources: Conservation and Use (Washington, D.C., 1979).

 
                                                
32

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

companies that were beginning to invest in biotechnology -- had been acquiring independent

seed companies and their plant "patents" (protection certificates). For example, Upjohn, together

with three other companies, now held 79% of such "patents" in beans. The overall result:

"thanks to the patent laws, the bulk of the world’s food supply is now owned and developed by a

handful of corporations which alone, without any public input, determine which strains are used

and how."55

The PBC also caught the attention of other amici by insisting that allowance of the

patenting of microorganisms as new compositions of matter would leave no scientific or legal

basis to preclude the patenting of higher life forms, including mammals and the human

manufactures of some Brave New World. Its brief predicted that patenting animals would lead

to consequences identical to those it alleged had occurred with plants -- a reduction in the

world’s domestic animal varieties and genotypes. Yet what most distressed the PBC -- what it

saw as "the essence of the matter" in the Chakrabarty case -- was that to permit patents on life

was to imply that "life has no ‘vital’ or sacred property," that it was only "an arrangement of

chemicals, or mere ‘compositions of matter.’"56

Solicitor General Wade H. McCree, Jr.’s brief did not endorse the PBC’s on the merits

but rather drew upon the Commission’s claims to bolster its own principal legal argument -- that

legislation was necessary to extend patent protection to living organisms. Genetic engineering

55 In the Supreme Court of the United States, Parker v. Bergy et al and Parker v. Chakrabarty, Brief on Behalf of
the People’s Business Commission, Amicus Curiae, Dec. 1979, pp. 7-9, 12-13.

56 In the Supreme Court of the United States, Parker v. Bergy et al and Parker v. Chakrabarty, Brief on Behalf of
the People’s Business Commission, Amicus Curiae, Dec. 1979, pp. 11-12, 21-22, 27, 29-30.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

33

had raised issues of ethics (the creation of new life forms, including human ones); also of safety

(recombinant organisms polluting the environment), continuing controversy over which, in the

Solicitor’s misinformed view, had led to a revision of the guidelines governing recombinant

research. Both issues had stimulated high disputes of a type that should be resolved by the

Congress, not the courts. MaLossi reiterated why no Congressional action was required for a

patent to issue on Chakrabarty’s bugs, stressing, in addition to the intricacies of the law, that the

bugs had nothing to do with the kind of recombinant DNA that was controversial. However, he

did feel compelled to point out to the Court the "distortion of the record" concerning

recombinant DNA presented in the Solicitor’s brief, particularly with respect to public health

and safety. Contrary to the Solicitor’s impression, the revisions in the NIH guidelines indicated a

progressive reduction, not enlargement, in the estimate of environmental risk in recombinant

research. Beyond that, MaLossi deemed it best to let the pro-recombinant amici represent their

own interests to the Court. 57

The amici obliged, especially the two -- Genentech and the Pharmaceutical

Manufacturers Association -- with the greatest immediate economic interest in the outcome of

the case. To both, the positions of the government and the PBC seemed to flout fact and logic.

Their briefs sought to set matters straight and to provide what amounted to basic instruction in

the fundamentals of the patent system, at least as they saw it. Patents did not foster but actually

penetrated industrial secrecy to an extent, because they compelled publication of the means and

57 Diamond v. Bergy et al and Diamond v. Chakrabarty, Brief for the Petitioner, [Jan. 1980], pp. 9-10, 17-21;
Parker v. Bergy et al and Parker v. Chakrabarty, Chakrabarty’s Brief in Opposition to Petition for Writ of
Certiorari to the United States Court of Customs and Patent Appeals, Sept. 1979, p. 6, n.3; Diamond v.
Chakrabarty, Brief for the Respondent, [Jan. 1980], pp. 27-28.

                                                
34

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

methods that led to a patentable product. Denying patents on life would throw corporate

recombinant research deeper into the realm of trade secrets and away from public scrutiny of the

degree to which the corporate world was actually abiding by the NIH guidelines. Patents

encouraged technological innovation, and they should be allowed to encourage it in genetic

engineering, since the field was recognized as a richly promising contributor to the nation’s

high-technology competitiveness. By offering the incentive of certificate protection, the Plant

Variety Protection Act had not reduced but had increased the number of plant varieties available

to the American public. For example, as many new varieties of wheat had been developed in the

seven years after the passage of the act, in 1970, as in the seventeen years before it. (Genentech

found it difficult to credit the argument that patents for life forms would diminish genetic

diversity, "when any shovel full of backyard sod can yield micro-organic life in endless variety,

and when genetic engineering itself permits the creation of new varieties.")58

Speaking from its own experience, Genentech called the patent system at its best "a pro-

competitive system," one that could facilitate "the interposition of small but fruitful companies"

in industries traditionally dominated by major firms. In fact, according to the Pharmaceutical

Manufacturers, since 1970, as a result of the Plant Variety Protection Act, the number of seed

companies had increased, especially in wheat, cereal grains, and soybeans (before that year, six

companies had been engaged in the development of soybean varieties; now the number was

twenty-five). Also since 1970, almost 1,000 applications had been submitted for plant variety

58 Diamond v. Chakrabarty, Brief on Behalf of the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, Amicus Curiae,
Jan. 1980, pp. 13, 26-28, 48; Brief on Behalf of Genentech, Inc., Amicus Curiae, Jan. 1980, pp. 13, 17-18.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

35

protection certificates on 57 distinct crops. About ten percent of these had come from

agricultural experiment stations at colleges and universities; about twenty percent, from the six

largest U.S. seed companies; and almost 70%, from private breeders of all sizes.59

The American Patent Lawyers Association took the trouble to point out what should

have been obvious to anyone -- that living entities (innumerable varieties of domesticated plants

and animals) had been treated as property since the advent of acquisitive man. Several of the

amici conceded that allowing a patent property right in Chakrabarty’s bugs might raise the

question of the patentability of higher life forms. However, higher life forms were not at issue in

the case, only microorganisms. The courts could only resolve the scope of the patentability of

life if and when that question came concretely before them, not prospectively. (The

Pharmaceutical Manufacturers opined that, should the matter arise, it would be easy to draw a

line between higher life forms and "the mindless soulless microorganism involved in

Chakrabarty"; Genentech scoffed at the idea that a grant of Chakrabarty’s claim would permit

patents on human beings, declaring that such argument "extends literalism beyond reason.")60

Genentech supplied a trenchant counter to what the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers

termed the "sky-is-falling" issues that had been insinuated into the case. The company’s brief

contended that it would defeat the patent system to permit controversialism to be a criterion of

patentability, that the best science and invention were revolutionary, and often controversial,

59 Diamond v. Chakrabarty, Brief on Behalf of the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, Amicus Curiae,
Jan. 1980, pp. 28-29;  Brief on Behalf of Genentech, Inc., Amicus Curiae, Jan. 1980, pp. 3.

60 Diamond v. Chakrabarty, Brief on Behalf of the American Patent Law Association, Inc., Amicus Curiae, Jan.
1980, p. 22; Brief on Behalf of the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, Amicus Curiae, Jan. 1980, pp.
20, 22-23;  Brief on Behalf of Genentech, Inc., Amicus Curiae, Jan. 1980, pp. 12.

                                                
36

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

and that it was not the province of the Court "to attempt, like King Canute, to command the tide

of technological development," adding, "The Patent System is, out of necessity, neutral. It

cannot be too finely tuned to the kind (as distinguished from the quality) of creation involved....

Most particularly must it abjure prior restraints, because they chill expression in literature and

science alike. The neutrality of the Patent and Trademark Office requires that it leave to other

agencies the regulation of technology, after the fact of its creation."61

The pro-Chakrabarty amici briefs may have told on the government. Presenting its case

in oral argument, Deputy Solicitor General Lawrence G. Wallace allowed to the Court that the

case did not involve broad issues of public policy. It concerned only the narrow field of statutory

interpretation and Congressional intent, to which he proceeded to confine his remarks.

Chakrabarty was represented by Edward F. McKie, Jr., of Washington, D.C., who maintained

that existing statutes were broad enough to allow his client’s claim, that a living microorganism

did not open a new area of patent protection. MaLossi remembered with pleasure that several of

the justices wanted to know whether the bugs were the product of a new technology and that

Wallace had to concede that they were not. Justice John Paul Stevens asked Wallace to explain

why patents should be granted to new chemicals but not to newly fashioned bacteria. Wallace

replied, lamely, that bacteria just did not "fit well within the statute," whereupon Justice

William Rehnquist retorted, "Do you fear an invasion of the spores?"62

61 Diamond v. Chakrabarty, Brief on Behalf of the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, Amicus Curiae,
Jan. 1980, pp. 15-16; Brief on Behalf of Genentech, Inc., Amicus Curiae, Jan. 1980, pp. 4-12.

62 Arguments before the Court: Patents,"  The United States Law Week, 48(March 25, 1980), 3609-3610;
telephone conversation with Leo MaLossi, Aug. 23, 1988.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

37

On June 16, 1980, the United States Supreme Court held, by a vote of five to four, that

Chakrabarty had a right, within existing statutes, to a patent on his microorganism. Chief

Justice Warren Burger delivered the majority opinion, which echoed much of the reasoning in

the appeals court opinion of Judge Giles Rich. Justice Burger enthused over the broad language

that Jefferson had written into the patent law of 1793, calling it expressive of its author’s

"philosophy that ‘ingenuity should receive a liberal encouragement’" and noted that all

succeeding Congresses had left Jefferson’s language virtually intact. Rejecting the contentions of

the Patent Office, he found that the patent code as written was ample enough to accommodate

inventions in areas unforeseen by Congress, including genetic technology, and to cover living

microorganisms. Congress, in passing the plant acts of 1930 and 1970, had "recognized that the

relevant distinction was not between living and inanimate things, but between products of

nature, whether living or not, and human-made inventions." Chakrabarty’s bugs were new

compositions of matter, the product of his ingenuity, not of nature’s. As such, they were

patentable under existing law. The minority’s opinion, delivered by Justice William Brennan,

argued  precisely the opposite -- that, in view of the legislative history of the two plant acts, the

extension of patent protection to living microorganisms required new law.63

There was no particular ideological split between the majority (in addition to Burger,

Justices Rehnquist, Stevens, Potter Stewart, and Harry Blackmun) and the minority (besides

Brennan, Justices Byron White, Thurgood, Marshall, and Lewis Powell). Both the majority

and the minority agreed that the question before the Court was the narrow one of statutory

63 Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U.S. 303,  100 S. Ct. 2204 (1980) at 2206-2212.

                                                
38

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

interpretation. However, Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr. dissented in the case, as he wrote to

Brennan, because of "the relative novelty of patenting a living organism, and by my

conviction that the issue should be decided by Congress." At Powell’s urging, Brennan’s

opinion included the observation -- Powell wrote the passage -- that the case concerned a

composition that "uniquely implicates matters of public concern" and advanced that fact as a

special reason for Congressional jurisdiction.64

Chief Justice Burger also took the trouble to address the apprehensions of the Patent

Office and the People’s Business Commission concerning the "grave risks" in genetic

engineering, writing in his opinion that their briefs "present a gruesome parade of horribles" and

reminded the Court "that, at times, human ingenuity seems unable to control fully the forces it

creates." Burger observed, however, that genetic research with its attendant risks would likely

proceed with or without patent protection for its products and that neither legislative nor judicial

fiat as to patentability would "deter the scientific mind from probing into the unknown any more

than Canute could command the tides."  More important, the Court was "without competence"

either to brush aside the horribles "as fantasies generated by fear of the unknown, or to act on

them."  Matters of high policy, embodying competing interests and values, were best handled by

Congress and the Executive -- the political rather than the judicial branches of the government.

The Court’s task was the "narrow one of determining what Congress meant by the words it used

64(cid:26)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:19)(cid:25); Lewis F. Powell to Mr. Justice Brennan, May 29, 1980, William J. Brennan MSS, Library of Congress,
Container 535.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

39

in the statute" -- which the Court had done -- and once that was accomplished, its powers were

"exhausted."65

(cid:31)# (cid:2)(cid:11)"(cid:12)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:12)(cid:14)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:4)(cid:23)(cid:12)"(cid:2)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:5)

After the (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:8) ruling, several critics insisted that the decision appeared to leave

no legal obstacle to the patenting of higher forms of life, including animals and, possibly,

human beings.66  In fact, a number of biologists began genetically engineering animals primarily

for research purposes -- for example, to study how cells differentiate as an animal develops from

a newly fertilized egg or to explore the genetic dynamics of cancer. But their efforts produced

animals that were new compositions of matter and that in some cases had commercial -- and,

hence, patentable -- possibilities.

The genetic engineering was accomplished by inserting foreign genetic material into an

animal’s genome using a method that had been recently devised independently in several

laboratories. The fundamental step in the process was to introduce foreign DNA obtained with

recombinant techniques into a newly fertilized mammalian egg. The immigrant DNA could

integrate into and then proliferate with the creature's native genome, eventually finding its way

into every cell of the grown animal, including its sex cells. When the animal reproduced, the

DNA would be transmitted to some fraction of its progeny, automatically supplying a large

65 Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U.S. 303,  100 S. Ct. 2204 (1980) at 2211-12.

66. "Blue Chips for a Biochemist." Time, March 9, 1981, p. 57; Peter Gwynne, "Court Decision Spurs Genetics
Research," Industrial Research and Development 22(August, 1980) 45-46; Debra Whitfield, "Patent Decision
Could Spur Genetic Research Industry," Los Angeles Times, June 17, 1980, p.11; C. Larry O’Rourke, "The
Chakrabarty Decision," Environment 22(July/Aug. 1980), 5.

                                                
40

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

number of such genetically transformed animals. The efficacy of the method was demonstrated

in 1980 at Yale University by Jon W. Gordon and Frank H. Ruddle, who declared their results

to mean that "genetic transformation can be extended to whole mammalian organisms at a very

early stage in their development."67

By then, engineering animals with foreign genes -- "transgenic" animals," to use the

term that Gordon and Ruddle soon coined -- had begun to shape the collaborative research of

Ralph Brinster, a veterinary biologist at the University of Pennsylvania, and Richard Palmiter, a

molecular biologist at the University of Washington. They first introduced a test construct of

foreign DNA that comprised a gene attached to a sequence of DNA taken from mice that would

promote and regulate the gene’s expression. The promoter/regulator gene did its job, and they

obtained expression of the gene in the recipient mouse.68

Brinster and Palmiter then decided to try their method of gene injection to correct

dwarfism in a strain of mice that resulted from a lack of growth hormone. The strategy was to

introduce into the mice the gene for rat growth hormone (rGH) attached to the gene for the

protein metallotheinin (MT), the same one that had worked in the test construct. MT regulates

the level of heavy metals in the body; its gene is abundantly expressed in many organs,

especially the liver. The ingestion of, say, too much zinc would stimulate the production of MT,

which would then tie up the zinc. Palmiter proposed to exploit that process to control the

67 Jon W. Gordon et al, "Genetic Transformation of Mouse Embryos by Microinjection of Purified DNA," Proc.
National Academy of Sciences, 77(Dec. 1980), 7380-84; Ralph L. Brinster and Richard D. Palmiter,
"Introduction of Genes into the Germ Line of Animals," The Harvey Lecture, Series 80 (1986), 1-4.

68Brinster and. Palmiter, "Introduction of Genes into the Germ Line of Animals," pp. 4-6

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

41

expression of the growth hormone gene in the transgenic mice. By regulating the amount of

metals such as zinc in their diet, he expected to control the action of the MT gene and, thus, of

the growth-hormone gene. 69

However, before introducing the rGH-MT combination into dwarf mice, Brinster and

Palmiter thought to inject it first into the newly fertilized eggs of normal mice to check that it

was properly constructed, that it would integrate into the genomes of the mice, and that it would

express itself in their livers after they were born. Palmiter recalled that a couple of months after

the mice were made, Brinster telephoned to report, "They’re growing larger than normal!"  A

number were 20 to 40 percent larger. Some were almost twice as big.70 In December 1982,

Brinster and Palmiter reported their results in (cid:27)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:18)(cid:5)(cid:13)(cid:28)(cid:11)which gave their findings prominent

coverage, including a cover picture of a mouse made huge by the growth hormone gene

crouched next to one of normal size. They then achieved even better results using human

growth hormone instead of the rat variety and, in November 1982 published their findings in

(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:15)(cid:13)(cid:21)(cid:30)(cid:13), which heralded their article with a dramatic cover illustration comparable to (cid:27)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:18)(cid:5)(cid:13)’s.71

The graphic demonstration of what might be achieved with transgenic animals excited

many biologists, but perhaps none more than Brinster and Palmiter themselves. Brinster, the

product of a farming family, had long been concerned with the improvement of agricultural

animals. Early in 1982, he had established a collaborative effort to produce transgenic

69 (cid:26)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:19), pp. 6-9; author’s interview with Richard Palmiter, October 25, 1990 (hereafter, Palmiter interview).
70Palmiter interview.

71 Palmiter et al, "Dramatic growth of mice . . . ," Nature, 300(16 Dec. 1982), 611-615; Palmiter et al,
"Metallothionein-Human GH Fusion Genes Stimulate Growth of Mice,” Science, 222(18 Nov. 1983);

                                                
42

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

animals with scientists at the United States Agricultural Research Service Center in Beltsville,

Maryland. The group experimented with transgenic sheep for about a year but failed in most of

them to obtain integration of the transgene into their genomes. Then Brinster began working

with pigs. By that time, he and Palmiter had achieved their spectacular success with mice.

Palmiter remembered that because the mouse grew after the insertion of a growth-hormone

gene, "we now expected everything to grow." He and Brinster reasoned that pigs, made

transgenic by injection of such a gene, might grow to twice current market size or grow to

market size in half the time.72

Working with a Beltsville scientist named Vernon Pursel, Brinster and Palmiter used a

transgenic construct for the pigs that coupled the MT promoter gene to the gene for human

growth hormone.  Some of the resulting transgenic pigs grew bigger than normal ones; they also

were less fatty and converted feed into meat more efficiently. But they suffered from various

afflictions, including gastric ulcers, kidney disease, arthritis, lameness, lethargy, and a tendency

to injury when they moved. They also lacked libidinal energy, a condition that dampened

expectations that, once created, they would happily reproduce themselves.73 

The Beltsville experiments indicated that transgenic transformation that worked well in one

species, the mouse, would not necessarily work well in another, pigs. Nevertheless, Brinster,

Palmiter, and Pursel continued their experiments with pigs, trying to find a promoter that would

72 Author’s interview with Ralph Brinster, Feb. 14, 1991; Brinster and. Palmiter, "Introduction of Genes into the
Germ Line of Animals," pp. 26-28. Brinster and Palmiter also introduced growth-hormone gene into rabbits.

73 V.G. Pursel et al, "Insertion of Growth Hormone into Pig Embryos," in R.B. Heap, C.g. Prosser, and G.E.
Lamming, eds., Biotechnology in Growth Regulation. .(cid:11)(cid:25)(cid:11) (London: Butterworth, 1989), pp. 1818-86; Vernon G.
Pursel et al, "Genetic Engineering of Livestock," Science 244(16 June 1989), 1281-1288.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

43

work. Scientists in universities and biotechnology firms embarked on transgenic research

programs with other farm animals.  They hoped to engineer chickens with higher resistance to

disease, for example, or sheep that produced more wool, or cows that provided more meat.74

Some also pursued what came to be called "molecular farming" -- genetically modifying

animals so that they manufactured valuable proteins. Genentech had obtained its first

commercially significant product, human insulin, by inserting the gene for human insulin into

bacteria, which then manufactured its constituent elements. But animals were far more efficient

producers of mammalian proteins. The gene for, say, Factor 9, a blood-clotting agent that

hemophiliacs lack, could not be produced in bacteria; but it might be inserted into a cow’s

genome and harvested from its blood.75 In all, molecular farming appeared to offer a means of

turning common animals into factories for the production of valuable human proteins that were

otherwise difficult and expensive to obtain, if they could be obtained at all.

While Brinster and Palmiter were pursuing the line of research that led them to

Beltsville, still other scientists were creating transgenic laboratory animals that would serve as

models for the study of genetically-based diseases. At Harvard University, Philip Leder and his

postdoctoral collaborator Tim Stewart developed a transgenic mouse that was supersusceptible

to breast cancer because it contained an oncogene -- that is, a tumor-causing gene -- tied to a

promoter that would activate the gene in the mammary glands. The work had not been done for

74 Robert A. Jones, "Biotechnology, In Search of a More Perfect Pig," Los Angeles Times, July 12, 1987, p. 1;
"Genetic Tests Open Scary World of Super Species," Toronto Star, March 29, 1988, p. A27; Richard Saltus,
"Era of ’Designer Animals’ Looms," Boston Globe, Dec. 26, 1988, p. 63.

75 Palmiter interview; . Jones, "Biotechnology, In Search of a More Perfect Pig"; Saltus, "Era of ’Designer
Animals’ Looms."

                                                
44

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

the sake of devising a patentable product, but once it was accomplished, Leder recognized that it

might have commercial possibilities. About the end of 1983, he brought his mice to the

attention of the Office of Technology Licensing and Industry Sponsored Research, the recently

established patents arm of the Harvard Medical School.76

To explore the issue, the Office of Technology Licensing assembled a small group,

including, along with Leder and several DuPont intellectual property lawyers, a patent attorney

named Paul Clark, from the downtown Boston law firm of Fish and Richardson, Harvard’s

principal outside patent counsel.  Clark later recalled that "the work’s most apparent and

compelling manifestation was the animal itself," continuing, "it became clear immediately that it

was important to claim the mice, to give Harvard and its licensee, DuPont, all the legal rights to

which they were entitled. Claims on methods of using the mice, or on plasmids, although of

some importance, would not have adequately protected the invention." Clark’s reasoning was

standard among patent lawyers: better to protect the product as well as the processes used to

produce it; otherwise, competitors, using different processes, could develop similar products.

Clark also saw that Leder’s transgenic animals were, like the bacteria in Chakrabarty,

new compositions of matter made by man, and he knew that the Supreme Court had

admonished in the Chakrabarty case that a court cannot properly consider the state of being

alive when deciding whether something falls within the protection of patent law. Thus, Clark

explains, "it was hard for me to see any legal basis for excluding claims on animals."

76 Author’s interviews with Philip Leder, June 21, 1988, June 6, 1991.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

45

On June 22, 1984, on behalf of Harvard University, Clark filed an application for a

patent on Leder and Stewart’s invention.  The main utilities that he claimed were

straightforward, including the use of such animals as sources of malignant or proto-malignant

tissue for cell culture and as living systems on which to test compounds for carcinogenicity or --

in the case of substances like Vitamin E -- power to prevent cancers. However, Clark had not

been at all conservative in what he claimed as the actual invention. It was not simply a

transgenic mouse with an activated (cid:16)(cid:8)(cid:30) gene, which would have been extraordinary enough. It

was any transgenic mammal, excluding human beings, containing in all its cells an activated

oncogene that had been introduced into it -- or an ancestor -- at an embryonic stage.

The same year that Harvard filed the patent application on Leder and Stewart’smouse,

three marine biologists in Washington state -- Standish K. Allen, Jr. and Sandra L. Downing, of

the University of Washington, and Jonathan A. Chaiton, of the Coast Oyster Company --

applied for a patent on an improved version of Crassostrea gigas, a variety of the Pacific oyster.

 The claim was partly for a process that made the oyster more edible. However, it also covered

the improved oyster as such, which challenged precedent.77

 The examiners in the U.S. Patent Office denied the claim, holding that neither (cid:23)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:19)

(cid:24)(cid:25)(cid:11)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:8) nor any other patent ruling authorized the grant of a patent on a higher animal,

even if only an invertebrate. The examiners also found that the triploid oyster was not patentable

on the technical ground that the innovation was obvious to anyone schooled in the art of oyster

77. Copy of Original Patent Application, Sept. 6, 1984, in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit,
Appeal No. 87-1393, In re Standish K. Allen, Jonathan A. Chaiton, and Sandra L. Downing, Joint Appendix,
filed Nov. 24, 1987, pp. 12-23. [Hereafter, Joint Appendix]

 
                                                
46

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

breeding. Allen and his colleagues appealed the examiners’ decision to the Board of Patent

Appeals and Interferences, of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.

The Board could have pointed to the limited scope of (cid:23)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:11)(cid:24)(cid:25)(cid:11)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:8) and

found that Congressional action was necessary to extend patent protection further to living

organisms. However, it had already cast a vote against Congress and for biotechnology in

1985, when it reviewed the patent application of Kenneth Hibberd, a scientist at a subsidiary

of Molecular Genetics Research, Inc., in Minnetonka, Minnesota. Hibberd had applied for a

patent under the industrial patent laws for a type of genetically engineered corn -- "a maize

seed having an endogenous free tryptophan content of at least one-tenth milligram per gram

dry seed weight and capable of germinating into a plant capable of producing seed" with the

same level of free tryptophan.  Although the examiners acknowledged that the innovation fell

within the scope of (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:28) they had denied Hibberd’s application, claiming that

Congress had intended plants to be protected exclusively under the Plant Patent Act and the

PVPA.  However, the Patent and Trademark Appeals Board awarded Hibberd his patent,

holding, in (cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:31)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:11) (cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:5)(cid:19), that the utility patent law (35 USC 101) "has not been narrowed

or restricted" by the passage of the Plant Patent Act or PVPA, that it predated both acts, and

that -- with genuflection to (cid:23)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:11)(cid:24)(cid:25)(cid:11)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:11)-- these plant-specific acts did not

"represent exclusive forms of protection for plant life."78 

In 1987, in the oyster case, the Board cast another vote for legal logic and, in

consequence, for biotechnology, issuing the decision known since as (cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:11)!""(cid:13)(cid:21). It upheld

78 (cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:11) (cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:5)(cid:19)(cid:28)(cid:11)(cid:13)(cid:7)(cid:11)(cid:3)"(cid:25), (1985) 227 United States Patent Quarterly, 443.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

47

the examiners on the point that obviousness of art disqualified the oyster for a patent, but it also

declared that that patents could in principle be granted on living animals -- but not on human

beings.79 The Board held that human beings fell outside the scope of patentability by reason of

the 13th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. Since the amendment outlawed slavery, it in

effect prohibits one human being from holding a property right in another.

Following (cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:31)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:11)!""(cid:13)(cid:21), the patent examiners had no problem granting Leder and

Stewart’s claim. And in April 1988, a U.S. patent was awarded to Harvard University on any

non-human mammal transgenically engineered to incorporate in its genome an oncogene tied to

a specific promoter.

# (cid:2)(cid:26)(cid:6)(cid:17)(cid:4)!(cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:12)(cid:14)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:26)!(cid:7)(cid:14)(cid:7)(cid:23)(cid:4)!(cid:5)

The grant of patents on animals provoked a flood of ethical and economic objections to

the patenting of life, expanding on those that Jeremy Rifkin and the People’s Business

Commission (which had by now turned into the Foundation on Economic Trends) had raised

during the (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:8) case. In 1984, still determined to defend the integrity of living creatures,

Rifkin filed suit in federal district court to halt the experiments with pigs under way at

Beltsville. Declaring them "morally reprehensible," Rifkin said it was "shocking that the U.S.

government would condone the introduction of human genes into an animal.80 The suit failed,

but the (cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:11)!""(cid:13)(cid:21) ruling in 1987 induced further outcries from Rifkin. And opposition to

79 (cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:11)!""(cid:13)(cid:21), USPQ, (1987), 1425.
80 Christine Russell, "USDA Using Human Gene in Effort to Grow Super Livestock," Washington Post, Oct. 1,
1984, p. 1; Boyce Rensberger, "Scientists Hail Gene Transfers as Promising," (cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:19)., Nov. 20, 1984, p. 1

                                                
48

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

transgenic research with higher animals gained leverage when about the same time reports were

published in the American and Canadian press about the Beltsville experiments, including the

health problems of the pigs.81

In mid-May 1987, Senator Mark Hatfield of Oregon, who sympathized with the animal

rights movement, urged the commissioner of patents and trademarks to impose a moratorium on

the processing of animal patent claims until congress could develop a policy on the issue. He

also got the Senate to pass a two-month moratorium as an amendment to an appropriations

bill.82 In the House, Congressman Robert Kastenmeier, of Wisconsin, chairman of the House

Judiciary Subcommittee that dealt with patents, attempted to come to grips with the issue by

holding hearings on animal patents in mid-1987 and again in September 1989.83

Kastenmeier, a left-of-center Democrat, was thoughtful and forthright, his judgments

well considered, his approach to issues “cerebral,” as one of his staff put it. He had been

wondering since the advent of recombinant DNA in the early 1970s whether genetic

engineering comprised a wonderful advance or raised a terrible specter. He believed that

Americans were divided about the issue; the closeness of the Supreme Court’s ruling in the

Chakrabarty case was indicative of the division. He appreciated the social activists’ worries

about animal patenting, taking the reports of "new varieties of pig, rust colored and large" as

81 Jones, "Biotechnology, In Search of a More Perfect Pig"; "Genetic Tests Open Scary World of Super
Species"; Saltus, "Era of ’Designer Animals’ Looms."

82New York Times, May 15, 1987, p.9; HJSH, 1987, p.2.

83HJSH, 1987; U.S. Congress, House, Hearings before the Subcommittee on Courts, Civil Liberties, and the
Administration of Justice, Committee on the Judiciary, Transgenic Animal Patent Reform Act of 1989, 100th
Cong.,  1st Sess., Sept. 13 and 14, 1989 (hereafter, HJSH, 1989).

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

49

reason enough to concern "those who do not wish to see animals mistreated or monster forms

created." He was also sensitive to the economic implications of animal patenting.84 His

congressional district included farming communities, the University of Wisconsin, and the

agricultural biotechnology firms that were growing up around it.

Kastenmeier doubted the adequacy of (cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:11)!""(cid:13)(cid:21)’s prohibition against patents on

human beings: Did it extend to human organs, genes, or other parts? He doubted, too, that the

answers to such questions should be left entirely to the commissioner of patents. He thought that

the extension of patent protection to higher organisms constituted a "quantum leap," one that the

patent office had been high-handed in making. In his view, the Constitution gives power in

determining the scope of patents to the Congress, and Congress ought to exercise it. Amid the

controversy (cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:11)Allen had aroused, he considered it imperative to probe the merits of

animal patents before the issuance of such patents turned into a policy that was both broad and

irreversible.85

The proposed moratorium on the issuance of animal patents drew support from animal

rights activists, clerics, and environmental-minded critics of animal patents. At the hearings,

John Hoyt, the president of the Humane Society of the United States, attacked animal patents on

both pragmatic and principled grounds. Such patents provided incentives for the kind of genetic

engineering that produced the suffering of the pigs at Beltsville. They reflected "a human

84Author’s interviews with Robert Kastenmeier, July 22, 1987, October 10, 1991 (hereafter, Kastenmeier
interviews); Kastenmeier's observation appeared in the transcript of HJSH, June 11, 1987, pp. 3-4, subcomittee
files, though not in the published version of the proceeding.

85 Kastenmeier interviews.

                                                
50

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

arrogance towards other living creatures" that denied "the inherent sanctity of every unique

being and the . . . ecological and spiritual inter-connectedness of all life." They also suggested

"that animals have no inherent value other than that which serves the end of human beings." 86

In the view of a Lutheran bishop, genetic engineering as such was morally dubious and so was

the reduction of life to mere material objects.  John Barnes, a veterinarian representing the

Alliance for Animals and the Federated Humane Society of Wisconsin, wondered whether the

genetic engineering of animals might produce "a Frankenstein effect," unleashing a dangerous

creature that might "inadvertently escape from laboratory isolation . . . and threaten life on

earth."  Barnes claimed that animal patenting would "compromise the integrity of animal

species and ultimately lead to the control of life forms by a few multinational corporations."87 

Congressman Charles Rose, of North Carolina, whose wife was an enthusiast of animal

rights, appeared as a witness to warn that scientists were "playing God" by putting human genes

into animals. "What would happen to the rodent community in America if [rats with human

growth genes] got loose in our society?" Rose was unwilling "to let the market place determine

the future of the animal kingdom." Neither was Congressman Benjamin Cardin, of Maryland, a

member of the subcommittee. He wondered whether the patent office would have any trouble

dealing with a two-headed animal -- part dog, part cat -- that was claimed "as a useful invention

. . . for a sideshow and circus. There might be great demand for such a creature because of

86HJSH, 1987, transcript, pp. 55-56; HJSH, 1989, pp. 108-9, 115.

87 Bishop Schumacher, HJSH, 1987, pp. 345-46, 351-52.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

51

"a lack of good freaks today," he noted. Cardin figured, with obvious disapproval, that in light

of (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:8)(cid:11) the patent office would have no problem granting a patent on it.88

Some farm spokespeople chimed in with ethical and environmental objections to animal

patenting. Gervase Heffner, of the National Farmers Organization in Wisconsin, said he was

"real concerned" about how in, say, fifteen years, would farmers "market that hog using human

growth hormones? Where is that going to fit in the showcase in a store?" He declared that if one

of those experimental pigs was "put out into the market, I would stop eating pork."89 But for all

the grandiloquent and homely posturing that the ethical issues stimulated, far greater attention in

the hearings went to the potential economic consequences of animal patents on farming.

Spokespersons for small farmers warned that the consequences would be

disadvantageous to family farmers. Among them was Stewart Huber, representing the

Wisconsin Farmers’ Union, who leveled multiple complaints against animal patenting. Much of

the research that undergirded the creation of potentially patentable animals had been paid for by

the public; yet private corporations would, for the period of the patent, be gaining a monopoly

property right in the genetically engineered animal, forcing consumers to pay twice for the same

product. Allowing patents on genetically engineered animals would "shift the profit motive for

livestock improvement from the family farmers, who have used the classical breeding practices

over the years, to the giant corporations which have the resources to use  . . . DNA research for

88 HJSH, 1987, pp. 110-111, 31-32.

89 Ibid., p. 313.  See also the testimony of Debra Shwarze, of the Wisconsin Family Farm Defense Fund, Inc,
who emphasized the broad range of environmental, ethical, food safety, and animal health issues raised by
biotechnology, ibid.,  pp. 329-33.

                                                
52

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

their own benefit." The process would have "a chilling effect on traditional family lifestyle

farms," speed vertical integration in farming, and make "individual farmers . . . wards of Wall

Street in the biotechnology establishments." And dealing with the progeny of patented animals

would pose legal and financial burdens that would be both impractical and unjust. "Farmer-to-

farmer livestock sales . . . could be construed to infringe on corporate patent rights, making the

farmer subject to civil prosecution every time an animal was sold."90

What bothered small farmers did not, however, worry agribusiness. James Terrell, of the

American Farm Bureau Federation (AFBF), told Kastenmeier’s subcommittee that the

Federation did not consider the ethical concerns important and that they should not be allowed

to interfere with the incentives that patents provided for the engineering of better farm animals.

He added that the AFBF did recognize that the disposition of rights in the progeny of the

animals might pose problems but that they were not insuperable. The Federation, he stressed,

did not fear monopoly pricing of prize animals. If producers regarded the patented animal as

sufficiently valuable, they would pay for it; if not, not.91

Strong defenses of animal patenting came from other agribusiness witnesses as well as

from academic scientists, and the biotechnology industry. They stressed that new farm

technologies were essential to feed the world’s growing population and were indispensable to

90 HJSH, 1987, pp. 307-9. See also the testimony of Tom Saunders, Wisconsin Farm Unity Alliance, who
declared, "Thousands of Wisconsin registered breeders, who have invested decades in building the genetic base
of their cattle, will find the value of their registered herd eroded by the development of new super-registered
patented livestock. For many farmers, the extra income from the sale of breeding stock is the difference between
keeping and losing our farm." Ibid.,  pp. 321-24.

91 HJSH, 1987, pp. 124-27.

 
                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

53

American farmers in competing in the international market. Noting that the Japanese were

taking steps to encourage their biotechnology industry, they warned that the United States had to

guard against losing its biotechnological edge to Japan as it had done in microelectronics.

Practicing scientists pointed out that patents were preferable to trade secrets because they

compelled the patent holder to disclose the details of the protected innovation, thus giving

others the opportunity to improve upon it. Philip Leder explained the significance of Harvard’s

oncomouse for understanding breast cancer, suggesting that animal patents were necessary to

attract industrial investment to advanced medical research that relied on animal models for

developing diagnostics, therapies, and cures for human disease.92

The key witnesses for academic and industrial biotechnology were Tom Wagner,

Winston Brill, and Richard D. Godown. Wagner, a descendant of five generations of Ohio

farmers, was the director of the Edison Animal Biotechnology Center, a state-supported

consortium at Ohio University, his home institution in Athens. Brill, a biologist, was vice

president for research and development of the Agracetus Corporation, a biotechnology firm

concerned with agriculture. Godown was president of the Industrial Biotechnology Association.

They all adamantly opposed a moratorium on animal patenting and, to that end, vigorously

contested the chief ethical and economic objections that had been raised against the practice.

Brill insisted that "monster animals . . . will not result from this technology." Any

organism’s genes comprised a finely tuned ensemble. One could not "take genes from a chicken

and add them to a cow’s chromosome and get a cow that lays eggs." 

92 HJSH, 1987 pp. 114-35, 208-58, 320, 350; HJSH, 1989, pp. 1193-202.

 
                                                
54

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

Godown dismissed as "ridiculous" the Frankenstein scenarios that had been appearing in parts

of the press -- for example, the myth that "genetic engineers are trying to develop some sort of

humanoid slave containing the genes of humans and chimpanzees." Wagner contended that

genetically engineered animals posed no threat to the environment. Farmers were likely to keep

them penned up and to retrieve any that did escape. Besides, animals, he explained, don’t "infect

other animals [genetically] or humans except in sexual reproduction within their own species. A

lot of us eat pork chops, a very few of us oink.  [Pigs] cannot impart their genetic material to

anything other than pigs."93

All three argued that genetic engineering, rather than increase animal suffering, would in

fact reduce it. The outcomes of conventional breeding were unpredictable because they joined in

one animal half of each parent’s genes. The process, Brill pointed out, could yield progeny that

were "healthy or unhealthy, large or small, commercially interesting or not." Genetic

engineering, in contrast, involved adding just one or at the most several genes to an animal’s

native complement. It was thus "more specific, more predictable and faster than breeding" Brill

said, implying that it was on the whole more humane, too. Wagner noted that agricultural

animals had been modified from the wild type by breeding over 10,000 years. "Anyone who

believes [that] the chickens in Frank Perdue’s chicken houses are living in a natural ecosystem is

simply unrealistic, " he said, adding that genetic engineering could make farm animals resistant

to the diseases that afflicted them in their synthetic environments.94

93HJSH, 1987, pp. 218, 38, 259.

94Ibid.,  pp. 218-19, 38.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

55

Wagner claimed that patented animals would help rather than hurt the small family

farmer. The prime breeding stock of the chicken industry were hybrids whose characteristics

were trade secrets held by just a handful of breeding firms that operated in closed arrangements

with an equally small number of producers. Wagner warned that if genetically engineered

animals were not patented, similar secrecy would prevail among their developers; they would

make "exclusive arrangement with vertical integrators," and "we will see a concentration of

agriculture in the way chickens have been concentrated." Godown added that genetically

engineered animals would "enable farmers to produce leaner beef . . . at lower cost . . . an

advantage in anybody’s language."95

Kastenmeier was convinced by much of the defense of animal patents. He expected that

genetic engineering of animals would proceed with or without the encouragement of the patent

system. A moratorium would only set a bad precedent and irritate the patent community without

achieving any good purpose. Besides, he was convinced that patents were superior to trade

secrets, and he thought that even opponents of animal patents would prefer openness to secrecy

in agricultural research and development.96

He also felt that while many of the ethical issues raised by the witnesses were legitimate,

they did not fall within the realm of patent policy. In the United States, patent policy was literally

amoral; it dealt only with the establishment and scope of property rights in innovations. It excluded

others from making, using, or selling the property, but it did not by fundamental statute

95Ibid.(cid:28)(cid:11) 1987, pp. 39, 259. See also Glenn E. Bugos, "Intellectual Property Protection in the American Chicken-
Breeding Industry," #(cid:18)(cid:17)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:13)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:11) (cid:15)(cid:17)(cid:7)(cid:20)(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:11)$(cid:13)(cid:24)(cid:15)(cid:13)%, 66(Spring 1992), 127-168.
96Kastenmeier interviews.

                                                
56

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

categorically exclude any invention from patentability.97 Kastenmeier believed that issues such as

whether the genetic engineering of animals might unduly foster animal suffering were within the

regulatory powers of congress but not within the jurisdiction of his subcommittee.98

He was certain that the issue of patents on human beings did fall within it and he

remained convinced that Congress needed to address it now rather than later. In keeping with

his concern for both agriculture and the nascent biotechnology industry, he hoped to strike a

balance between the creators and the users of animal patents. He repeatedly pressed witnesses

for their views on a "farmer’s exemption" -- whereby farmers could do what they wished with

the offspring of patented animals, including selling them without paying a fee to the patent

owner. Michael Ostrach, a senior official with the Cetus Corporation, a biotechnology company

that had formed Agracetus, strongly objected. A farmer’s exemption, he predicted, would only

lead patent holders to charge farmers a higher price for the animal, thus making it very

expensive.99 In 1988, Kastenmeier nevertheless produced a bill that would exempt farmers from

any restraint, including the restraint of royalty payments, on what they did with the progeny of

their patented animals. It declared explicitly that human beings could not be patented. The bill

passed the House, but it was not taken up in the Senate before the end of Congress.100

97 In contrast, Article 53 (a) of the European Patent Convention -- which was established in 1962 and governs the
national patent systems of its adhering nations -- prohibits patents on any invention that is contrary to public
order or morality.  When Harvard University applied for a patent on its oncomouse, it had to demonstrate that
the creation of Leder and Stewart did not violate the article. See Daniel J. Kevles,  “Of Mice and Money:  The
Story of the World’s First Animal Patent,” Daedalus(cid:28) forthcoming, 2002
98 Kastenmeier interviews.

99 HJSH, 1987, p. 296.

100 The bill was H.R. 4970. U.S. Congress, House, Congressional Record, Sept. 13, 1988, pp. H7436-H7438.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

57

Kastenmeier attempted to advance another bill on the subject in 1990 but failed; and

defeated in the 1990 primary election, he was thereafter unable to push the issue. Since then,

Congress has generally ignored the issue of animal patents. One reason is the force of the

biotechnology complex in the political economy of intellectual property, but another is that the

genetic engineering of animals has not fulfilled expectations, either in improving agricultural

animals or in turning them into factories for molecular farming.101 Only about 25 animal patents

have been granted in the United States, most of them on laboratory mice and rats. [need to

check this] However, if and when the genetic engineering of animals becomes scientifically

achievable enough to figure in the political economy of agriculture, animal patenting may once

again find a place on the public agenda.

#(cid:31) (cid:2)(cid:26)(cid:6)(cid:17)(cid:4)!(cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:12)(cid:14)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:8)(cid:7)(cid:24)(cid:13)

In contrast, the European Patent Convention -- which was established in 1962 and

governs the national patent systems of its adhering nations -- specifically excludes two types of

inventions from eligibility for patents. Article 53(a) prohibits patents on any invention that is

contrary to public order or morality. And Article 53(b) prohibits them on plant or animal

varieties, or anything produced by a natural biological process, except for microbiological

products. Article 53(a) seems to have its roots in Roman law. Article 53(b) was adopted to

prevent interference with the international system for the protection of breeder’s rights -- it is

known acronymically as UPOV and was created in 1961 -- in new varieties of plants. At the

101"Biotechnology Venture Hits Unexpected Snags," New York Times, Nov. 23, 2001, p. C5.

                                                
58

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

time of the creation of UPOV, the extension of the exclusion to animal varieties was

undoubtedly an afterthought.

However, both articles were brought into play when the European Patent Office (EPO),

which administers the convention and which is headquartered in Munich, came to take up

Harvard University’s application, filed in 1984, for a European patent on its oncomouse. Ruling

in June 1989, the EPO found that oncomouse did not violate the public-order-and-morality

clause of the convention, but it rejected Harvard’s application on grounds that the mouse did

violate Article 53(b).  In the view of the EPO examiners, oncomouse was a new variety of

animal, the product of a natural biological process, and, hence, ineligible for a patent under the

convention.102

Harvard quickly appealed the rejection, insisting that its mouse was not a new variety

but a new type of animal that transcended varietal classification, and that it was not a natural

biological product but -- echoing Chakrabarty’s claim -- a biological entity made by man. The

appeal provoked an unprecedented degree of third-party filings. (Under the European Patent

Convention, interested third parties can file comments for or against pending applications and

appeals, an option that is unavailable in the American patent process.)  Many of the filings were

identical, the products of organized opposition to animal patenting in Europe from public-

interest organizations concerned with animal rights, Third World agriculture, and environmental

issues. The dissent mobilized by these public-interest groups appears to have been centered in

England, where animal welfare groups are powerful, and in Germany, where opposition to

102 European Patent Office, Press Release No. 10/89, “EPO Refuses Patent Application for Oncogenic Mouse.”

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

59

genetic engineering and Greenish concern with environmental protection are vigorous. The

arguments raised by these groups closely resembled those advanced in the United States against

animal patenting. However, the European agricultural community appears to have been more

profoundly split on patents for plants and animals than its American counterpart, with

considerable opposition coming from countries where small-scale agriculture (as distinct from

agribusiness) continues to flourish -- for example, Denmark.

The third-party filings evidently contributed significantly to the decision of the appeals

board, which in 1990 returned the Harvard application to the original examiners for

reconsideration. The appeals board, agreeing with Harvard, declared that the rejection on

grounds of Article 53(b) was without merit, but it held that the examiners had to review the

application against Article 53(a), the morality clause. Part of what the examiners were

compelled to reconsider were issues raised by the third-party filings, particularly whether a

patent on oncomouse would lead to animal suffering (mice with cancer) and environmental

danger (their spreading of oncogenes into the natural mouse population if they were to escape).

However, the appeals board also instructed the examiners to weigh those matters against the

likely benefit to human beings that might arise from research with oncomice.103

Harvard’s lawyers in Europe contended that the mice would, of course, contribute to the

battle against cancer, making them distinctly beneficial to human beings. They also argued that,

since the mice were super-susceptible to the contraction of cancer, fewer of them would be

required to test for carcinogens and, thus, fewer mice would suffer in such testing. Finally, they

103 European Patent Office, “Decision of the Technical Board of Appeal 3.3.2 of 3 October 1990.”

                                                
60

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

pointed out that the mice posed only a minute environmental risk, because they were to be

confined to the laboratory rather than released into the wild; and while unintended release might

occur, the danger was surely not a matter for the patent system but for the agencies concerned

with the control of hazardous materials.104

The Harvard lawyers’ arguments persuaded the European Patent Office, which

incorporated them in a ruling, issued in October 1991, indicating that a patent on the mouse

could and would likely be granted.105  Under the terms of the convention, the ruling was liable

to still further third-party objections; the comment period closed in February 1993, having

drawn many more inches of dissent, most of it advancing the same arguments and coming from

roughly the same sources as in the first round.

The third-party dissidents did not prevail, just as the opponents to animal patenting have

not prevailed in the United States. However, even though American patent law continues to be

literally amoral, anyone seeking a patent on a living organism in Europe will have to satisfy the

requirements of Article 53(a). In the globalizing political economy of biotechnology, American

innovators were on notice that in Europe they had to attend to the ethical features of their

innovations.

104 “European Patent Application No. 86 304490.7, President and Fellows of Harvard College, Response to the
Official Letter of 11th December 1990. . . .”

105 European Patent Office, Press Release 3/92, “European Patent for Harvard’s Transgenic Mouse.”

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

61

#(cid:31)(cid:31) (cid:2)(cid:26)!(cid:17)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:14)(cid:2)(cid:22)(cid:12)(cid:14)(cid:12)(cid:19)(cid:12)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:25)

What they had to do in Canada was much less clear.  Living micro-organisms first

became an issue in the Canadian patent system about the same time as in the United States. But

while they were held to be patentable shortly after the (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:8) decision, in sharp contrast to

the course of events in the United States, neither the Canadian Patent Office nor Courts

proceeded rapidly to extend patentability to higher organisms.

(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:21)(cid:7)(cid:17)(cid:11)&(cid:20)(cid:5)(cid:11)’(cid:15)(cid:30)(cid:5)(cid:20)((cid:20)(cid:5))(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:15)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:17)

In 1976, the Abitibi Company of Toronto applied for a patent on a new mixed fungal yeast

culture system.  Scientists at the University of Ontario, in Western Ontario, had developed the

culture for the company to absorb foaming spent-sulfite liquor generated by its papermaking

business. They had isolated fungi and subjected them to increasing concentrations of foaming

sulfites (among other nutrients) in water.  The organisms that survived the sulfite were then

subjected to increasing concentrations of foaming sulfite liquor in their culture media. 

Eventually they obtained five mutated fungi that could consume the foaming effluent, thus

clearing the waste stream of the contaminant. Abitibi’s patent application covered both the

process of creating the mixed fungal yeast culture system and the product of the system -- that

is, the yeast culture itself. The patent examiner allowed Abitibi’s process claims but rejected the

claims on the microbial culture system on the grounds that living matter was not patentable

subject matter under section 2 of the Canadian Patent Act. The Abitibi Company appealed the

106 I am grateful to Kari Theobald for research assistance on patenting life in Canada.

                                                
62

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

rejection of its product claims to the Commissioner of Patents, who had it considered by a

Patent Appeal Board.107 

Section 2 of Canadian patent law authorized the grant of a patent on a new manufacture

and "composition of matter." Similar to American patent law in its explicit content, it further

resembled the United States patent code in that it said nothing about patents on living

organisms. The Abitibi case thus posed challenges to Canadian patent law like that raised by

Chakrabarty, whose application was then making its way through the U.S. Patent Office. By the

time the Abitibi case reached the Appeal Board, the Chakrabarty case had been decided and was

being widely publicized.  The Board noted that the Canadian prohibition on patenting living

matter had been based on various precedents in the United Kingdom but that “the Chakrabarty

decision casts doubt upon the correctness of that practice.”108 

In 1982, two years after (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:8), the Board recommended to the Commissioner that

the terms "manufacture" and "composition of matter" included, the subject matter of Abitibi's

application, declaring:

All new life forms which are produced (cid:13)(cid:21)(cid:11)(cid:16)(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:13)(cid:11)as chemical compounds and are

prepared and formed in such large numbers that any measurable quantity will

possess uniform properties and characteristics are patentable.  Patentable subject

matter includes micro-organisms, yeasts, molds, fungi, bacteria, actinomycetes,

unicellular algae, cell lines, viruses or protozoa.109

107 $(cid:13)(cid:11)!(cid:31)(cid:31)"(cid:15)(cid:30)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:11)(cid:20)&(cid:11)!(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:7)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:11)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:11)(1982), Canadian Patent Reporter (CPR), Vol.62, 2nd, p.81.
108Ibid., p.87.

109Ibid., p.82.

 
                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

63

The Board also proposed criteria for the patentability of living organisms: 

The conditions of patentability of such subject matter are that the organism to

be claimed, must not of course have existed previously in nature, for in that

event the “inventor” did not create it, and his invention is old.  It must be useful,

in the sense that it carries out some useful known objective. . . .  It must be

sufficiently different from known species that it can be said that its creation

involved the necessary element of inventive ingenuity.110

The Board's recommendation was evidently influenced not only by legal logic but by

considerations of political economy, particularly international competition in biotechnology. It

noted that cases in Australia, Germany and Japan seemed to point to the patentability of living

matter, observing, “Throughout the world various judicial bodies, without changes in

legislation, have gradually altered their interpretation of statutory subject-matter to adapt it to

new developments on technologies, and current concepts of industrial activity.”111  The

Commissioner of Patents accepted the Board’s recommendations. Thus, responding to the

changing legal and competitive environment in the world, Canada granted patent no. 1,131,371:

*(cid:20)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:11)!(cid:30)(cid:7)(cid:15)(cid:24)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:19)(cid:11)(cid:29)"(cid:18)(cid:19))(cid:13)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:5)(cid:20)(cid:30)(cid:13)(cid:17)(cid:17) to the Abitibi Company, the nation's first patent on living

matter.

110Ibid.

111 Ibid.,  p.88.

                                                
64

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:21)(cid:7)(cid:17)(cid:11)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:11)(cid:12)"(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:7)(cid:17)

While the Abitibi decision dealt only with micro-organisms, the Board was well aware

that its decision raised implications for the patentability of higher life forms. Acknowledging

that the issue was debatable, the Board nevertheless suggested that such life forms were

patentable by reason of legal logic:

If an inventor creates a new and unobvious insect which did not exist before

(and thus is not a product of nature) and can recreate it uniformly and at will, and

it is useful (for example to destroy the spruce bud worm), then it is every bit as

much a tool of man as a micro-organism.  With still higher life forms it is of

course  less  likely  that  the  inventor  will  be  able  to  reproduce  it  at  will  and

consistently, as more complex life forms tend to vary more from individual to

individual.  But if it eventually becomes possible to achieve such a result, and

the other requirements of patentability are met, we do not see why it should be

treated differently.112

So far as the CPO was concerned, multicellular organisms %(cid:13)(cid:5)(cid:13) be treated differently. It

did not subscribe to the doctrine set forth by the U.S. Congress in 1952 that "anything under the

sun" qualifies as patentable subject matter.  Apparently after the Abitibi decision, the CPO

modified its ’(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:18)(cid:3)"(cid:11)(cid:20)&(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:21)(cid:7)(cid:11)(cid:22)&&(cid:15)(cid:30)(cid:13)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:30)(cid:7)(cid:15)(cid:30)(cid:13) (MOPOP) chapter on “Utility and Non-Statutory

Subject Matter" to state: “Plants and animals are not patentable subject matter.  Seeds are also

non-patentable, however, a coated seed may be patentable if the invention resides in the coating

112Ibid. pp. 89-90.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

65

given to the seed provided that the life process of the seed has not been altered and there is no

new living matter.”113 

A key test of the CPO's position on plants came in 1983, when Pioneer Hi-Bred, a

Canadian subsidiary of Pioneer Hi-Bred International, in Des Moines, Iowa, applied for a patent

on a new soybean variety, designated “Soybean Variety 0877.”114  A product of the research

branch of the parent company, the new variety, had been devised using traditional cross-

breeding techniques among three known varieties. The inventors claimed that it was the result

of human intervention, did not occur in nature, and that it incorporated utilities such as high oil

content, early maturity, stable high yields, resistance to seed shattering, and resistance to root rot

caused by a fungus.(cid:11)At the time, Canada provided no intellectual property protection for new

varieties of plants. Pioneer Hi-Bred believed its invention merited such protection in part

because of the implications of the Abitibi case and (cid:23)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:11)(cid:24)(cid:25)(cid:11)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:8) for patent coverage

of higher organisms.115

The examiner at the Canadian Patent Office (CPO) rejected Pioneer’s claims on grounds

that its policy manual held unpatentable both the processes for creating new varieties of plants

113 Canadian Intellectual Property Office, "Chapter 16: Utility and Non-Statutory Subject Matter, section 16.04
Examples of Non-Statutory Subject Matter," Manual of Patent Office Practice[only available online at
http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/sc_mrksv/cipo/patents/mopop/mopop_dnld-e.html, 1996].

114 Pioneer Hi-Bred International, Inc., founded in 1926, is now the world’s leading agricultural genetics
company operating in more than 120 countries worldwide.  See the company’s website at
http://www.pioneer.com/canada/
115 $(cid:13)(cid:11)!(cid:31)(cid:31)"(cid:15)(cid:30)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:11)&(cid:20)(cid:5)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:21)(cid:7)(cid:11)(cid:20)&(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:5)(cid:11) (cid:15)(#(cid:5)(cid:13)(cid:19)(cid:11)(cid:14)(cid:7)(cid:19)(cid:25) (1986), 11.CPR (3d) 311 (Patent.App.Bd.), p.313.  For
further features of the soybean, see p.314;  Ken MacQueen,  “Soybean patent case goes to top court,” The
Vancouver Sun, May 9, 1988, p.C2; Danyl M. Stotland,  “Is Biotechnology Patentable in Canada," Canadian
Intellectual Property Review ,9(1991), p.1-24.

                                                
66

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

and animals as well as the new varieties themselves.116 Pioneer Hi-Bred appealed the ruling

through the CPO, contending that the policy should be changed "in the light of the wording of

the (cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:21)(cid:7)(cid:11)!(cid:30)(cid:7)(cid:11)and developments in the law."117

A Patent Appeal Board appointed by the Commissioner of Patents reviewed the matter

and, on March 4, 1986, the Commissioner, accepting the Board’s recommendations, upheld the

examiner's decision. He rested the ruling on the tenor of precedent in the Canadian courts rather

than on the implications of the Abitibi case as the Appeal Board had earlier spelled them out. 

According to the Commissioner: The Canadian courts, differing from their counterparts in the

United States, had tended to circumscribe rather than broaden the wording of section 2 "by

holdings that have excluded some subject-matter areas and human activities from patentability."

Furthermore, the Canadian court decisions overpowered the Abitibi ruling, which strictly

speaking covered only microorganisms, not higher life forms. The Commissioner also held that

the processes used by Pioneer Hi-Bred in creating its soybean were traditional, commonly used

breeding methods; and that as such, they were not patentable under Canadian law.118

Pioneer appealed its case to the Federal Court of Appeal, thus bringing the issue of the

patenting of higher life forms to the Canadian courts for the first time. Ruling on March 11,

1987, the Court upheld the Commissioner of Patents decision to reject Pioneer Hi-Bred's claims.

The Court was unconvinced that the terms "manufacture" and "composition of matter" applied

to a plant variety produced by cross-breeding: "Such a plant cannot really be said, other than on

116 Re Application for Patent of Pioneer Hi-Bred Ltd. (1986), p.313.

117 Ibid.
118Ibid(cid:25), p.313, 315, 318-20.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

67

the most metaphorical level, to have been produced from raw materials or to be a combination

of two or more substances united by chemical or mechanical means." 119

The Court also found that Pioneer Hi-Bred’s application failed to satisfy the disclosure

and reproducibility requirements of Canadian patent law. According to those requirements, the

method of producing a patentable product had to be described in sufficient detail so that a

person skilled in the art could reproduce it.120  In the view of the Court, the processes employed

by Pioneer Hi-Bred in breeding its new soybean variety "involved a ’degree of luck’, ’an element

of good fortune.’  It follows that even a complete and accurate disclosure by the appellant of

everything that the alleged inventor did to develop the new plant would not enable others to

obtain the same results unless they, by chance, would benefit from the same good fortune.121 

Pioneer Hi-Bred then took its case to the Supreme Court of Canada, which on June 22,

1989, unanimously upheld the decision of the Federal Court of Appeal. The justices agreed with

the Appeal Court that the company had failed to meet the disclosure and reproducibility

requirements of the law. Calling that inadequacy sufficient to reject Pioneer Hi-Bred’s claim,

they declined to rule on whether a plant was patentable under Section 2.122

The Federal Appeal Court had questioned the Patent Commissioner’s implicit claim of

authority -- contrary to that of his counterparts in the United States and England -- "to establish

limits to patentability other than those expressly or impliedly defined by Parliament." Here the

119Ibid., p.495-96.

120 Canadian Patent Act, s.36 (1)

121 Pioneer Hi-Bred Ltd. v. Commissioner of Patents (1987), p.492-493.

122Ibid., p.265.

                                                
68

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

Court evidently alluded to the fact that the CPO’s longstanding policy of holding living matter

unpatentable because the Canadian Parliament had not explicitly made it patentable.123 The

Appeal Court’s observation had clearly left open the possibility that higher life forms might be

patentable. The Supreme Court’s sidestepping of the issue reinforced the fact that the issue

remained outstanding. However, the decision of both courts to uphold the Patent Commissioner

on his reasons for denying Pioneer Hi-Bred its patent left the patentability of higher life forms in

a murky state, with ammunition for disputants on both sides of the issue.

+(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:11) (cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:24)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:19)(cid:11)’(cid:20)(cid:18)(cid:17)(cid:13)

On June 21, 1985, Harvard University filed for a Canadian patent on the oncomouse that

Leder and Stewart had engineered. On March 24th, 1993, the patent examiner granted patent

protection to the oncogenetic construct that had been introduced into the mouse and to the

processes used to create the mouse, but he refused it for the mouse itself.  The examiner cited

the CPO’s policy manual and the decision of the Federal Court of Appeals in the Pioneer Hi-

Bred case.124  Harvard soon requested a review of the examiner’s decision by the Commissioner

of Patents. The Commissioner consulted with the Patent Appeal Board, which heard oral

arguments on the case. On August 4, 1995, the Commissioner reaffirmed the examiner’s

decision and dismissed Harvard’s application for a patent on Leder and Stewart's mouse. The

Commissioner argued that the transgenic mouse was not an “invention” because, once the

123Ibid., p.495-96.

124In the Canadian Patent Office—The Decision of the Commissioner of Patents, Harvard Oncomouse case,
August 4, 1995, p.2.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

69

oncogene was inserted into the newly fertilized mouse egg, nature rather than the inventors

controlled the creation of the whole animal. The inventors only ensured the reproduction of the

oncogene. Unlike the Commissioner at the time of the Abitibi case, this Commissioner asserted

that Canada need not take its cue on patent policy from the United States.125 

Harvard thereupon appealed the matter to the Federal Court of Canada, Trial Division. 

Contesting the substantive argument of the Patent Commissioner, Harvard’s lawyers argued that

 the inventors had complete control over the oncogene, the animal’s innovative characteristic.

Moreover, they contended that the oncomouse could be seen as both a “manufacture” (because

the mouse is produced from hand labor and results in a new form) and as a “composition of

matter” (because the mouse is produced by combining a gene with a fertilized mammalian

egg).126

On April 21, 1998, the trial court ruled against Harvard. The presiding judge held that

being able to demonstrate the presence of the oncogene in the mouse did not constitute

control of the mouse and that the insertion of the oncogene into the mouse zygote did not

constitute invention of it. The mouse possessed numerous other characteristics independently

of Leder and Stewart's manipulations. The judge also found that the reproduction of the

oncogene from one generation to the next was attributable to the laws of nature, not the

inventors. The mouse was not reproducible within the requirements of the law because it

married human intervention with the laws of nature. "If someone skilled in the art wanted to

125(cid:26)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:19).,  p.6-7.
126 “Designer Mouse is not a Patentable Invention," Canadian Patent Trademark Newsletter, June 1998
http://www.patentable.com/newsletters/jun98news.html

                                                
70

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

produce an oncomouse with the gene in a particular organ, he or she would only be able to do

so if lucky," he contended.127

Yet the judge was concerned not only with law but with the process for making it in an

arena of patents that was ethically charged. He declared that “a complex life form does not fit

within the current parameters of the Patent Act without stretching the meaning of the words to

the breaking point, which I am not prepared to do.” He added that he was "not persuaded by the

majority decision in Chakrabarty" and was "in complete agreement with the minority.”  He

further noted that the ethical considerations involved in determining the patentability of higher

life forms should be left to the legislators to decide: “[I]f Parliament so wishes, it clearly can

alter the legislation so that mammals can be patented."128 

Harvard then brought its case to the Federal Court of Appeal (FCA). The Canadian

Environmental Law Association (CELA) requested and was granted status in the FCA

proceedings as an intervener against Harvard's claims. The CELA raised various arguments that

the Commissioner of Patents had not. One arose from the passage in 1991 of the Plant Breeders'

Rights Act, a system of intellectual property protection for plants akin to that established in the

United States by the Plant Variety Protection Act in 1970. 129  The CELA argued that the

passage of the Act demonstrated that the products of plant breeding were not meant to be

covered under the Patent Act, and by implication, that all other life forms that are the products

127 President and Fellows of Harvard College (appellant) v. Commissioner of Patents (respondent), 1998,
pp.289-291.
128(cid:26)bid., pp.291-2.
129 Plant Breeders’ Rights Legislation For Canada”, Canadian Intellectual Property Review, 1992, p.38-43.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

71

of genetic engineering are similarly unpatentable. It contended in addition that since the

Canadian Patent Act did not explicitly authorize the patenting of living matter, such matter was

therefore not patentable under the Act. Finally, the CELA also advanced a number of arguments

like those raised in the Kastenmeier hearings, pointing to adverse public-interest effects that

might arise from patenting the products of biotechnology -- for example, hazards to the

environment, to human health, and to animal welfare-- and to the sacrilege of commodifying

life.130

On August 3, 2000, the Appeal Court, overturning the Commissioner of Patents and the

trial division court, decided by a majority of two to one that the Harvard oncomouse was indeed

a patentable invention. The dissenting justice held that the patentability of inventions falls

within the expertise of the Commissioner of Patents, that in denying Harvard a patent on a

living mouse he had exercised his authority reasonably and in accord with law and precedent.

Morevoer, given “the serious moral and ethical implications of this subject-matter, it seems that

the Parliament is the most appropriate forum for the resolution of the dispute here.131

Justice Marshall Rothstein crisply iterated the majority's reasons. Since the Canadian

Patent Act was modeled on the U.S. statute and used the same broad language, the

Chakrabarty decision should be persuasive to Canadian courts. The Patent Act did not

exclude living organisms from eligibility for patents. Neither therefore should the Court.  The

framers of the Patent Act could not have been expected to anticipate every future invention.

130 President and Fellows of Harvard College (appellant) v. Commissioner of Patents (respondent), 2000, pp. 34-
35.

131Ibid., pp.3,7.

                                                
72

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

As to the CELA’s legal objections, in the United States, the majority in (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:8) "found

that a rule that would deny patent protection because an invention was unknown when the Act

was passed would conflict with the core concept of patent law, that anticipation undermines

patentability, and that broad general language was employed because inventions are often

unforeseeable." Furthermore, nothing in the Canadian Plant Breeders’ Rights Act(cid:11)implied that

living things are excluded from the definition of “invention” in the Patent Act provided they

are the result of human ingenuity and are not solely a product of the laws of nature.132

Judge Rothstein went on: The Canadian Supreme Court's decision in the Pioneer Hi-

Bred soybean case was based on the issue of disclosure; it did not rule out the patentability of

higher life forms.  Unlike the breeders of the new soybean variety, the Leder and Stewart had

intervened in the mouse to change its genetic composition. The onocmouse could indeed be

considered a new “composition of matter” comprising the combination of the oncogene (a

physical substance) and the fertilized egg (a biological matter).  Besides, if lower life forms

were compositions of matter, so too were higher life forms. The Commissioner of Patents and

the trial court had given too much weight to the question whether the oncomouse was a product

of human intervention or of nature.  “The use of the laws of nature by inventors does not

disqualify a product from being an invention, provided inventiveness or ingenuity is also

involved.” And whether the inventors sufficiently controlled the production of their invention

was not a "useful" criterion. "All that is important for the usefulness of the product (the use of

132Ibid.,  pp. 25-26, 31,.34.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

73

the oncomouse in carcinogenecity studies) is that, using the methods described by the inventors,

a mouse is produced with all of its cells affected by the oncogene."133 

Judge Rothstein declined to address the CELA’s public-interest concerns, maintaining

that it was for Parliament, and not the Court, to deal with such issues. Like the majority in

(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:8), he held that the Court’s sole task was to interpret the Patent Act. However, aware

that the FCA’s ruling might raise apprehensions that human beings might be next, Judge

Rothstein added, in an echo of (cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:11)!""(cid:13)(cid:21), that "the Patent Act cannot be extended to cover

human beings," continuing, "Patenting is a form of ownership of property.  Ownership concepts

cannot be extended to human beings.  There are undoubtedly other bases for so concluding, but

one is surely section 7 of the (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:5)(cid:11)(cid:20)&(cid:11)$(cid:15))(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:17)(cid:11)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:11)*(cid:5)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:16)(cid:17) . . . which protects liberty.  There

is, therefore, no concern by including non-human mammals under the definition of ’invention’ in

the Patent Act, that there is any implication that a human being would be patentable in the way

that the oncomouse is."134

The FCA decision delighted Harvard’s Canadian lawyer, who reflected, "The trouble

you get into is that in the spectrum of life on earth, there is no difference between a mouse and a

bacterium -- it’s a continuum.  Where do you draw the line?  Do you patent the squid, but you

don’t patent the shark?  Or do you patent the shark but you don’t patent the porpoise?"135 The

Canadian biotech industry was equally pleased. A legal specialist in biotechnology declared,

133Ibid., pp. 22-24, 29.

134Ibid,  p.36. 

135 David Gambrill, “Court allows patent on Harvard Mouse: Decision paves the way for patenting all life forms
except humans"” Law Times, 2001, www.canadalawbook.ca/headline52_arc.html, p.2.

                                                
74

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

“The decision . . . is a triumph of logic and reason over the evisceral fear of the new

technologies.”136 

The decision failed to provoke a widespread national outcry, even though it received

some attention in the Canadian national press, but it did irritate several agrarian, religious,

environmental, and public-interest groups.137 The Rural Advancement Foundation International

(RAFI), Canadian division, a non-governmental organization dedicated to the conservation and

sustainable improvement of agricultural biodiversity, was concerned with the impact of

intellectual property on agriculture and world food security.  One of its members deplored the

FCA decision, saying, “For the first time in Canada, something that can look you in the eye is

considered an invention. . . . The implications of this change in Canadian patent law are

profound and the outcome will be viewed with dismay by many nations who have been

following the Canadian case closely.”138

The response of religious leaders resembled that of their counterparts in the United

States. The Evangelical Fellowship of Canada (EFC) urged that the patenting of life forms

ought to be completely prohibited. “The question of whether or not higher life forms should be

patentable creates unease for Canadians because it raises social, philosophical, moral and

religious questions about the nature of life and the ownership of life," said the Director of EFC’s

Centre for Faith and Public Life.   He further noted that “We are stewards of God’s creation, not

136 Ibid., p.3

137 L.J. Deftos, “Patenting Life: The Harvard Mouse that Has Not Roared," The Scientist, November 27, 2000.

138 “Court rules that mammals can be patented”, Natural Life, 2000, p.2.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

75

owners, and our task is to care for that which has been entrusted to us.  Theology, philosophy

and law remind us that human ownership is not limitless.”139 

The CELA, its intervention in the case having proved fruitless, despaired that the social

policy issues raised by animal patenting would ever be addressed.140  One CELA member

reiterated the position it had advanced to the FCA, declaring that the decision whether to patent

higher life forms "should be made by legislative review, after a full public debate of all the

implications.  If Parliament did consider the issue, it could then decide whether there should be

safeguards such as ethical and environmental reviews, other public protections for food security

and the protection of animals, the appointment of a body of ethical advisors or involvement of

the public in decisions made by the Patent Office.  Only Parliament, not the Courts, could

ensure that such safeguards are in place for the public interest.141

The CELA was joined in its call for legislative review of the issue by the Canadian

Biotechnology Advisory Committee (CBAC), a group of experts in science, nutrition, business,

law, environment, ethics, philosophy and public advocacy. Established to counsel government

ministers, it was to suggest ways to make Canada internationally competitive in biotechnology,

while incorporating social and ethical considerations into biotechnology policy.142 In a

memorandum to the Canadian Government, the CBAC faulted the FCA ruling on several grounds.

139 “EFC Makes Submission on Patenting Higher Life Forms”, EFC Press Releases,
http://www.evangelicalfellowship.ca/ media/pr_viewer.asp?Press_Release_ID=78, May 24, 2001

140 Gambrill, “Court allows patent on Harvard Mouse: Decision paves the way for patenting all life forms except
humans"” Law Times, 2001, p.3.

141“Court rules that mammals can be patented”, Natural Life, 2000, p.2.

142 See official CBAC website at www.cbac-cccb.ca

                                                
76

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

It made no distinction between life forms; plants and primates were equally patentable. And it set

no limits to what could be patented.143 The CBAC argued that, because biotechnology patenting

had become a major part of globalization, it was imperative that the Canadian Parliament, with full

public participation, develop a domestic policy on the patenting of life as quickly as possible, taking

into account the “full range of moral, ethical and social issues that are at stake in this case." 144

The CBAC proposed specifically that Parliament consider amending the Patent Act

explicitly to forbid, if required, particular classes of higher life forms such as primates, the

human body and certain plant species.  Parliament might also want to consider adding to

Canadian patent law a policy provision such as the clause in the European Patent Convention

prohibiting the grant of patents on inventions that were contrary to public order and morality.145

As an alternative to Parliamentary action, the CBAC proposed that the government appeal the

ruling of the FCA on the Harvard mouse to the Canadian Supreme Court, a course of action that

several other groups also urged.146

The government showed no interest in having Parliament review the Patent Act.

However, on October 2, 2000, it did file an appeal of the FCA ruling and stated that a public

dialogue was needed on the issue of animal patents. It also filed a notice of motion to stay the

143 Canadian Biotechnology Advisory Committee Advisory Memorandum:  The Federal Court of Appeal’s
Decision Against the Commissioner of Patents on the Harvard Onco-mouse Case, http://www.cbac-
cccb.ca/documents/oncomouse1.pdf, September 8, 2000, p.3

144 Ibid.

145 Canadian Biotechnology Advisory Committee Advisory Memorandum:  The Federal Court of Appeal’s
Decision Against the Commissioner of Patents on the Harvard Onco-mouse Case , p.5.

146 Ibid. One of the groups was the Council of Canadians, an independent, non-partisan citizens' interest group
that  provides a critical and progressive voice on key national and international issues, “Court Ruling Opens
Door to Corporate ownership of Life Forms," The Council of Canadians (Media Releases),
www.canadians.org/media/media-000929.html. 

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

77

FCA’s order.147  A press release explained that “the government considers it necessary to refer

the matter to the Supreme Court of Canada in order to obtain a definitive judgement on the

scope of the current patent law.148

The Supreme Court agreed to hear the case.149  The Canadian Patent Office resolved that

it would continue to deny patents on higher life forms until the Court ruled definitively on their

patentability.150 As of the end of 2001, the Court had not yet delivered its decision.

#(cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31) (cid:2)$(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:14)(cid:15)

In 1991, shortly before the Harvard mouse was granted its European patent, J. Craig

Venter, a biologist at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), in Bethesda, Maryland, raised the

both the economic and ethical stakes in the patenting of life or its parts by proposing the

wholesale patenting of human gene fragments. Venter's lab, using automated machines, had

sequenced not whole genes but random fragments of cDNA -- that is, DNA complementary to

the coding regions in genomic DNA -- derived from part of the brain.151 Such a fragment was

147 “The Government Seeks Leave to Appeal the Federal Court of Appeal's decision on the Harvard Oncomouse
case to the Supreme Court," Ottawa, October 4, 2000,
http://www.strategis.ic.gc.ca/sc_mrksv/cipo/corp/corp_appeal-e.html

148 “The Government Seeks Leave to Appeal the Harvard Oncomouse Case to the Supreme Court," CNN News
Release, October 4, 2000.

149 Bita Amani, “The Mouse Trap: Patenting Complex Life Forms in Canada, Mr. Morrow & the Harvard
Mouse," from the website of the Canadian Centre for Innovation Law and Policy,
http://128.100.167.70/lawforum/pages/2publications.htm

150 Email, Peter Davies, of the Canadian Intellectual Property Office, to Kari Theobald, July 27, 2001.

151Mark D. Adams, Jenny M. Kelley, Jeannine D. Gocayne, Mark Dubnick, Mihael H. Polymeropoulos, Hong
Xiao, Carl R. Merril, Andrew Wu, Bjorn Olde, Ruben F. Moreno, Anthony R. Kerlavage, W. Richard
McCombie, and J. Craig Venter, "Complementary DNA sequencing: expressed sequence tags and Human
Genome Project," Science, 252 (June 21, 1991), pp. 1651-1656; Christopher Anderson, "US patent application
stirs up gene hunters," Nature, 353 (Oct. 10, 1991), pp. 485-486.

                                                
78

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

called an "expressed sequence tag," or EST.152 Although just 150 to 400 base pairs long, each

was unique and served to identify the gene of which it was a part.153 In June 1991, Venter and

NIH filed for patents on 315 ESTs and the human genes from which they came.154

Venter’s initiative failed, largely because ESTs did not fully characterize genes, but once

he put ESTs on the patent agenda, Rifkin and his allies contended that human genes, even those

fully characterized as to composition and function, should not be patented at all.155 At Senate

hearings on ethical issues in gene patenting in 1992, Andrew Kimbrell, the policy director and

attorney for Jeremy Rifkin's Foundation on Economic Trends argued in favor of a moratorium

on gene patenting, saying, "We are right in the middle of an ethical struggle on the ownership of

the gene pool."156  He held that Congress should “intercede to decide where this ethical and

legal free-fall ends."157

152Mark D. Adams, Jenny M. Kelley, Jeannine D. Gocayne, Mark Dubnick, Mihael H. Polymeropoulos, Hong
Xiao, Carl R. Merril, Andrew Wu, Bjorn Olde, Ruben F. Moreno, Anthony R. Kerlavage, W. Richard
McCombie, and J. Craig Venter, "Complementary DNA sequencing: expressed sequence tags and Human
Genome Project," Science, 252 (June 21, 1991), pp. 1651-1656; Christopher Anderson, "US patent application
stirs up gene hunters," Nature, 353 (Oct. 10, 1991), pp. 485-486.

153Mark D. Adams, Jenny M. Kelley, Jeannine D. Gocayne, Mark Dubnick, Mihael H. Polymeropoulos, Hong
Xiao, Carl R. Merril, Andrew Wu, Bjorn Olde, Ruben F. Moreno, Anthony R. Kerlavage, W. Richard
McCombie, and J. Craig Venter, "Complementary DNA sequencing: expressed sequence tags and Human
Genome Project," Science, 252 (June 21, 1991), pp. 1651-1656; Christopher Anderson, "US patent application
stirs up gene hunters," Nature, 353 (Oct. 10, 1991), pp. 485-486.

154 Leslie Roberts, "Genome patent fight erupts," Science, 254 (Oct. 11, 1991), pp. 184-186.

155 Ted Peters, "Patenting life: Yes," First things: a monthly journal of religion and public life, 63 (May 1996),
pp. 18-20.

156 Kimbrell testimony,  The genome project:the ethical issues of gene patenting, Hearing  before the
Subcommittee on Patents, Copyrights and Trademarks of the Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Senate, 2:S. Hrg.
102-1134, Sept. 22, 1992 (U.S. Govt. Printing Office, 1993).

157Ibid.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

79

Congress, its eye on the economic and medical potential of biotechnology, was

unwilling to do anything of the sort. Patent attorneys, biotech representatives, and several

congressmen warned that restrictions or a moratorium on the patenting of life or its parts would

put the U.S. at a competitive disadvantage internationally and impede research on cures and

therapies for disease.158 Moreover, advocates of biotechnology insisted on distinguishing

between issues of political economy and issues of ethics.159 The former had a place in disputes

over patent policy; the latter, at least in the United States, did not, even though they might be

legitimate in principle. The appropriate venues for considering them were the legislative and

regulatory arenas of government, not the Patent Office.160

Rifkin nevertheless maintained an ethical enfilade against gene patenting, finding allies

among clerics, feminists, and whoever else might feel threatened or offended by private

ownership of the gene pool. In 1995, prompted by his Foundation on Economic Trends, several

prominent clerics announced at a press conference in Washington, D. C. that a coalition of one

hundred eighty religious leaders representing eighty denominations had joined Rifkin’s group in

signing a joint appeal opposing the patenting of human genes and genetically altered animals.161

 Richard Land, President of the Christian Life Commission of the Southern Baptist Convention,

158 Testimony, The genome project:the ethical issues of gene patenting, Hearing  before the Subcommittee on
Patents, Copyrights and Trademarks of the Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Senate, 2:S. Hrg. 102-1134, Sept.
22, 1992 (U.S. Govt. Printing Office, 1993).

159 Testimony of William D. Noonan, ibid.

160 Ibid.

161 Ted Peters, "Patenting life: Yes," First things: a monthly journal of religion and public life, 63 (May 1996),
pp. 18-20.

                                                
80

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

declared that  "[T]he patenting of human genetic material attempts to wrest ownership from God

and commodifies human biological materials and, potentially, human beings themselves.”162

The next year, Rifkin mobilized women's rights leaders against attempts to patent genes

implicated in breast cancer, claiming that such efforts represented an "assault on women" and

"denies them control over the most intimate aspect of their being, their bodies' genetic

blueprint."163  He said that a coalition would petition the Patent Office to challenge claims that

had been filed on the breast cancer genes BRCA1 and BRCA2. Rifkin's statements were

endorsed by members of women's health organizations in sixty-nine countries, including Betty

Friedan, Gloria Steinem, and Bella Abzug, the former member of Congress and herself a breast-

cancer survivor.164 Abzug averred, "Human genes are not for sale or profit.  Any attempt to

patent human genetic materials by individuals, scientific corporations, or other entities is

unacceptable." 165

In the United States in December 1997, Rifkin and a biologist announced that, as a

provocation, they would seek a patent on methods to create a human/animal hybrid, a creature

part animal and part person.166 Bruce Lehman, the U.S. Commissioner of Patents, declared that

the Patent and Trademark Office would in general reject patents that were “injurious to the well-

162 Richard D. Land and C. Ben Mitchell, "Patenting life: No," First Things, 63 (May 1996), pp. 20-22.

163 "US coalition counters breast gene patents," Nature, 381 (May 23, 1996), p. 265.

164 Ibid.; Eliot Marshall, "Rifkin’s latest target: genetic testing," Science, 272 (May 24, 1996), p. 1094.

165 Eliot Marshall, "Rifkin’s latest target: genetic testing," p. 1094.
166  David Dickson, “Legal fight looms over patent bid on human/animal chimaeras,” Nature(cid:28)(cid:11),-. (2 Apr 1998),
423.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

81

being, good policy or good morals of society.”167 Patent lawyers roundly attacked Lehman,

contending that he had no authority in U.S. patent law, because it is literally amoral, to back

such a prohibition.168 Yet even if ethics has no rightful presence in American patent policy, an

ethical principle – that the human genome must not be locked up -- has been creeping into it

through the issue of gene patenting. And nothing has done more to introduce it than the robust

ambitions of Craig Venter.

In May 1998, Venter, who had left NIH several years before for a non-profit genome

research institute, announced that he would move to a new, for-profit company, called Celera

that would be located next door, in Rockville, Maryland.169 Celera would aim to sequence all

the DNA in the human genome by 2001, using rapid new automated machines supplied by its

principal owner, the Perkin-Elmer Corporation.170 Venter declared that Celera would make all

its sequence data publicly available while at the same time earn money from selling access to

the information.171 Venter’s rapid-fire approach to the sequencing prompted scientific critics to

predict that his company’s data would contain numerous serious gaps in the DNA, perhaps

100,000 of them.172 It was also unclear how the company could publish and profit from its

167 Meredith Wadman, “…as US office claims right to rule on morality,” Nature(cid:28)(cid:11),-, (21 May 1998), 200.
168Ibid.
169 Eliot Marshall and Elizabeth Pennisi, “Hubris and the human genome,” Science(cid:28)(cid:11)./0 (15 May 1998), 994-
995; J. Craig Venter et al., “Shotgun sequencing of the human genome,” Science(cid:28)(cid:11)./0 ( 5 Jun 1998), 1540-1542.
170 Marshall and Pennisi, “Hubris and the human genome,” pp. 994-995;Venter et al., “Shotgun sequencing of
the human genome.”pp. 1540-1542.

171Venter et al., “Shotgun sequencing of the human genome,”pp. 1540-1542.

172 Marshall and Pennisi, “Hubris and the human genome,” pp. 994-995.

                                                
82

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

sequence data. Early in 2000, strategies that Celera said it would follow to profit from its work

appeared to threaten broad access to the sequence information.173

But Venter has revived his original goal of wholesale gene patenting. Along with several

other genomic companies, Celera has proposed to use ESTs to identify new genes and guess

their function by finding genes of known function and similar structure through computerized

searches of the genomic data base. The company would then seek utility patents covering these

new genes, arguing that their functions were likely the same as those of the genes with similar

structure.174 That strategy stimulated a forceful statement in late March by Aaron Klug and

Bruce Alberts, the presidents, respectively, of the Royal Society of London and the National

Academy of Sciences in the United States.175 They called guessing at gene function by

computerized searches of genomic data bases “a trivial matter.”176 Its outcome might satisfy

“current shareholders’ interests,” but it did “not serve society well.” Holding that its results did

not warrant patent protection, they stressed that “the human genome itself must be freely

available to all humankind.”177

The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, however, flatly disagrees, judged by its current

policy on the patenting of genes and DNA sequences. At the end of 1999, it invited public

comments on that policy and subsequently received them from 35 individuals and 17

173 Eliot Marshall, “Talks of public-private deal end in acrimony,” (cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:15)(cid:13)(cid:21)(cid:30)(cid:13)(cid:28)(cid:11)./1 (10 Mar 00), 1723-1725.
174 Author’s conversation with Rebecca Eisenberg, March 2001.

175 Bruce Alberts and Sir Aaron Klug, “The Human Genome Itself Must be Freely Available to All Humankind,”
Nature, Vol. 404 (3/23/00): 325.

176 Ibid.

177 Ibid.

                                                
Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

83

organizations. Some of the comments were ethical, echoing those of Alberts and Krug; some

were legal or practical, raising objections, for example, to granting patents on DNA sequences

such as ESTs by arguing that they should not be patentable because they exist in nature. In

January 2001, the Office found reasons to refuse to incorporate any of the comments in its

policies. Indeed, its responses to the comments in effect promulgated a policy governing the

patentabilty of genes and DNA sequences that is enormously broad.178

Gene patenting has exposed a conflict and, possibly, an incompatability in patent policy

between the United States and the European community. Even though the former does not

impose ethical constraints on the patentability of products, the latter does, with the consequence

that what may be patentable in the U.S. may not be so in Europe. Paradoxically, while trade

barriers have been steadily falling with globalization, at least in the commerce of living

organisms and their parts, patent barriers may be arising to some degree.

The transatlantic mismatch aside, within both the United States and Europe, gene

patenting has prompted important challenges to the scope of intellectual property rights in

genes. The human genome is not only widely regarded as a common birthrate of people

everywhere; it is also finite. Critics in biomedical research and health delivery have begun

contending that monopoly control of its crucial parts -- the genes responsible for common

diseases -- can be counterproductive to both science and health. Their arguments are economic

and consequential rather than, like Rifkin’s, quasi-theological and abstract. They point, for

178 Department of Commerce, Patent and Trademark Office, "Revised Utility Examination Guidelines; Request
for Comments," *(cid:13)(cid:19)(cid:13)(cid:5)(cid:3)"(cid:11)$(cid:13))(cid:15)(cid:17)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:5), 64: no. 244, Dec. 21, 1999, 71440; Department of Commerce, Patent and
Trademark Office, "Utility Examination Guidelines," *(cid:13)(cid:19)(cid:13)(cid:5)(cid:3)"(cid:11)$(cid:13))(cid:15)(cid:17)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:5), 66: no. 4, Jan. 5, 2001, 1092. I am
indebted to Professor Hal Edgar, Columbia University Law School, for calling my attention to these documents.

                                                
84

Kevles, Patenting Life: 12 January 2002

example, to the insistence of corporate gene-patent holders on charging license fees to scientists

who want to pursue research on the covered genes; and to the high prices charged for diagnostic

tests using them. They also point out that a good deal of the intellectual capital contained in

these patents was provided at public expenses.

Biotechnologists counter, like Burbank’s posthumous advocates, that they have an

ethical claim on the products of their innovations and that the intellectual property rights in gene

patents must be absolute if investment in that branch of biotechnology is to be sustained. In a

sense, then, gene patenting has produced a conflict between the ethical and practical interests of

innovators on the one side and the larger society on the other. If the conflict grows sharper,

governments may choose to limit the property rights in human DNA sequences by regulating

their use.

European Commission

A history of patenting life in the United States with comparative attention to Europe and Canada

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities

2002 — iv, 84 pp. — 21 x 29.7 cm

ISBN 92-894-2063-4

