The European Group on Ethics
in Science and New Technologies
to the European Commission

Opinion on the ethical aspects of patenting
inventions involving human stem cells

- Opinion N° 16 -

- 7 May 2002 -

TABLE OF CONTENTS

THE TEXT OF THE OPINION N° 16..................................................................... 1

ETHICAL ASPECTS OF PATENTING INVENTIONS INVOLVING HUMAN
STEM CELLS............................................................................................................................. 3

THE PATENTABILITY IN THE EUROPEAN UNION ......................................... 21

COMMUNITY LAW IN RELATION TO PROCESSES FOR THE CLONING AND
PATENTABILITY OF INVENTIONS RELATING TO THE GENOME AND
CERTAIN HUMAN CELLS, Jean-Luc GAL ............................................................................23

DIRECTIVE 98/44/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL
ON THE LEGAL PROTECTION OF BIOTECHNOLOGICAL INVENTIONS........................39

THE PATENTABILITY IN THE UNITED STATES.............................................. 51

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND ACCESS ISSUES ON STEM CELL TECHNOLOGY,
Maria C. FREIRE .....................................................................................................................53

THE WISCONSIN ALUMNI RESEARCH FOUNDATION AND GERON CORPORATION
DISPUTE : INFORMATION NOTE .........................................................................................61

THE EUROPEAN PATENT OFFICE................................................................... 69

PATENTABILITY OF INVENTIONS USING HUMAN STEM CELLS,
André REMOND ......................................................................................................................71

THE EUROPEAN PATENT OFFICE : INFORMATION NOTE..............................................79

i

WORLD TRADE ORGANISATION ..................................................................... 81

THE WTO AND THE TRIPS AGREEMENT, Thu-Lang TRAN WASESCHA .......................83

THE WORLD TRADE ORGANISATION : INFORMATION NOTE........................................93

WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ORGANISATION................................. 97

THE BUDAPEST TREATY AND ITS APPLICABILITY TO HUMAN STEM LINES;
THE WIPO APPROACH ON ETHICAL ISSUES, Nuno Pires DE CARVALHO ...................99

THE WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ORGANISATION
INFORMATION NOTE ..........................................................................................................107

POINT OF VIEW FROM AN INDUSTRIAL REPRESENTATIVE..................... 111

ARE THE RULES FOR PATENTING DRUGS APPLICABLE TO HUMAN
STEM CELLS?, Philippe BOUVET ......................................................................................113

ANNEX ............................................................................................................... 121

AGENDA OF THE ROUND TABLE ORGANISED BY THE EUROPEAN GROUP
ON ETHICS ON THE “ETHICAL ASPECTS OF PATENTING INVENTIONS
INVOLVING HUMAN STEM CELLS”, 20 NOVEMBER 2001, BRUSSELS........................123

LIST OF THE PARTICIPANTS TO THE ROUND TABLE...................................................125

* * * * * *

ii

The Text of the Opinion N° 16

ETHICAL ASPECTS OF PATENTING INVENTIONS INVOLVING
HUMAN STEM CELLS

========================================

Delivered by the European Group on Ethics
In Science and New Technologies
To the European Commission

On 7 May 2002

1

2

OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS

IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES

TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION

No 16

Original in English

7 May 2002

****************************************************************************************************************************

ETHICAL ASPECTS OF PATENTING INVENTIONS INVOLVING HUMAN STEM CELLS

Reference:
Rapporteurs:

Request by the European Commission on 18th October 2000
Linda Nielsen and Peter Whittaker

*****************************************************************************************************************************

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE),

Having regard to the request of Romano Prodi, President of the European Commission, to the
EGE on the ground of Article 7 of the Council Directive 98/44/EC of 6 July 1998 on the legal
protection of biotechnological inventions, giving mandate to the European Group on Ethics to
evaluate “all ethical aspects of biotechnology”;

Having regard to the Treaty on European Union as amended by the Treaty of Amsterdam, and
in particular Article 6 (formerly Article F) of the common provisions, concerning the respect for
fundamental rights, Article 95C (formerly Article 100A) on the approximation of Law, Article
152 (formerly Art. 129) on public health, Article 157 (formerly Art. 130) on Industry, and Article
163 (formerly Art. 130F) on Research and Technological Development;

Having regard to the Charter of 28 September 2000 on Fundamental Rights of the European
Union, approved by the European Council in Biarritz on October 14th 2000, in particular Article
1 on “Human dignity”, Article 3 on the “Right to the integrity of the person”, which refers to the
principle of “free and informed consent” and prohibits “the reproductive cloning of human
beings”, Article 13 asserting freedom of research and Article 17 which states that “intellectual
property is protected”;

Having regard to the Council Directive 98/44/EC of 6 July 1998 on the legal protection of
inventions and in particular Article 5, about the patentability of elements
biotechnological
isolated from the human body, Article 6, concerning certain inventions excluded from
patentability, and the above mentioned Article 7 giving mandate to the European Group on
Ethics (EGE) to evaluate “all ethical aspects of biotechnology”;

Having regard to the proposal for a Council Regulation on the Community Patent presented by
the Commission on 5 July 2000;

Having regard to the judgement of the European Court of Justice of 9 October 2001, rejecting
the appeal of the Kingdom of the Netherlands for annulment of the Directive 98/44/EC as well
as to the opinion of the Advocate General of 14th June 2001 in this case;

3

Having regard to the European Patent Convention, signed in München in 1973 and
establishing the European Patent Organisation, in particular Art. 52 on patentable inventions
stipulating that discovery, as well as surgical, therapeutic or diagnostic methods for treatment
of the human or animal body, are not regarded as inventions, and Art. 53.a concerning the
exclusion from patentability of inventions the publication or exploitation would be contrary to
“ordre public” or morality;

Having regard to the Budapest Treaty of the WIPO on International Recognition of the deposit
of micro organisms for the purposes of Patent Procedure of 28 April 1977;

Having regard to the Trade Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights Agreement
(TRIPS) annexed to the Agreement establishing the World Trade Organisation, entered into
force on 1st January 1995, and in particular Article 27.2 concerning the exclusion from
patentability of inventions the commercial exploitation would run counter to “ordre public” or
morality, and Art. 27.3 concerning the exclusion from patentability of diagnostic, therapeutic
and surgical methods;

Having regard to the Council of Europe’s Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine,
signed on 4 April 1997 in Oviedo, in particular Article 15 about freedom of research, Article
18.2 prohibiting the production of embryos for the sole purpose of research and Article 21
stating that “the human body and its parts shall not, as such, give rise to financial gain”;

Having regard to the Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights
in particular, Article 11 which
endorsed by the United Nations on 11 December 1998,
recommends to prohibit “reproductive cloning of human beings” and Article 12 b) which
proclaims freedom of research as “part of freedom of thought”;

Having regard to national regulations on patent and to ethics bodies opinions on stem cell
research and their use;

Having regard to the previous EGE Opinion N° 3 of 30.09.1993 on the Commission proposal
for a directive on biotechnological invention, Opinion N° 8 of 25.09.1996 on the patenting of
inventions involving elements of human origin, Opinion N° 12 of 23.11.1998 on Human
embryo research, and Opinion N° 15 of 14.11.2000 on Human stem cell research and use;

Having regard to the Round Table organised by the Group on 20 November 2001 in Brussels
with members of the European Parliament, jurists, philosophers, scientists, representatives of
industries, representatives of religions, representatives of patients’ associations and other
groups of interest, and of international and European organisations (UNESCO, Council of
Europe, WTO, WIPO, EPO);

Having regard to the Hearings of experts on 3rd July 2001, 4th September 2001, 2nd October
2001, and 8th January 2002;

Having regard to the reports asked by the Group to Prof. Daniel Kevles (Department of
History, Yale University) on “A history of patenting life in the United States with comparative
attention to Canada and Europe” and to Prof. Geertrui Van Overwalle (Centre for Intellectual
Property Rights, Faculty of Law, K.U. Leuven) on “Study on the patenting of inventions related
to human stem cell research”;

Having heard the rapporteurs Linda Nielsen and Peter Whittaker;

4

1. WHEREAS :

SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND

1.1.

Characteristics of stem cells

Stem cells are cells found in all vertebrate animals, including human beings. They play roles
in the processes of normal development and regeneration or repair of damaged tissues.
The reason for this is their properties of dividing to give cells either identical to themselves or
differentiated into particular types of cells.

Because of these properties, it is thought probable that stem cells will find use in the therapy
of degenerative diseases or injuries. Other potential applications for human stem cell cultures
include uses for studying fundamental processes of human development or for toxicological
testing and drug design. Non-human animal stem cell lines may also be used to produce
genetically modified animals.
It is also possible that genetically modified non-human animal
stem cell lines may be developed for human therapeutic purposes.

1.2.

Sources of human stem cells

Different types of stem cells can be distinguished according to the sources from which they
are retrieved. Thus, there are:

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

Adult stem cells: progenitor and multipotent stem cells are present in adults. Mammals
appear to contain some 20 major types of somatic stem cells that can regenerate the
various tissues but they are rather difficult to find and isolate and they do not seem to
have the same developmental potential as embryonic or foetal stem cells.

Stem cells of foetal origin:

-

-

Haematopoïetic stem cells can be retrieved from the umbilical cord blood.

Foetal tissue obtained after pregnancy termination can be used to derive multipotent
stem cells like neural stem cells which can be isolated from foetal neural tissue and
multiplied in culture, though they have a limited life span. Foetal tissue can also give
rise to pluripotent EG cells isolated from the primordial germ cells of the foetus.

Stem cells of embryonic origin: pluripotent ES cells are those which are derived from
an embryo at the blastocyst stage. Embryos could be produced either by in vitro
fertilisation (IVF) or by transfer of an adult nucleus to an enucleated egg cell or oocyte
(somatic cell nuclear transfer – SCNT).

One can distinguish:

-

Embryos created by in vitro fertilisation. They can have been created for the purpose
of assisted reproduction but not used for it (the supernumerary embryos) or they can
have been created specifically for the purpose of research or treatment. These
embryos are viable and could lead to birth if implanted in the uterus.

5

-

-

Embryos created by cloning technique (by transfer of the nucleus of somatic cell into
an oocyte) or created by parthenogenesis (by stimulation of an oocyte to initiate the
duplication of the oocyte genetic material and then the division of the cell). Given the
consensus in Europe to ban reproductive cloning, these embryos cannot be implanted
in a uterus. Their capacity to lead to a birth is supposed to be either probably very
(in the case of
reduced (in the case of
parthenogenesis).

the cloned embryo) or quasi-null

Stem cells may possibly be also obtained by injecting stem cell or egg cytoplasm into
somatic cells transforming them into stem cells (ooplasmic transfer).

(cid:1)

Other methods: new technical ways of deriving stem cells may be developed in the
future.

1.3.

Derived cell and stem cell lines

One should distinguish:

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

stem cells freshly derived from an organ or tissue which have not yet been subjected to
any modification and which are capable of being propagated as stem cell lines,

unmodified stem cell
lines which refer to cultured lines of cells which have been
propagated originally from freshly derived stem cells and which have not been modified in
any other way. When the stem cells are derived from an embryo, the undifferentiated
stem cell lines which can be derived from them are pluripotent.

modified stem cell lines which refer to cultured lines of cells, propagated from stem cells
or stem cell
lines, which have been modified either by genetic manipulation, or by
treatment that causes the cells to differentiate in a particular way.

LEGAL BACKGROUND

A.

GENERAL BACKGROUND

1.4.

(cid:1)

What are the purposes of patent law?

Patent law in general

Patent law aims to promote technical innovation and the dissemination of its fruits. The
inventor gets exclusive rights to control commercial exploitation of his invention for some
years and in return, he discloses detailed description of his invention, making the new
knowledge available to all. This disclosure enables others (researchers etc…) to build on
the achieved knowledge.

(cid:1)

European Directive

the 1998 EU Directive regarding legal protection of
The original purpose of
biotechnological inventions is to establish legal certainty in this area within the European
Community and to help European biotechnological companies to become more efficient in
promoting innovation and thus attracting investment.

6

In addition, the Directive includes ethical considerations which take into account specific
In this aspect, the EU approach of patenting in biotechnology differs from the
concerns.
US legal framework in that field which does not explicitly refers to ethics.

What is a patent?

1.5.
A patent provides the patent holder with protection, for a period of 20 years in general, against
the commercial exploitation of the invention by others. A patent is not a legal title granting its
holder the exclusive right to exploit his invention, nor is it a right of ownership. A patent is a
legal title granting its holder the exclusive right to stop others from using or making his
invention.
If a third party wants to use an invention protected by patent, a licence is normally
required from the owner of the patent.

The granting of a patent is not an authorisation for the use of the invention. As mentioned in
recital 14 of the Directive ..“a patent for invention does not authorise the holder to implement
that invention, but merely entitles him to prohibit third parties from exploiting it for industrial or
commercial purposes”. Whether or not research, commercial use or marketing is permitted,
may be dealt with by other kinds of regulation than the patent regulation.

1.6.

What may be the scope of a patent?

A patent application contains a description of the invention and one or more claims. The
claim(s) are an essential part of the patent as they define the scope of the rights given by the
patent to the patent holder. The claim defines thus what third parties may or may not do
without a licence from the patent’s holder. A licence is normally based on paying a fee.
One distinguishes claim on product and claim on process or method:
(cid:1)

A product claim may concern a substance (like a chemical compound) or a composition
line). The protection given by such patent includes the right to
of matter (like a cell
prevent third parties not having the owner’s consent
from making, selling, using or
importing the said product;

(cid:1)

A process claim concerns the activities exercised upon for instance biological material to
effect a process or a method. The protection given by such patent includes the right to
prevent third parties not having the owner’s consent from using the process, and using,
selling or importing the product obtained by this given process. The protection does not
cover the same product which would have been obtained otherwise.

Thus a product claim provides stronger protection for the patent holder and more restrictions
in relation to further use and research than a process claim.

1.7.

Who grants a patent?

Patenting facilities (National Patent Offices) are available in most countries (for instance the
U.S.P.T.O1., I.N.P.I.2 for France). The protection of the invention is limited to the state that
grants the patent and the legal consequences of the patent are settled by the national courts.

1 U.S.P.T.O.: United States Patent and Trademark Office
2 I.N.P.I.: Institut National de la Propriété Industrielle

7

In 1973,
the European Patent Convention (EPC) was signed in München, creating the
European Patent Organisation (EPO). At present, 20 European countries including all 15 EU
Member States have signed the EPC. A patent granted by the EPO may be registered in any
of the states adhering to the Convention, avoiding then for the inventor the multiplication of
applications. The EPO has recently incorporated the 1998 EU Directive within its practice.

In case of dispute over a patent, only the national courts are competent and thus may adopt
diverging positions on the same dispute. Therefore, the European Commission proposed to
create a “Community Patent”, which would be delivered by EPO, and a centralised Community
tribunal in the framework of the European Court of Justice would be set up to deal with the
potential disputes. This Commission Proposal is still under discussion.

1.8.

Criteria for a patent

the three following

A patent may be granted in all European countries, provided that
requirements are all met:
(cid:1)

Novelty. The invention must represent an advance in what is considered to be the “state
of the art” in its field.

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

1.9.

(cid:1)

Inventive step. The invention must not be obvious to anyone familiar with the field
concerned. A simple discovery cannot constitute a patentable invention. One of the main
difficulties regarding patenting in biotechnology, is the ability to distinguish between a
simple discovery which is not patentable and an invention as such, which is patentable.
As emphasized in the EGE Opinion N° 8 of 25.09.1996 on the patenting of inventions
involving elements of human origin : “The traditional distinction between discovery (not
patentable) and invention (patentable) involves, in the field of biotechnology, a particular
ethical dimension...”.

Industrial application. The invention must be capable of industrial application.
respect medicine and agriculture are considered to be “industry”.

In this

Exclusions

Traditional exclusions in Europe

In Europe patents are excluded if their publication or exploitation is in conflict with the
“ordre public” or morality. The concept refers mainly to the respect of human dignity
which is at the roots of human rights and is mentioned in the Article 1 of the Charter of
Fundamental Rights. The Convention of München refers to “ordre public” in its Article
53.a and the 1998 EU Directive regarding legal protection of biotechnological inventions
refers to “ordre public” and morality in its Article 6.

Diagnostic,
therapeutic and surgical methods are also traditionally excluded from
patenting. This exclusion was aimed to maintain the sharing of medical knowledge and
It does not concern products or drugs used for
know-how for the benefit of patients.
medical purposes.

8

(cid:1)

Specified exclusions

The EU Directive goes into detail to specify what is contrary to “ordre public” and morality
in the biotechnology sector, namely Article 6 states in particular that the following are
considered to be unpatentable:
“
-
-
-
-

Processes for cloning human beings;
Processes for modifying the germ line genetic identity of human beings;
Uses of human embryos for industrial or commercial purposes;
Processes for modifying the genetic identity of animals which are likely to cause them
suffering without any substantial medical benefit to man or animal, and also animals
resulting from such processes.”

It should be noted, as stressed in Recital 38, that this list is “to provide national courts and
patent offices with a general guide to interpreting the reference to “ordre public” and morality
… and obviously cannot presume to be exhaustive”.

1.10.

Exemptions

In Europe, there is a traditional academic exemption, mentioned in most national laws, which
allows further research without paying a licence to the inventor,
this research is not
commercial.

if

1.11

Compulsory Licences

As stated in most national regulations and in the above-mentioned WTO TRIPS agreements,
compulsory licences may be granted if the patent protection is contrary to the common good.

1.12.

Differences between Europe and the US concerning patent in general

There are four main differences between EU and US regarding law or conception of
application of the law:

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

Priority of the first inventor or the first claimer

While disclosure or previous claim by an inventor ends any right to later patent in Europe,
the American system grants the patent right to the first inventor. After disclosure the
inventor has a period of time - the so-called grace period - to claim the patent.

Exemption and exclusion

In the US, the legislation does not provide for academic exemption. But in practice, there
are often agreements between patent owner and research laboratories, although it is not a
right.

In the US there are no legally based exclusions regarding diagnostic and therapeutic use
or ethically based exclusions.

9

(cid:1)

Criteria of patentability

The criteria for patenting are traditionally interpreted in a more flexible and broader way in
the US, leaving a larger place for legal interpretation and for negotiation after the patent is
awarded.

In the US, the conception of what is an invention is broader.

In the US, the invention must prove to have a “utility” instead of “industrial application”, the
notion of “utility” is less specific, it means it is useful. The conception of what is “useful” is
broader than the more precise requirement of industrial application used in Europe.

(cid:1)

Opposition to a patent

In the US, only third
The possibility to oppose to a patent differs between the US and EU.
parties whose interests are directly damaged by a patent can oppose via the US Patent
Office or via a court, while in Europe, any person may oppose to a patent delivered by the
European Patent Office by addressing directly the EPO, or via a court.

The need to translate patent applications in different languages makes also the cost of the
patent much higher in Europe than in the US.

1.13.

Patents and Transparency

The inventor is required to publish full details of the invention in a manner sufficiently clear and
complete for it to be carried out by a skilled person. When a patent has been granted patent
information is provided. There are comprehensive databases with international coverage, also
accessible through the Internet. Moreover, there are patent databases with national coverage
and bibliographic databases covering the literature.

B.

PATENTING BIOTECHNOLOGICAL INVENTIONS

1.14.

When were biotechnological inventions first patented?

In 1980, the US Supreme Court overturned its previous case law to allow the granting of a
patent on living matter, namely an oil degrading bacterium (Diamond v. Chakrabarty’s case
law). But previously in the 70’s, other biotechnological inventions have also been patented
with regard to methods, such as in particular methods of recombinant DNA.

Since then, there is a standing practice for patenting biotechnological
inventions on living
matter. Thousands of patents consist of living matter, for instance micro-organisms, genes,
cell lines including human ones such as cancer cell lines, and there are recognised ways to
patent such inventions.

10

1.15. What is specific to certain biotechnological inventions?

As mentioned above, in the field of biotechnology, the distinction between invention and
discovery may be less obvious than in other fields. Furthermore, the description of the
patented product may also be difficult. That is why, with regards to micro-organisms, it is not
enough to describe the micro-organism and its industrial application, so the deposit of the
micro-organism may be necessary.

Therefore, the Budapest Treaty signed in 1977 and implemented by the World Intellectual
Property Organisation defines how the written description of
the invention must be
supplemented by the deposit of the new micro-organism in an internationally recognised
depository authority. The access to the micro-organism is defined by the national law of the
country where the depository authority is.

1.16.

Patents on stem cells

Worldwide there have been over 2000 patent applications involving human and non human
stem cells, of which one quarter refer to embryonic stem cells. Over one third of all stem cell
applications and one quarter of all embryonic stem cell applications have been granted.

According to the practice in the US or in the EU, the various processes which have been
considered for patenting include:

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Processes for isolation of stem cells from embryos or tissues;

Processes for enrichment of stem cells in mixtures of cells;

Processes for culturing of stem cells;

Processes for genetically modifying stem cells for particular applications. For example it
may be possible to modify stem cells to avoid rejection following transplantation;

Processes for inducing stem cells to differentiate in particular ways. It will be necessary to
induce stem cell cultures to differentiate into particular types of cells (e.g. neural cells,
heart muscle cells) for specific regenerative therapies;

for

adult

inducing

stem cells

or
Processes
‘transdifferentiation’. Retrodifferentiation refers to the induced reversion of adult stem
cells, with limited differentiation capacity towards multipotency or pluripotency.
Transdifferentiation is the induction of adult stem cells to differentiate into cells of a tissue
type different from that normally associated with the particular stem cells;

‘retrodifferentiation’

undergo

to

Processes to create embryos by transfer of a somatic cell nucleus to an enucleated egg
(cloning technique) for derivation of stem cells. This provides the possibility for producing
autologous stem cells which are less likely to be rejected;

Processes to create non-viable “embryos” by parthenogenesis. These techniques, which
may also be used to provide autologous stem cells, would eliminate the need to destroy
potentially viable embryos for deriving stem cells;

Processes for transforming somatic cells directly into stem cells, eg. by injecting them with
stem cell cytoplasm or egg cytoplasm (ooplasmic transfer);

11

and the various products which have been considered for patenting include:

-

-

-

Stem cells;

Stem cell lines;

Differentiated stem cells;

- Genetically modified stem cells.

1.17.

Patenting of human embryonic stem cells

Human embryonic stem cells have so far been both isolated and cultured in the US, Australia,
India, Singapore, Israel and Sweden, and only cultured in the UK. The issue raised by the
1998 EU Directive is whether patents on human embryonic stem cells should be granted or
not, and the question is still in discussion. The facts are that such patents have already been
granted in the US.

One example is the US patent awarded to the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation
(WARF), for human pluripotent stem cells derived from spare embryos created for infertility
treatment. This broad patent covers both James Thomson’s method of isolating human
embryonic stem cells (ESC) and the five undifferentiated stem cell lines derived. That patent
gives WARF control over who may work with its five stem cell lines and for what purpose.
WARF decided to provide access against a nominal fee to academic researchers and access
In return for its funding of James Thomson’s
against a negotiable fee to other scientists.
research, the for-profit Geron Corporation was granted a licence agreement by WARF. Geron
holds exclusive rights to develop the stem cell lines isolated at the University of Wisconsin into
three specific differentiated stem cell lines for commercial purposes.

ETHICAL BACKGROUND

1.18. Historical aspects of patenting

Since its origin at the end of the XVIIIth century, modern patent law has had an ethical
Its aim is indeed to define the conditions of a “social contract” between inventors
dimension.
and society at large. On the one hand, inventors are able to be granted financial rewards and
thus to share profits with manufacturers and industrialists. On the other hand, inventors are
obliged to disclose information on useful inventions, for the benefit of the public good. That
means that the purpose of a patent is to strike a balance between different interests.

The patent system aims to keep a balance between the inventor’s interests and the interests
of society. That is why a fair balance between both interests, meaning that the scope of the
claim of the patent must be proportional to the scope of the effectively described applications
of the inventions, has an ethical dimension.

12

1.19

Ethical aspects of patenting in biotechnology in general

The patenting of biotechnological inventions, especially in the health sector, includes special
ethical dimensions. The patenting of inventions to be used for therapeutic or diagnostic
purposes may have an impact on access to health care. Concern has been expressed about
the patent award by the EPO to Myriad Genetics for diagnostic tests for breast cancer and
ovarian cancer. The claims include the genes BRCA1 and BRCA2.
It is feared that the
monopoly on the tests that this will create will result in unreasonable prices being charged with
consequent reduced access to the tests. There are similar concerns expressed about the
award to the Chiron Corporation of a patent granted in Europe for a combined HIV – Hepatitis
C test kit. It seems probable that similar situations might arise in the stem cell area. Although
patenting should encourage research,
there is a fear that patenting of biotechnological
inventions may entail excessive costs of research which would also impede access to health
care. Moreover, since the description of an invention is not sufficient for a researcher to
reproduce or improve it, it is important to make research biological materials accessible to the
researchers.

1.20.

Ethical aspects of patents involving human stem cells

The patenting of inventions involving human stem cells raises specific ethical questions
related to fundamental ethical principles, namely:

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

The prohibition of making profits from the human body and its elements, as stated by
Article 3 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which is grounded on the principle of non-
commercialisation of the human body. The donation of stem cells of human origin (adult,
foetal or embryonic) must not give rise to payment of donors, apart from the justified
compensation of constraints.

The principle of free and informed consent of the donor which is also reflected in
article 3 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and in the Recital 26 of the 1998 EU Patent
Directive stating “Whereas if an invention is based on biological material of human origin
or if it uses such material, where a patent application is filed, the person from whose body
the material
is taken must have had an opportunity of expressing free and informed
consent thereto, in accordance with national law”.

1.21.

Ethical aspects of patents involving human embryonic stem cells

The Group is well aware that all procedures involving directly or indirectly the human embryo
are controversial in the sense that they are based on presuppositions for instance concerning
the beginning of human life and the question whether there should be an absolute or a relative
protection of human life in its different stages. Political and legal decisions in these ethical
matters may change the self understanding of what it means to be a human being in a given
epoch and society.

the embryo remains indeed highly
The question of the dignity and the moral status of
controversial
in a pluralistic society as the European Union. Those who are opposed to
human embryo research, cannot, a fortiori, consider any patenting in that field. Among those
who consider research on embryos ethically acceptable, some may feel great reluctance
towards patenting the resulting inventions, while others consider patenting inventions derived
from embryo research as acceptable, especially given their potential medical benefits.

13

Industrial and commercial exploitation of human embryos is excluded from patenting
according to Article 6 of the above-mentioned 1998 EU Directive. This article leaves open the
question of patentability of cells obtained from donated embryos, nor does it state precisely
which embryos are subjected to this exclusion. Some consider that non viable embryos,
which cannot lead to a birth, such as those created by parthenogenesis, or even by somatic
cell nuclear transfer (cloning), are not covered by this exclusion.

When the question is about the patentability of the process which requires the use of human
oocytes to produce stem cells by any means, there is a risk that women may be submitted to
undue pressure to donate oocytes.

There is at present a tendency to accept double morality where there is no coherence
between different positions adopted by one country. For instance, one could expect that to
consider research on human embryos to derive stem cells as unethical, might imply the
prohibition of the import for research of embryonic stem cells derived from human embryos as
well as of the use of potential therapeutic applications resulting from such research, which is
not always the case.

14

2. OPINION

2.1.

SCOPE OF THE OPINION

According to the 1998 EU Directive on the Legal Protection of Biotechnological Inventions
article 7: « EGE evaluates all ethical aspects of biotechnology ».

The Group has, in its Opinion No. 15 of 14th November 2000 on the ethical implications of
human stem cell research and its uses, made recommendations, namely:

-

-

-

to set up a strict public control by centralised authorities, on human embryo research
where it is allowed;

to take measures to prevent commercialisation of human embryos or cadaveric foetal
tissue;

to ensure the respect of ethical principles through the control of public authorities,
concerning import of human stem cells, where allowed.

This present opinion deals with the specific ethical questions related to patenting of inventions
involving human stem cells. The Group is aware of the fact that patents also involve many
difficult and different questions of an economic and political nature, which may influence the
way of dealing with patents, but has seen its task as providing an ethical focus on the
question. The rapid development of biotechnology, especially the promise of stem cell
research, makes it appropriate to consider and clarify some questions which could not have
been taken into account when the 1998 EU Directive was drafted, given the state of the art at
that time.

One option would have been to forbid patenting of stem cells or stem cell
lines. The
consequence of such an option would be the major slowing of this research field (except in
case of a very unlikely large public investment), and the EGE opinion is that it would be
contrary to public (and especially patients’) interests. Moreover, the Group considers that it
would be contrary to the EU choices as expressed by the 1998 EU Directive on patenting.

The Group finds that it is crucial to define the conditions required to patent, the limits of the
patenting of human stem cells in relation to ethical considerations and the relevant processes
securing ethical evaluation.

2.2.

THE BASIC ETHICAL DILEMMA

EGE recognises the importance of patents as an incentive to innovation and as a reward to
the inventor for openness and publishing the results.

One ethical dilemma arises due to the fact that patents can encourage scientific progress
which can be used to the benefit of better health care, and at the same time, patents can also
impair access to the health care due to the need of a licence to use them and to the fees that
will have to be paid to the patent holder.

15

It is then necessary to secure the right balance between the inventor’s interests and the
society’s interest – in the sense that one task for the community is to secure ethical principles
and values in the context of possible conflicting interests of stake-holders, namely: patients
and patients’ associations,
investors,
healthcare providers, and social insurance providers.

inventors and other researchers, donors,

industry,

In order to be able to specify ethical limitations, a number of problems are to be considered,
including:

content of patents (process or product);
-
-
various sources of stem cells;
- methods used to derive stem cells;
-
-

protection of the donor;
possible socio-economic consequences and philosophical
system as applied to stem cells (further research, access to health care).

implications of

the patent

2.3.

CONTENT OF THE PATENT

It is the opinion of the EGE that:
(cid:1)

Isolated stem cells which have not been modified do not, as product, fulfil
the legal
requirements, especially with regards to industrial applications, to be seen as patentable.
In addition, such isolated cells are so close to the human body, to the foetus or to the
embryo they have been isolated from, that their patenting may be considered as a form of
commercialisation of the human body.

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

lines are established, they can hardly be considered as a
When unmodified stem cell
patentable product. Such unmodified stem cell lines do not have indeed a specific use but
a very large range of potential undescribed uses. Therefore, to patent such unmodified
stem cell lines would also lead to too broad patents.

Therefore only stem cell
genetically modified so that
application, fulfil the legal requirements for patentability.

lines which have been modified by in vitro treatments or
they have acquired characteristics for specific industrial

As to the patentability of processes involving human stem cells, whatever their source,
there is no specific ethical obstacle, in so far as they fulfil the requirements of patentability
(novelty, inventive step and industrial application).

2.4.

SOURCES OF STEM CELLS

Human stem cells may be adult (from living or deceased donors), foetal or embryonic stem
cells. The derivation of stem cells raises different ethical questions, depending on the source
of the cells. The Group considers that applicants for a patent involving human stem cells
should declare which is the source of the stem cells.

As already stressed by the Group in the Opinion N° 15 of 14/11/2000 on the ethical aspects of
human stem cell research, there are strong ethical concerns about the use of human embryos
which require specific caution. These concerns are reflected in the 1998 EU Directive which
states that processes which would lead to uses of human embryos for industrial or commercial
purposes are contrary to “ordre public” and morality and not patentable.

16

The Group sticks to the strict application of the principle of non-commercialisation of human
embryos, which is in line with the principle of non-commercialisation of the human body.

The Group considers that patenting of inventions allowing the transformation of unmodified
stem cells from human embryonic origin into genetically modified stem cell lines or specific
differentiated stem cell lines for specific therapeutic or other uses, is ethically acceptable, as
long as the inventions fulfil the criteria of patentability, and in respect of the above-mentioned
ethical principles.

2.5.

THE QUESTION OF CLONING

The 1998 EU Directive states, in its Article 6, section 2, that « processes for cloning human
beings » shall be considered unpatentable.
In recital 41 cloning is defined as « any process,
including techniques of embryo splitting, designed to create a human being with the same
nuclear genetic information as another living or deceased human being ». This provision
raises the question of the scope of the prohibition to patent processes of cloning human
beings. The Group notes that the 1998 EU Directive does not bring clarification on the
specific question to apply the prohibition of patenting only to reproductive cloning or also to
cloning for stem cells.

The Group recalls that:

-

-

-

the process used to create embryos by somatic cell nuclear transfer is the same
in both reproductive cloning and cloning for stem cells but the destiny of the
cloned embryos differs;

the prohibition to create identical human beings by cloning is shared by all EU
states, and mentioned in the Charter of Fundamental Rights and in the additional
protocol to the Convention of Council of Europe and more widely shared in the
world, as mentioned in the Universal Declaration on the Human Genome of
UNESCO;

there is a diversity of approaches between member states concerning cloning for
stem cells.

As mentioned in its Opinion N° 15 of 14th November 2000 on Research on human stem cells,
there are strong ethical concerns to be taken into account about cloning for stem cells.
Therefore, considering these ethical concerns, and particularly the risk of instrumentalisation
and commercialisation of the embryo, the Group calls for a cautious approach, excluding the
patentability of the process of creation of a human embryo by cloning for stem cells. The
Group stresses the urgent need to engage a public debate on that issue.

2.6.

PROTECTION OF THE DONOR

When the donated cells may become part of a patent application, donors should be informed
of the possibility of patenting and they are entitled to refuse such use. Apart from justified
compensation, donors ought not to get a reward which could infringe the principle of non-
commercialisation of the human body. These ethical requirements should apply as far as
possible to imported stem cells.

17

2.7.

PATENTS AND FURTHER RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

Although the appreciation of the patentability of an invention in biotechnology as in other fields
is a matter of a case by case evaluation by a patent office and eventually by a court, the
Group again insists on the necessity to avoid the granting of too broad patents that would
impair further research and development.

lines may provide very important research tools.

In the new area of stem cell research, the potential use is hoped to expand over time and
In addition to the academic
stem cell
exemption, it is essential to secure that patents on stem cell lines are not too broad, as this
may have adverse effects on the aim to support further innovation to the benefit of health care.
It is therefore the opinion of EGE that patents shall only be granted, when the patent claim
line and its industrial
refers to a specific and a sufficiently accurately described stem cell
application.
relationship between a patent claim and the
description of the invention.

involves a consistent

That

2.8.

EUROPEAN REGISTRY

The Group calls for the creation of an EU Registry of unmodified human stem cell lines, such
registry which should include information on both ES (embryonic stem) and EG (embryonic
germ) cell lines should be publicly accessible.
Its aim would be to ensure transparency and
thus facilitate access by the research community to the needed biological material for further
research.

2.9.

PATENTS AND ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE

The patent creates a control regarding commercial use. This raises questions as to the uses
which are covered by the patent.

To secure that patent holders do not misuse their rights for example by charging unreasonable
fees for the use of their inventions, EGE finds that the recourse to compulsory licence should
be encouraged when the access to diagnosis and treatment is blocked by misuse of patent
rights.

The EGE stresses the fact that it is the responsibility of the states to establish legal procedure
for the delivery of compulsory licence and to examine if fair access to health care justifies such
a procedure.

2.10.

ETHICAL EVALUATION OF PATENT APPLICATIONS

According to Article 7 of the 1998 Patent Directive, the European Group on Ethics is charged
with the evaluation of the ethical aspects of biotechnology in general.

Besides this general evaluation, the EGE considers that there may be also a need to make
ethical evaluations in the course of the examination of patent applications involving specific
ethical dimensions.

It would be desirable that such ethical evaluation becomes part of the review process of
national patent offices or European Institutions like EPO and that advisory panels of
independent experts are set up for that purpose.

18

EGE proposes that, in the course of the evaluation of biopatenting required by Article 16 of the
1998 EU Directive, specific attention is paid to the consequences of the patents on further
research and access to health care, especially with regard to the fair and equitable
accessibility of new therapeutic and diagnostic products at high costs.

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies:

The Chairperson : Noëlle Lenoir

Rafael Capurro

Anne Mc Laren

Pere Puigdomenech Rosell

The Members:

Yvon Englert

Göran Hermerén

Stefano Rodota

Linda Nielsen

Peter Whittaker

Günter Virt

Inez de Beaufort

DISSIDENT OPINION:

Prof. Günter Virt agrees in general with the above, but does not agree permitting patenting
processes and products using material resulting from destroyed human embryos:
lines are excluded from
“Human embryonic stem cells and also embryonic stem cell
patentability because we cannot get embryonic stem cell lines without destroying an embryo
and that means without use of embryos. This use as material contradicts the dignity of an
embryo as a human being with the derived right to life.
If the condition for patentability is the
industrial and commercial use and if the use of human embryos for industrial and commercial
purposes is not patentable,
then every exception, which cannot exclude industrial and
commercial purposes, is against the ethical sense of the directive. Patenting is an incentive.
Patentability of human embryonic stem cells and stem cell lines would push research towards
embryonic stem cells and thus undermine the priority of research using non embryonic stem
cells. Despite the relatively clear regulations in the directive this incentive for research will
lead to forms of “bypasses” which makes it impossible to guarantee an ethically tolerable
situation in the field of patentability”.

19

19

THE PATENTABILITY IN THE EUROPEAN UNION

22

Jean-Luc GAL

National expert to the European Commission
DG Internal Market

Community Law

in relation to processes for the cloning and patentability

of inventions relating to the genome and certain humain cells

========================================

This text has been published in
Revue du Droit de l’Union Européenne 4/2000, pp. 835-853

23

24

Introduction1

Following the intensification of scientific research and the important discoveries made
in the last forty years in the field of molecular biology, biotechnology has emerged as one of
the most important and promising of techniques. The impact of processes, techniques and
biotechnological material is felt in many sectors - health, agriculture, environment, food and
industry.

However, in the mid-1980s, the diversity - and indeed the absence - of national laws
on the subject proved detrimental
to the research, development and competitiveness of
European undertakings by comparison with Japanese or American companies active in this
sector.

For these reasons, it has been vital that the European Community should launch an

initiative in this sphere in order to harmonise national laws within the internal market.

The main reason for a proposed Commission directive was the total absence of any

harmonisation within the internal market of the European Community.

This proved detrimental

to the research, development and competitiveness of

European undertakings by comparison with Japanese or American companies.

Hence, in 1985, the Commission White Paper on completing the internal market noted

that:

“The differences in intellectual property laws have direct and harmful repercussions on
intra-Community trade and on the capacity of undertakings to consider the intra-
Community market a unique environment for economic activities [...] The picture has
become even more complicated recently on account of the need to adapt existing
intellectual property systems to the technological changes which have taken place in a
number of fields, particularly that [...] of biotechnology [...] The Commission therefore
intends proposing measures on the protection of biotechnological inventions to the
Council.” [Unofficial translation]2.

A need for clarification therefore made itself felt in this connection in order to establish

clear and legally sound rules allowing industries of this type to develop harmoniously.

With this in mind, the Commission submitted an initial proposal for a directive on 21

October 19883. In it, the Commission observed that:

“The system for protection by patent is essentially intended to encourage technical
innovation, which is an important factor of economic growth, by recompensing the
inventor for his creative work so as to stimulate inventive activity. Protection by patent
therefore enables capital to be attracted to research/development and the industrial
exploitation of research results while fostering the rapid and beneficial spread of
knowledge otherwise liable to remain secret.” [Unofficial translation].

1 This article was made possible through the kind participation of Mr Erik Nooteboom, Head of the DG Internal
Market, Industrial Property Unit/E2.
The author, Mr Jean-Luc Gal, is a national expert to the European Commission from the INPI (National Institute
for Industrial Property). He works in the Industrial Property Unit.
The ideas and opinions expressed are entirely those of the author and cannot predetermine the opinion of the
Commission or the INPI.
2 Commission White Paper for the European Council in Milan (28-29 June 1985). The completion of the internal
market, COM (85) 310 final, 14 June 1985, 6 145 et seq.
3 COM (88) 496 final/SYN 159 of 21 October 1988, OJ No C from 10 to 13.1.1989.

25

This proposal was rejected on 1 March 19954 by the European Parliament following a
conciliation procedure mainly on account of the lack of any distinction, in connection with DNA
sequences, between discoveries which cannot be protected by a patent and true inventions
which, for their part, can be covered by an industrial property right.

A new amended proposal was put forward at the end of 19965.
The opinion of the European Group on Ethics was delivered on 25 September 1996:
this recognised that the traditional distinction between discoveries and inventions included an
important ethical dimension in the biotechnology sphere. However, the opinion stressed that
the directive did establish guarantees in this sphere.

The directive was finally adopted on 6 July 19986. The Netherlands Government
voted against this directive, while Italy and Belgium abstained. The directive was published in
the Official Journal on 30 July 19987. Article 15 lays down that the Member States must bring
into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this
Directive not later than 30 July 2000.

It should be noted that at the present time only three Member States have formally
legislation: Denmark, Finland and Ireland8.
implemented the directive in their national
However, the great majority of countries have begun the legislative process which will lead
them to the adoption, as rapidly as possible, of their internal legal instrument implementing the
directive.

Finally, despite the appeal from the Netherlands to the Court of Justice1, all the
Member States are bound by the content of the directive and have been since the expiry of
the transposition deadline2.

It should be noted that the European Patent Office introduced the main provisions of
Directive 98/44 into its Implementing Regulations following a decision by the Administrative
Council of 16 June 19993.

It is important to note that protection by patent is currently afforded in the European
instrument: the

Union by two systems, neither of which is based on a Community legal
European patent system and the national patent systems.

It ought similarly to be noted that the patent law applicable in the Member States
originates in the convention on the unification of certain aspects of invention patent law signed
at Strasbourg within the framework of the Council of Europe on 27 November 1963. This
convention defines, in particular, the conditions of patentability and also lays down certain
exceptions to patentability.

4 C4-0042/95 – 94/0159 (COD), Doc PE-CONS 3606/1/95 of 21.2.95. OJ No C68 of 20.3.95, p. 26.
5 OJ C296 of 8.10.1996, p4, OJ C 311
6 Directive 98/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 1998 on the legal protection of
biotechnological inventions, reproduced under the heading “Legislative texts and documents” in this publication.
7 To be consulted on line: http ://www.ipr-helpdesk.org/t_en/i/i_410_en.asp?adt_id=749&ads=98
8 Formal notifications received on 30 November 2000. The United Kingdom, which has already promulgated its
regulation for the implementation of Directive 98/44, ought to notify this at any time now.
1 Case C-377/98 of 30.10.1998, case pending.
2 It should be noted that Article 242 of the EC Treaty provides that:
“Actions brought before the Court of Justice shall not have suspensory effect. The Court of Justice may,
however, if it considers that circumstances so require, order that application of the contested act be suspended.
Pursuant to the second sentence in this article, the Kingdom of the Netherlands brought an appeal in order to
obtain the stay of execution of Directive 98/44. By an order dated 25 July 2000, the President of the Court
see:
rejected
http://curia.eu.int/jurisp/cgibin/form.pl?lang=fr&Submit=Rechercher&docreuire=alldocs&
numaff=C-
377%2F98&datefs=&datefe=&nomusuel=&domaine=&mots=&resmax=100.
3 OJ EPO 7/1999, p. 437.

request”:

this

26

The content of the Strasbourg Convention was taken up again in the Convention on
the Grant of European Patents concluded in Munich on 5 October 19734.
Today, 20
European States are party to this Convention5, the aim of which is to establish a set of
national patents governed by national and Community law via a unique procedure for the
examination of a patent applications.

Hence a European patent entering its national stage and relating to a sequence of

DNA will be subject to the provisions of Directive 98/44.

It is still desirable to be able to obtain, particularly in connection with biotechnology, a
the European
It was therefore with this in mind that the European Commission submitted a

Community patent of a unitary nature valid in all
Community.
draft regulation on the Community patent6.

the Member States of

Directive 98/44 established a flexible legal framework in relation to the issues raised
by the protection by patent of DNA sequences. Similarly, it endeavoured to propose certain
legal guidelines covering the patentability of human stem cells, which is a sector in the
process of full development.

I.

Patentability of DNA sequences

The patentability of DNA sequences will be covered in three stages: at the outset, it is
appropriate that attention be drawn to the issues at stake in connection with the human gene.
The conditions for the patentability of these genes will then be looked at. Finally, the question
of the scope of the rights conferred on biotechnological inventions and the limits which can be
applied to those rights will be dealt with.

A.

General presentation

The human genome is made up of a vast combination of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)
sequences which contains both genes (coding DNA sequences which can give rise to proteins
- see below) and a large quantity of DNA not having real known functions. Thus genes are
dispersed within the genome.

It should be noted that a copy of the genome is to be found in most human cells.
DNA, which exists in its natural state in the human body, is made up of some three
billion basic pairs (adenine, guanine, thymine and cytosine) which are coupled together (A and
T, C and G).

It is the
DNA is the chemical basis of some 80 000 to 100 000 genetic code genes7.
order in which the basic pairs exist which constitutes the coded information of genes. Genes
collectively gather together in the form of chromosomes representing the genetic pool of a
living organism or cell. This pool is transmitted to the daughter cells and to the descendants
of an organism.

4 A procedure for the review of the European Patent Convention was held in Munich from 20 to 29 November
2000. Conference documents may be consulted on: http://www.european-patent-office.org/epo/dipl_conf/documents_f.htm
5 The fifteen Member States and also Switzerland, Liechtenstein, Monaco, Cyprus and Turkey.
6 COM (2000) 412 final 1.8.2000.
7 This is only an estimate since it is currently impossible to be able to establish a precise and definitive number of
genes in humans.

27

The DNA of a cell

is an internal stock of

information which is not renewed or
destroyed. When a gene's information has to be expressed, it must firstly be copied in the
form of a molecule of messenger ribonucleic acid (m-RNA). The proteins are the products of
the decoding of m-RNA's. The gene filiation
protein represents the genetic
pool. Proteins are molecules which specifically execute the orders of genes. The code which
allows the structure of a protein to be defined (the sequence of the amino acids) operates
according to a universal correspondence system. It applies both in the case of bacteria and in
the case of mammals: an amino acid corresponds to three successive bases. Nature has
retained only twenty amino acids as players in the game of life. They are to be found in all
living organisms.

m-RNA

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

It is these genes which are of real interest in the sphere of biotechnology and for

which a type of specific protection is therefore required.

Precise Community rules therefore needed to be established in order to take these
specific features into account, and this was done through Directive 98/44. However, the basic
principles of patent law continue to apply in this field of technology.

Recitals 8 and 13 in Directive 98/44 clearly set out this situation. Recital 8 lays down

that:

“Legal protection of biotechnological inventions does not necessitate the creation of a
separate body of law in place of the rules of national patent law; [...] the rules of
national patent
the legal protection of
biotechnological inventions given that they must be adapted or added to in certain
specific respects in order to take adequate account of technological developments
involving biological material which also fulfil the requirements for patentability.”

law remain the essential basis for

Recital 13 adds:

“The Community's legal framework for the protection of biotechnological
inventions
can be limited to laying down certain principles as they apply to the patentability of
biological material as such, such principles being intended in particular to determine
the difference between inventions and discoveries with regard to the patentability of
certain elements of human origin, to the scope of protection conferred by a patent on
a biotechnological invention [...]”

B.

Patentability of biotechnological inventions

1.

Distinctions between patentable discoveries and inventions

The patent laws applicable within the Member States of the European Community
generally contain a non-exhaustive list of what must not be regarded as an invention. The
(such as scientific theories or
exclusions relate to constructions which are abstract
discoveries) or not of a technical nature (mere presentation of information).

An invention needs to be both practical and technical.

In other words, it must provide

a technical solution to a technical problem.

28

Thus if someone discovers a new property belonging to biological material which is
already known, such as a DNA sequences in particular, that person only makes a simple
discovery which is not in itself patentable.

However, if that same person is capable of determining a practical use of a technical
nature attached to that property, he/she has then conceived an invention and can therefore file
for a patent. Moreover, if a substance found in nature is isolated for the first time from its
natural environment and if a process can be developed from it which resolves a technical
problem, this process is therefore patentable.

To sum up, the essential factor which characterises an invention is its technological
contribution. The same result would have been impossible to achieve without recourse to
man, since nature is incapable of attaining the same result by herself.

In Directive 98/44, Articles 5(1) and 5(2), jointly with Recitals 20 and 21, lay down the

existing distinctions between a simple discovery and a true invention.

Article 5(1) lays down that the simple discovery of an element of the human body,

including a total or partial sequence of a gene, does not constitute a patentable invention.

Hence the directive is in accordance with Article 4 of the UNESCO declaration8 on the
human genome and the new Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union9 which
debars any financial gain being made from the human genome in its natural state.

Moreover, the joint declaration on the human genome presented by President Clinton
and Prime Minister Blair is also based on the same approach to this issue. The conclusions of
the Okinawa Summit under the auspices of G8 are also fully compatible with the provisions of
Directive 98/44.

It is thus indisputable that neither the human genome nor a DNA sequence as such
can be patentable according to the directive since they do not constitute inventions: they
existed prior to being revealed. Admittedly, they have enabled human knowledge to be
extended but this knowledge must be applied if it is to be technologically useful.

Hence the fundamental data on the human genome which it has been possible to
reveal through the project christened HUGO (Human Genome Project), an alliance of public
institutions and commercial companies, are not patentable. This is why patents must not
restrict access to these fundamental data.

However the Directive, in Article 5(2), lays down that an element isolated from the
human body or otherwise produced by means of a technical process, including the partial
sequence of a gene, may constitute a patentable invention, even if the structure of that
element is identical to that of a natural element.

Recital 21 in the directive reasons as follows: a DNA sequence can be the result of
technical processes which identified, purified, characterised and multiplied it outside the
human body. Such a process could not be conducted by nature alone.

2.

The criteria of patentability

To obtain a patent on an invention based on, or included in, a gene, the general
conditions of patentability need to be met: the invention must be new, show inventive activity
and lend itself to industrial application.

8 http ://www.unesco.org/ibc/fr/genome/projet/index.html.
9 http ://www.consilium.eu.int/df/default_asp ?lang=fr. OJEC 364 of 18.18.2000, p. 1.

29

Moreover, the traditional

laws relating to patent law generally comprise two additional

patentability conditions:

-

-

In addition, it must relate to a technical problem.

the invention must be of a technical nature, in other words it must lie within the
technical sphere.
It must also
possess technical characteristics and be able to be outlined in claims which allow the
aim and scope of protection to be defined;
in addition, the invention must be sufficiently described for the specialist to be able to
reproduce it on the basis of the information contained in the patent application.

If these requirements are not met, the invention cannot be protected by a patent.
Article 3 of the Directive reiterates these basic principles concerning biotechnological

inventions.

a.

Novelty

The first criterion to be fulfilled is therefore novelty. This condition refers to the

question of the state of the art.

The state of the art can be defined as follows: anything made available to the public
by written, oral, electronic means or by use before the date of the filing of a patent application.
In other words, if the invention is included in state of the art, it could not be protectable via a
patent.

In the biotechnology sphere, it has occasionally been maintained that a gene could
not meet this notion of novelty, insofar as it was present in certain data banks accessible to
the public. However, the presence of a gene in a data bank is not sufficient to destroy the
In fact, in the light of the data communicated, a person still needs to
novelty of an invention.
have had knowledge of the information to be capable of achieving the invention. This
therefore means that the invention must be sufficiently accessible to the public for the nature
of novelty to be no longer able to be fulfilled.

Directive 98/44 reaffirms this approach in Article 3(2), which states that:

“Biological material which is isolated from its natural environment or produced by
means of a technical process may be the subject of an invention even if it previously
occurred in nature.”

This assertion is, moreover, clarified within Article 5(2) which deals in particular with

the specific case of genes and DNA sequences.

b.

Inventive activity

To be protectable, an invention must be of an inventive nature. Inventive activity must
be comprehended in the light of the state of the art. Thus an invention will be deemed to
satisfy the criterion of inventive activity if, in the light of the state of the art, it does not appear
obvious to the specialist.
It should be pointed out that the specialist is not an utterly inflexible
institution and that, quite the contrary, he/she is infinitely variable depending on the technical
sphere dealt with.

30

Thus, as far as biotechnology is concerned, he/she will be a person with an average
knowledge of genetic engineering who, having regard to the state of the art (all the available
knowledge), will be capable of making the invention described without recourse to a degree of
creativity, or indeed extreme ingenuity.
It is sufficient for him/her to be able to achieve the
invention described by applying standard, known reasoning processes.

Article 3 of Directive 98/44 points out the requirement that this condition should be

complied with in the sphere of biotechnology.

The concept of inventive activity is, quite obviously, a fluctuating one. Thus it should
be pointed out that, while considerable efforts and resources had to be deployed at the
beginning of any human genome sequencing operation to isolate and characterise the first
genes, it seems that such processes have now proved to be less arduous.
In certain cases,
they can even be described as routine.

Our knowledge of genes is growing. We have an increasing knowledge of their
functions within the organism and their relationship with specific diseases. Accordingly, there
are those who now think that such processes have become mechanical and cannot therefore
be protected by a patent.

In such instances, it is indisputable that such genes isolated and characterised almost
automatically will probably be inventions (in other words, they will not be excluded, as such,
from the scope of patentability) but for all that they will not be patentable. They will not, in fact,
meet the essential criteria of inventive activity.

Moreover, some claim that it is the simplest matter to deduce the function of a gene
by computer-aided simulations (bio-informatics) based on other genes whose functions are
already known; this technique is described as research by homology.

If research by homology indicates that there is a broad similarity between the new
gene examined and another one which is already known, it is therefore highly likely that the
new gene possesses a function similar to that previously revealed in the already known gene.
Accordingly, on the basis of information obtained via the first gene, the function of the new
gene can easily be guessed.

In this case, patentability will not be able to be recognised in respect of such

inventions on account of the absence of any inventive activity.

c.

Industrial application

The criterion of industrial application is deemed to be fulfilled if the invention can be

carried out or used in all spheres of industry, including agriculture.

Directive 98/44 does not challenge this requirement. On the contrary, it endeavours

to provide clear guidelines in this particular sphere of technology.

There are those who have questioned the need for such specifications, when no such
approach has been followed in respect of novelty or inventive activity. The reasons are
simple: the approach to be followed in order to assess novelty or inventive activity in this
sphere of technology could be the same as that adopted to address any other technical
sphere.

Accordingly, the specifications in regard to the criterion of industrial application do not
run counter to the principles laid down earlier for this condition of patentability: it was, by
contrast, deemed by the legislature to be adequate to provide major specifications in order to
be able to characterise this requirement.

Thus Article 5(3) lays down that the precise industrial application of a DNA sequence

must be divulged for the invention to be protected.

31

Moreover, Recital 23 clarifies this requirement by stating that a DNA sequence
without indication of a function does not contain any technical information and is therefore not
a patentable invention.

Recital 24 adds that where a sequence is used to produce a protein, it needs to be

specified which protein is thus produced or what function it performs.

The degree to which the function requires to be divulged is going to vary from case to
case.
In fact, the importance of specific divulging will have to be assessed by the yardstick of
the knowledge available when the application for a patent is examined. This requirement will
become increasingly important as the therapeutic and diagnostic use of a gene becomes
commonplace.

However, it seems to be virtually accepted that the mere isolation of a gene and any
speculation on the potential function which that gene is capable of fulfilling do not appear
sufficient to justify the issue of a patent.

3.

Process of surgical or therapeutical treatment - further therapeutic application

It should be noted that a biotechnological invention can consist entirely of a surgical

treatment process.

Article 27(3a) of the TRIPs Agreement10 allows its members to exclude diagnostic,

therapeutic and surgical methods for the treatment of human beings from patentability.

Thus Article 52(4) of the European Patent Convention (hereinafter EPC) is fully in
accordance with that article by making express provision for the exclusion of such processes
from the field of patentability.

In any event, Recital 35 in Directive 98/44 points out that:

“This Directive shall be without prejudice to the provisions of national patent law
whereby processes for treatment of the human or animal body by surgery or therapy
and diagnostic methods practised on the human or animal body are excluded from
patentability.”

It may also be that a protein which has been coded on the basis of a DNA sequence
can present a new function which is different from that initially planned in an earlier patent
application. In this specific case, Recital 28 of the directive points out that:

“This Directive does not in any way affect the basis of current patent law, according
to which a patent may be granted for any new application of a patented product.”11

10 Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs Agreement) (1994),
http ://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/t_agmO_e.htm.
11 Here, too, the positive law applicable on the subject is essentially the European Patent Convention.
Currently Article 54(5) of the EPC lays down that:
“The provisions of paragraphs 1 to 4 shall not exclude the patentability of any substance or composition,
comprised in the state of the art, for use in a method referred to in Article 52, paragraph 4, provided that its use
for any method referred to in that paragraph is not comprised in the state of the art.”
The current conference for the review of the EPC plans to retain this article and add a new one which would read
as follows:
“Nor do Paragraphs 2 and 3 rule out the patentability of a substance or composition referred to in Paragraph 4 for
any specific use in any method referred to in Paragraph 53(c), provided that use is not included in the state of the
art.” [Unofficial translation].
This new wording allows full account to be taken of the second therapeutic indication and also the subsequent
ones, although it leaves some doubt as to the exact scope of the first therapeutic indication.

32

C.

Scope - Exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred on the holder of the patent

1.

Scope of the patents covering DNA sequences

It should be pointed out that the general rules for assessing the scope of an invention

relating to a DNA sequence continue to apply.

Thus Article 69(1) of the EPC can provide useful clarifications:

“The extent of the protection conferred by a European patent or a European patent
application shall be determined by the terms of
the
description and drawings shall be used to interpret the claims.”

the claims. Nevertheless,

However, Recital 13 of the directive states that specific details need to be provided

concerning the extent of the protection conferred by a patent in the sphere of biotechnology.

Thus Article 9 of the Directive states that:

“The protection conferred by a patent on a product containing or consisting of genetic
information shall extend to all material, save as provided in Article 5(1), in which the
product
is incorporated and in which the genetic information is contained and
performs its function.”

Moreover, Recital 25 states that:

“For the purposes of interpreting rights conferred by a patent, when sequences
overlap only in parts which are not essential to the invention, each sequence will be
considered as an independent sequence in patent law terms.”

Thus, the scope assigned to a patent relating to DNA sequences must be assessed in

the light of these provisions.

2.

Exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred on the holder of the patent

Concerning the authorisation to undertake experimental activities relating to
inventions in the biotechnology sphere, reference needs to be made to national or European
legislation. In fact, the aim of the directive is not to state an opinion on the control of research,
as Recital 14 very appropriately points out.

However, it should be noted that all laws governing the patents of Member States
within the European Community contain provisions authorising research into, and
experimentation on, the field covered by a patent.

Moreover, even if these do not, on the face of it, appear to be desirable, forms of
protection such as compulsory licences are provided for within the framework of the normal
operation of patent law to ensure that the holder of the patent does not abuse the rights
he/she enjoys.

33

Moreover, the point should be stressed that Directive 98/44 limits itself to determining
solely what the subject of protection by a patent can be in the light of patent law. Hence
patent law and, all the more so, Directive 98/44, have not adopted ethical standards or values
for reasons of ordre public or morality. Directive 98/44 limits itself to drawing attention to the
fact that certain inventions which could meet patentability criteria may be ruled out on ethical
grounds, stemming from relevant national, Community or international
It limits itself
solely to citing an indicative and non-exhaustive list.

laws.

A patent could not confer a positive right to use an invention. Such a use and,
accordingly, the research and development leading to that invention continue to be governed
by national and European laws.

Hence, Recital 14 points out that:

“A patent for invention does not authorise the holder to implement that invention, but
merely entitles him to prohibit
for industrial and
commercial purposes.”

third parties from exploiting it

The Directive has managed to establish a balanced position in relation to the
patentability of DNA sequences taking into account the special nature of the field concerned,
although also the interests of biotechnological companies.

II.

Patentability of human stem cells

To begin with,

it should be pointed out

is incorrectly described as
“therapeutic cloning” is in no instance intended to reproduce human beings identically12. The
interest of this technique lies in the possibility of being able to recreate organs or tissues from
cells which are described as “stem” and which have been able to be isolated, particularly
during the initial stages of life of the embryo.

that what

At

the start of

promising in the treatment of diseases which hitherto seemed as if
incurable forever.

the third millennium, human stem cells appear to be particularly
they would remain

However, as these cells are extracted from the human being, they cause fear among

some people and hope among others.

With the first steps these new techniques are taking, a brief technical overview ought
to be given in order to classify the problems involved, followed by a study of the premises of
the legal questions which are bound to arise in future years.

A.

Technical overview

Human evolution illustrates this development very clearly. Human development
begins when a spermatozoon fertilises an ovule and creates a single cell which has the
potential to create an entire organism. This fertilised egg is totipotent.

12 The reproduction of human beings identically is described as reproductive cloning.
It is currently known that
reproductive cloning techniques have only been used successfully among animals since the birth in Scotland of
the sheep Dolly.

34

In the first few hours following fertilisation, this cell divides into identical cells which

also retain the totipotent character.

This means that if one of these cells is placed in a woman's uterus, it will have the

capacity to develop into an embryo.

Approximately four to five days after fertilisation, and after several cell division cycles,
these totipotent cells begin specialising. A cavernous sphere forms within them which is
termed a blastocyst. This blastocyst is composed of an external mass and an internal mass.

The external mass is the origin of the placenta and other issuing matter needed for

the development of the foetus in the uterus.

The cells in the internal mass are not yet specialists and can give rise to virtually any
human tissue, although it should be observed that, in themselves, these cells cannot create a
human being insofar as they are incapable of creating a placenta, which is vital for the
development of the embryo in the uterus.

These cells are described as pluripotent since they can give rise to any type of human
body tissue. They cannot be described as an embryo because if they are placed alone in a
uterus they cannot under any circumstances develop into a foetus.

These cells will continue to develop and finally give rise to specific cells fulfilling
certain particular functions. Thus, blood stem cells situated in the spinal cord can give rise to
red corpuscles, white corpuscles or platelets and can do so throughout the life of the human
being. These more specialised cells are described as multipotent. They are extraordinarily
numerous in the embryo, although found in far smaller quantity in the child and adult.

Currently, embryonic stem cells (i.e. pluripotent cells) have been able to be developed

from two sources:

-

-

The first method consists of isolating cells from the internal mass of the blastocyst.
It
has proved possible to cultivate these cells and obtain a line of cells from them which
are described as embryonic stem cells13;

The second method consists of isolating pluripotent cells from foetal tissues obtained
following - in particular - an abortion. The cells which are to be removed are located
in the testicles or ovaries. These cells are termed Embryonic Germ Cells.14

The scientific benefit of using embryonic stem cells is manifold.

-

-

-

The study of stem cells ought
observed during human development to be gradually understood;

to allow the complex succession of

the phases

Recourse to stem cells could radically modify the practice observed for developing
medicines. Using these stem cells to carry out the necessary tests before marketing
future medicines can, apparently, be envisaged;

therapy seems to be the most ambitious objective.
The development of cell
Numerous diseases are the result of dysfunctions of cell functions or the destruction
of certain human body tissues.

Cell therapy has, indeed, been used for a number of years.

It currently consists of
replacing diseased cells or those which are insufficient in number by new cells. For example,
the treatment of leukaemia or cancer by a bone marrow graft is a form of cell
therapy.
However, organ donations are generally insufficient to meet the demand.

13 More commonly described as ES cells.
14 Or EG cells.

35

Moreover, cell graft techniques have limits: rejection occurs on account of immunological
incompatibility, the lack of an organ donor, the absence of cells which can be grafted in the
case of certain types of human tissue, etc.

Cell therapy using embryonic stem cells offers new and extremely interesting prospects
for the future treatment of degenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's or Parkinson's disease.
The use of pluripotent cells stimulated to develop specialist cells ought to enable an

inexhaustible source of cells and tissue to exist to combat these diseases.

Moreover, recourse to the so-called nuclear transfer technique within a sexual cell 15 is an
interesting method which could alleviate the difficulties associated with the rejection of cells
introduced into the organism and which are encountered during the practice of traditional cell
therapy.

This technique consists of enucleating an ovocyte and introducing the nucleus of a non-
germ cell into that cell16. The cell which is fused in this way, as well as cells deriving from it,
have the potential to give rise to a living creature: these cells are therefore totipotent17. These
cells will give rise in their turn to a blastocyst, from which cells can be isolated from the
internal mass and reproduced in a culture: the cells obtained in this way will also be embryonic
stem cells.

Recourse to this “therapeutic cloning” methodology has the great advantage of
overcoming the problem of incompatibility in the acceptance of organs by certain patients.
They will not, indeed, be faced with difficulties of this type insofar as the cells injected into
them will originate, from the very outset, from their own organism.

B.

Legal overview

Depending on the technique used, the legal solution will evidently differ having regard

to patent law.

Moreover it should firstly be pointed out, in accordance with Recital 14 that the
directive could not be interpreted as running counter to national, European and international
laws laying down any limitations or prohibitions or guaranteeing control of research and the
use and marketing of its results. In other words, before wondering whether a given process or
product is patentable, it should firstly be checked whether a given product obtained or
technique used is authorised under relevant laws and under what conditions.

As far as patent law is concerned, the sampling of multipotent cells from an adult does
not seem to pose major difficulties. Any technique or product obtained will, subject to the
limitations set out in Article 5(1) (non-appropriation of the human body as such), be protected
by a patent if it fulfils patentability conditions.

Similarly,

if

the technique consisting of sampling tissue from a dead foetus is

authorised by relevant laws governing ethics and research, it ought to be patentable.

On the other hand, the question of creating and using embryonic stem cells is a

considerably more difficult one.

A distinction needs to be made from the outset between the mere use of embryos and

the creation of embryos for research purposes.

15 A technique termed SCNT: Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer.
16 That is, any cell other than reproductive ones.
17 There is currently no technique whereby these cells can be isolated and made to reproduce in a culture.

36

Under Article 6(2c) of the directive, the use of human embryos for industrial or

commercial purposes is not patentable.

Recital 42 of the directive states:

“Uses of human embryos for industrial or commercial purposes must also be excluded
from patentability; [...] in any case such exclusion does not affect inventions for
therapeutic or diagnostic purposes which are applied to the human embryo and are
useful to it.”

It will be the responsibility of the courts to which cases of dispute are referred to

specify the scope of the terms used.

For its part, cloning is covered by Article 6(2)(a) of Directive 98/44, which lays down

that:

“[...] the following, in particular, shall be considered unpatentable:
(a) processes for cloning human beings;”.

This exception to patentability is based on grounds of ordre public or morality referred

to in Article 6(1).

A definition of the cloning of human beings given in Recital 41, which defines it as any
process, including techniques of embryo splitting, designed to create a human being with the
same nuclear genetic information as another living or deceased human being.

It should be noted that the directive refers only to the question of human cloning.

In
fact, it was not its place to state an opinion on this question. The definitions of the embryo
accordingly derive from national laws, which are particularly diverse.

The legal situation concerning the concept of embryo is completely disparate within
It does appear that the embryo is protected by law on conception
the European Community.
in Ireland and that, accordingly, any reproduction of an embryo, whatever the stage of
development, comes under the prohibition of the law.

In other countries, an embryo is only acknowledged to have a legal value as from its

fourteenth day of development18.
Reference ought

to be made to the fact

the European Union's Charter of
Fundamental Rights provides, in Article 3(2), for the prohibition of reproductive cloning19. The
Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, signed at Oviedo on 4 April 199720, lays down
in Article 18(2) that the creation of human embryos for research purposes is prohibited.

that

Nevertheless, in the light of the preparatory work for Directive 98/44, it is apparent
that the European legislature wished to rule out the protection by patent of any type of cloning
process.

Hence we read, concerning Article 6:

“In Paragraph 2(a),

‘processes for cloning human beings’
[Unofficial translation]21.

the Council deemed it more correct

to use the expression
than ‘processes for human reproductive cloning’”

entitled

“Ethical

14 November

18 For more information, see the 15th Opinion of the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies
of
use”:
aspects
2000,
http://.europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics.
19 Op. cit., Footnote 17.
20 http ://www.coe.fr/fr/txtjur/164fr.htm.
21 Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament in accordance with Article 189B(2), second
sub-paragraph of the EC Treaty - joint position adopted by the Council on 26 February 1998 on the proposal for a
directive from the European Parliament and the Council on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions.
SEC(1998) 360 final - 95/0350(COD), p. 7.

stem cell

research

human

and

of

37

To have an exhaustive view of the situation, it should finally be pointed out that the
the use of which offend against human
directive excludes from patentability processes,
dignity, such as processes to produce chimeras from germ cells or totipotent cells of humans
and animals22.

Here too, it will be the responsibility of the courts to which cases of dispute are

referred to specify the scope of the exclusions envisaged.

Conclusion

In conclusion, forthcoming (technical and legal) developments in the field of human

stem cells ought to enable us to have a clearer view of the legal situation applicable.

On 18 October 2000, the European Group on Ethics was commissioned by President
Prodi to study the ethical aspect of the patentability of inventions involving human stem cells23.
Furthermore, pursuant to Article 16(c) of Directive 98/44, the Commission will provide
the European Parliament and the Council, in the course of 2001, with a report on the
law in the field of biotechnology and genetic
development and implications of patent
engineering.

Directive 98/44 of the European Parliament of 6 July 1998 on the legal protection of
biotechnological inventions was adopted after long and constructive discussions both within
the European Parliament and the Council: it has enabled balanced solutions to be drawn up in
relation to the patentability of living material.

It is in the European Community’s interest to watch carefully any changes which might

take place in the biotechnology field.

22 Recital 38.
It is worthwhile pointing out that, under the terms of Article 7 of
23 See page 14 of the aforementioned opinion.
the Directive,
the European Group on Ethics evaluates all ethical aspects associated with biotechnology.
Moreover, Recital 44 adds that that Group may be consulted only where biotechnology is to be evaluated at the
level of basic ethical principles, including where it is consulted on patent law.

38

DIRECTIVE 98/44/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT

AND OF THE COUNCIL

of 6 July 1998

On the legal protection of biotechnological inventions

========================================

39

39

39

40

40

33

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

40

THE PATENTABILITY IN THE UNITED STATES

51

52

Maria C. FREIRE

Ph.D.
Chief Executive Officer
The Global Alliance for TB Drug Development
Brussels – New York

Intellectual property and access issues

on stem cell technology

========================================

Presentation during the Round Table
On “Ethical aspects of patenting inventions involving human stem cells”
Organised by the EGE on November 20, 2001 in Brussels

53

54

Intellectual Property and Access Issues on Stem Cell Technology

Summary1 of Mrs Freire’s presentation during the Round Table
on “Ethical Aspects of patenting inventions involving human stem cells”
organised by the EGE on November 20, 2001 in Brussels

The three main points of the presentation were as follows:

1. The United States legislation on technology transfer;

2. The National Institute of Health (NIH) research tools' guidelines and the importance of
allowing scientists access to the core technologies;

3. The agreement negotiated between the NIH and WiCell, the key patent holder with the stem
cell technology

1. The United States legislation on technology transfer

In the 1980s, three pieces of law were enacted in order to encourage universities to transfer
the technologies that were federally funded: the Bayh-Dole Act, the Stevenson-Wydler Act and
the Federal Technology Transfer Act. These three Acts have a direct impact on the stem cells’
story.

The Bayh-Dole Act: The United States Congress encouraged the commercialisation of the
technologies that arose from the research funded by the NIH and the Government. The idea
was that garnering these technologies, patenting the intellectual property, and moving it
forward for public benefit would enhance the economic development of the United States. This
strategy of mammoth investment in public health is often considered to be at the origins of the
creation of the biotechnology industry in the United States.

The key elements of this law were access to, and utilisation and broad distribution of these
technologies. To achieve that, United States university professors were encouraged to patent.
The universities, not the professors, retained the title to the patents and were encouraged to
move it forward.

The Stevenson-Wydler Act and the Federal Technology Transfer Act: They are very similar.
The only difference is that the Stevenson-Wydler Act relates to Government agencies, such as
the NIH, the Food and Drug Administration, or the Center for Disease Control. Researchers
working for these institutions were also encouraged to capture technologies. Again,
the
Government agencies, not the researchers, own the patent rights and are then charged for
moving it forward.

1 Summary prepared by the Secretariat of
Technologies to the European Commission)

the EGE (European Group on Ethics in Sciences and New

55

As a result of this policy, the NIH became good at protecting the intellectual property and at
garnering an entrepreneurial infrastructure. But sometime, the NIH forgot perhaps that its first
most important mission was the funding of research for the furtherance of public health.

2. The NIH research tools' guidelines and the importance of allowing scientists access

to the core technologies

Another consequence of this policy was that the NIH found itself in a problematic situation:
tools that have been developed using NIH technology where not broadly accessible by
researchers in other universities. That was the case for the stem cells technology or for the
oncomouse - the universities could not access this oncomouse for research purposes without
signing agreements, even though the United States Congress invested in the project. And
when scientists are not able to use basic tools for research, the whole scientific enterprise
suffers.

This is why the NIH decided to come up with a set of rules and guidelines for all its grantees.
These rules and guidelines state that the Bayh-Dole Act, which allowed for the patenting of
technologies, but also required broad utilisation and the furtherance of research, should be
appropriately implemented. They also ask NIH scientists developing research tools to
disseminate them broadly to their colleagues and the scientific community.

Additionally, in order to minimise administrative burdens - people were taking six to eight
months to transfer a basic cell line from one laboratory to the other - the NIH, along with
colleagues at the universities, came up with a one page agreement according to which access
to technologies was given for research but not therapeutic purposes. Under this one page
agreement, scientists are not allowed to use or insert any of this technology or material into
humans, and have to respect the appropriate terms and conditions for doing basic research.

It is worth mentioning these guidelines with regards to the stem cells because, in many
instances, they represent a prime research tool – Mrs Freire insisted on the fact that she was
saying that with a great deal of respect, understanding where these cells came from.
Therefore, following President Bush’s decision on the use of stem cells in August 2001, one
understands that the NIH had to ensure that the scientists could access them, in accordance
with the NIH core principles and mission.

3. The agreement negotiated between the NIH and WiCEll, the key patent holder with

the stem cell technology

Before going into the details of the agreement giving NIH scientists access to the cells, a few
points need to be clarified regarding the existing patents on stem cells, more precisely
regarding James Thomson' s patent.

56

- Firstly, James Thomson’s research was funded by the NIH only for his work on primates, but
not for his work on humans, because the United States has a ban on federally funded
research having to do with human stem cells.

James Thomson, operating under the rules of the Bayh-Dole Act, filed a first patent application
on his work on primates through his university - in the case of the Wisconsin University, it is
done through the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation (WARF) that owns the patents. A
first patent was issued in the late 1990s with claims to primates. A second patent that was
issued in 2001 is a continuation of the first one. One could argue that humans are primates.
However, in an interesting move, the US Patent & Trademark Office issued a second patent,
identical to the first one, except that it says humans rather than primates. There was no NIH
funding in relation to the patent that related to human stem cells. But by virtue of the fact that
the NIH funded the first patent, it has some rights to the stem cells technology.

- Secondly, to further clarify the history, the stem cells research done on humans was funded
by a private company called Geron. The Geron facilities, in the University of Wisconsin, were
funds were used to study the human stem cells.
completely separated and no Federal
Because the company had funded the research, it had the rights to some of the developed
technology - this is fairly standard both in European and American agreements. That is why
the Wisconsin Alumni Foundation gave Geron exclusive rights to six cell types. However,
Wisconsin reserved the right for research purposes and narrowed what they granted back to
Geron to six cell
important medical
types, which happened to coincide with the most
applications...

-
-
-

- Finally, the various players need to be clarified:
James Thomson did the research;
the Wisconsin University owns the intellectual property through the WARF;
the Wisconsin University created a subsidiary called WiCell
Company- in order to handle all the requests for stem cells.
WiCell now has the rights for the scaling up and distribution of the stem cells.

-Wisconsin Cells

The issue of accessing the stem cells became crucial after President Bush announced his
decision on stem cells on August 9th 2001. He said very clearly that only the 60 cell lines or so
that were identified at that date could be used for research using federal funds. Consequently,
the NIH had to come up with an agreement with WARF, the key holder of the stem cells
patent, or more precisely with WiCell, because they are the holders of the intellectual property,
and more importantly, of the cell lines. An important thing to realise is that even if researchers
can get access to the intellectual property or to the patents through a licence agreement, they
do not necessarily get access to the tangible property - the actual cells. And in this case, no
researcher could make the cells, because that was part of the presidential directive. So they
had to access the cells themselves. Thus the NIH had to craft an agreement that not only
allowed for the use of intellectual property, but also for the receiving of the cells that had
already been created, so no more embryos would be destroyed.

57

Mrs Maria Freire, on behalf of the Public Health System (which includes the NIH, the Center
for Disease Control and the Food and Drug Administration), negotiated this agreement with
the Wisconsin University people. They knew and understood that the NIH had some rights to
the stem cells technology by virtue of the fact that the NIH had funded the primate technology.

So, unlike the case of the oncomouse, where the NIH had to prevail on the good will of the
company, in the case of the stem cells, the NIH had some residual rights that Wisconsin
acknowledged and took into account during the negotiations. The anatomy and the critical
features of the resulting agreement are as follows.

- Firstly, and most importantly, the commercial uses were separated from the research uses.
This separation ensured that NIH scientists could access these tools for no commercial
purposes, thus allowing basic research to move forward.

the NIH agreed that

- Secondly,
the intellectual property remained with the inventors,
Wisconsin. But the NIH did not allow “reach-through rights”, in accordance with its long
established position against this kind of rights. Reach-through are rights whereby the owner
of a certain material retains the ownership on any invention developed with this material. In
the NIH / Wisconsin agreement, the cells are considered as research tools, and inventors
using them retain the rights to their own inventions, unless the cells are part of the final
invention.

- Thirdly, the NIH noticed that some of the already identified stem cell lines around the world
fall within the WARF patent. Consequently, the importation of these stem cells into the United
States would in fact infringe this patent. Wisconsin agreed not to consider the importation of
these cells by the NIH researchers as a violation of their patent rights. Thus, NIH researchers
fearing patent
can work with any of the 60 cell
infringement.

lines that have been identified without

- Finally, Wisconsin agree to extend the terms of the agreement to any recipient of NIH
funding that wishes to have the same terms and conditions, thus allowing a larger part of the
scientific community to research on the stem cells.

The practical details of the agreement are as follows:

- The cells can be transferred through a Material Transfer Agreement, which a one-page
agreement allowing the cells to be used for non-commercial purposes (if people want to use
the cells for commercial purposes, they have to sign a different kind of agreement with
Wisconsin);

- The NIH researchers cannot redistribute the cells. If somebody else wants to access the
cells, they can go to Wisconsin and get them directly;

- The cells will only be used as provided by law;

- NIH researchers are only charged a $ 5000 fee, which represents the cost of making and
maintaining the cells. There are no royalties or additional costs.

58

The quid pro quo was that the NIH agreed to acknowledge WiCell, and acknowledge the
sources of these cells in its publications (that is standard procedure within the field of scientific
research anyway). Additionally, NIH researchers have to send a yearly notification saying that
they are using the cells in accordance with the law (it is not a NIH standard practice, but the
NIH agreed to send such a notification). Finally, the NIH agreed not to give any other party
that has stem cells better terms and conditions than the ones granted to Wisconsin. So the
NIH is using Wisconsin as the threshold. If better terms and conditions are given to any other
providers of cells, the NIH has to go back to Wisconsin and grant the same.

In conclusion, the situation today is as follows: The NIH negotiators are going to the other
providers of stem cells and crafting similar agreements with them. The scientists are able to
access the cells. And hopefully, the science can continue.

59

40

THE WISCONSIN ALUMNI RESEARCH FOUNDATION AND

GERON CORPORATION DISPUTE

Information Note

========================================

This text has been prepared
by Brigitte Gratton, trainee within the EGE Secretariat

61

62

The Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation and
Geron Corporation Dispute

Information note1

Introduction

In November 1998, Dr. James Thomson (University of Wisconsin) first isolated and cultivated
pluripotent human embryonic stem cells (human ES cells). His team established five
unmodified human ES cell lines. Through the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation (WARF
or the Foundation), he filed a patent on 26 June 1998, which was issued on 13 March 2001:
US Patent 6,200,806.

WARF is an independent and non for-profit foundation affiliated to the University of Wisconsin.
Its role consists of patenting the findings made by researchers at the University of Wisconsin.
Because the University employs these researchers,
intellectual property rights on their
discoveries belong to the University, more specifically to the Foundation in charge of dealing
with intellectual property rights. As owner of these patents, WARF is also responsible for
licensing them. The Foundation owns US Patent 6,200,806 and licensed it to Geron.

Geron is a private biopharmaceutical company focused on developing and commercialising
therapeutic and diagnostic products for application in oncology and regenerative medicine,
and research tools for drug discovery. Geron sponsored James Thomson’s research, as the
US Government did not fund it because it used human embryos. In return for its funding,
Geron was granted important rights under a licence agreement.

The WARF patent covers both the method of isolating human ES cells (the process) and the
five unmodified stem cell lines themselves2 (the product). It is a very broad patent, which gives
WARF control over who may work with these five human ES cell lines, over who may use
James Thomson’s process to isolate the stem cells, and over the purpose of the work
(research, commercialisation). At the moment, the WARF patent is only valid in the USA, but
applications are pending in Europe.

1 Author: Brigitte Gratton, trainee with the Secretariat of the EGE (1st March 2002 / 31st July 2002).
2 The WARF patent includes: - a product claim on a purified preparation of pluripotent human ES cells; - a
product claim on five unmodified human ES cell lines; - a process claim for isolation of stem cells from embryos; -
a process claim for culturing of stem cells; - a process claim for inducing stem cells to differentiate in particular
ways.

63

The access to stem cells

Since President Bush’s announcement on the 9th August 2001, scientists whose research is
federally funded are allowed to work with the 72 human ES cell
lines already isolated. In
practice however, the government does not have control over whether these ES cell lines get
to researchers for the following reasons:

Since in the United States research using embryos can only be privately funded, many of
these human ES cell lines are in the hands of private companies, and therefore access has to
be negotiated. It is generally also true at international level.

When a patent exists (such as the WARF patent), a licence has to be negotiated.
Furthermore, the grant of exclusive rights under a licence agreement may restrict access to
the human ES cells and discourage research.

If the human ES cell lines match the description in the broadly worded WARF patent, their
owners (public institutions or private companies) must obtain approval from the WARF before
distributing them.

For all these reasons, the existence of a patent such as the WARF patent and the related
licensing practices may impair freedom of research and access to healthcare.

The first licence agreement between WARF and Geron

Under a first licence agreement,3 WARF granted to Geron exclusive rights to develop the
unmodified stem cell lines isolated by Dr. James Thomson into six specific modified stem cell
lines4 (relating to liver, muscle, nerve, pancreas, blood, and bone cells) for commercial
It means that Geron exclusively was allowed to develop and commercialise
purpose.
therapeutic and diagnostic products involving these six stem cell types.

The Foundation retained the right to distribute its unmodified stem cell lines to the academic
research community. These stem cell lines were and are still available from WiCell Research
Institute, a WARF subsidiary.5

3 The first and the second licence agreements remain confidential. Informations about their contents are therefore
from second hand sources.
4 Modified/differentiated human ES cell lines can also be called human ES cell types. Both expressions will be
used in this note.
5 WiCell’s mission is to provide scientists with the Wisconsin human ES cells.

64

The dispute between WARF and Geron

On the 13 August 2001, WARF filed a lawsuit against Geron, contesting the company’s rights
to additional human ES cell types. Indeed, on the 26 July 2001, Geron exercised an option
contained in the first licence to claim 12 additional stem cell types. WARF argued that the
option had expired a week earlier and that the use of the option could be denied at WARF
discretion. At that time, there was no legal argument over Geron’s rights to the six human ES
cell types already licensed to Geron. However, WARF warned Geron that it could also loose
its rights to them because its performance in developing therapies had been disappointing.

Additionally, WARF argued that Geron had no exclusive rights to research products6 except in
those cases when Geron added its own technology. This argument probably related to a
dispute as to whether research products were included in the definition of therapeutic and
diagnostic products. If that were the case, Geron would have had exclusive rights on research
products involving the six human ES cell types as well.

The interests at stake

The motivations of WARF in filing the lawsuit were probably:

To stop Geron from taking too large a piece from the commercial interests at stake. Regarding
the timing and context,7 Geron obviously tried to secure potential profits when it exercised the
option.

To be able to license the additional human ES cell types to other various companies.

To promote research and investment in stem cells research. Geron’s exclusive commercial
rights on 12 additional human ES cell types would have: - restrained the development of
therapeutic and diagnostic products from these stem cell types; - generally discouraged other
scientists from researching on WARF stem cells, as to commercialise any related inventions,
they may need to obtain a sublicence from Geron.

6 Example: using the stem cells to screen for drug compounds.
7 President Bush’s announcement a week earlier confined the federally funded research only to already isolated
human ES cell lines.

65

The settlement of the dispute

The dispute was settled out of court. On the 9 January 2002, WARF and Geron signed a new
licence that gives Geron:

-

-

-

Exclusive rights to develop therapeutic and diagnostic products from three types of
human ES cells (nerve, cardiac muscle and pancreas cells);

Non-exclusive rights to develop therapeutic and diagnostic products from three further
human ES cell types (blood, cartilage, and bone cells);

Non-exclusive rights to develop research products in six human ES cell types.

Furthermore, WARF and Geron agreed to grant research rights to existing human ES cells
patents and patent filings to academic and governmental researchers without royalties or fees.

Geron not only renounced the enlargement of its area of exclusivity, but also gave away
exclusive commercial rights on three human ES cell types. Thus a monopoly situation on the
commercialisation of human ES cell types owned by WARF was avoided. In addition, the new
agreement clarifies the situation regarding research products. Finally, the new agreement
clearly states the principle of free access to the human ES cell lines for academic researchers.
It is, however, not so certain that the latter point was a real issue in the dispute.

The access to WARF stem cells

The current situation is that WARF gives NIH researchers and scientists working for non for-
profit institutions access to its stem cell lines against a nominal fee, which covers expenses
incurred for culturing and shipping the stem cells, but does not constitute a payment of
royalties. Previously, WARF generally used to retain the right to provide such access to
academic researchers when negotiating licence agreements (cf. Geron’s licence).
In
September 2001, the Foundation signed an agreement with the NIH regarding access to its
fee to academic
stem cell
researchers became legally binding for WARF. The principle of access without having to pay
royalties is therefore clearly stated in Geron’s new licence agreement and even extended to
prospective inventions and future patents. On the other hand, private researchers have to
negotiate access under a licence and to pay much more than a nominal fee.

lines. Consequently, providing access against a nominal

66

Conclusion

Regarding the lawsuit, the first agreement apparently did not stop academic researchers from
accessing the five unmodified human ES cell lines.

However, it:

-

-

-

Precluded them from developing therapeutic and diagnostic products using the stem cell
types subject to exclusive commercial rights;

Discouraged them from developing research products involving the stem cell types as it
was unclear whether they were subject to exclusive commercial rights;

Discouraged them from researching on human stem cell lines as the commercialisation of
their findings would have required a licence from WARF or even from Geron (the grant of
such a licence could be refused at WARF and/or Geron’s discretion).

The settlement reduces the number of stem cell types subject to exclusive commercial rights
from six to three. In that sense, it opens the field of research. However, a true opening of the
field of research relies on WARF. If WARF were to grant further exclusive commercial rights to
others companies from the private sector, nothing would really change. If, from now, WARF
decides to grant mainly non-exclusive commercial rights to other companies, then the field of
research would be truly opened. But at least a monopoly situation where a single company
has a commercial exclusivity on all WARF human stem cell types has been avoided.

Regarding the WARF patent, the Foundation holds a very extensive patent that could create a
monopoly. This patent may be changeable in Court.
Indeed, broad patents are more
vulnerable to attack, and legal experts are not sure whether the WARF patent would survive
the scrutiny of litigation. WARF is however apparently not willing to abuse its position, not only
because it is in its commercial interests, but also because the foundation is attached to the
public sector and promote the same values (namely the free access to research tools). Still it
is in WARF’s commercial interests to be able to grant more licences. The positive aspect is
that WARF’s licensing policy is not inconsistent with the advancement of basic research, in the
sense that WARF is not seeking ownership of any new inventions that arise from using its
stem cell lines, nor insisting on an option to have exclusive rights to these inventions.

67

62

THE EUROPEAN PATENT OFFICE

69

70

André REMOND

General Director, European Patent Office

Patentability of inventions using human stem cells

========================================

Presentation during the Round Table
On “Ethical aspects of patenting inventions involving human stem cells”
Organised by the EGE on November 20, 2001 in Brussels

71

72

Patentability of inventions using human stem cells

Summary of Mr Remond’s presentation during the Round Table
on “Ethical aspects of patenting inventions involving human stem cells”
organised by the EGE on November 20, 2001 in Brussels

I.

INTRODUCTION

On 14 November 2000 the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies to
the European Commission (EGE) issued an opinion on human stem cell research and use.

The EGE plans to issue a second report on the specific ethical questions relating to the
patenting of inventions involving human stem cells.

This document outlines the practice in the European Patent Office and identifies the specific
problems the EPO faces in this area.

Il.

THE CURRENT SITUATION

Although there has been extensive public and political debate world-wide on the importance
and appropriateness of stem cell research, the European Patent Office has so far received
very few patent applications concerning stem cells of human embryos.

At the end of October 2001 documentary research identified 37 European patent applications.
Most of these came from the United States. By the same date, 1102 patents had been issued
in the infinitely broader field of human or non-human stem cells.

In 2000 the EPO granted the University of Edinburgh a patent for a method of selecting stem
cells, including human stem cells derived from embryos (ES cells). There was opposition to
this patent. The opposition procedure is currently under way, and a ruling will not be
forthcoming before 2002.

The most controversial point raised by opponents concerns the use of human embryos as a
source of cells. Even though the harvesting phase is not explicitly included in the patented
method, it is clear that an embryo is often destroyed in order to obtain embryo stem cells. But
the validity of the patent must also be examined in terms of whether the invention could be
reproduced using human cells on the date when the patent was applied for (21 April 1994). In
the United States two matching patents have been granted (14 and 21 November 2000).

73

Ill.

TYPES OF INVENTION CONCERNED

The main categories of invention in this area are:

-
-
-
-
-
-

cell selection and cultivation methods;
stem cells per se;
differentiated stem cells, e.g. haematopoietic stem cells;
genetically modified stem cells;
tissue and/or organs obtained from stem cells;
uses of stem cells, e.g. for therapeutic purposes.

A patent application may involve one or more of these categories. Some patent applications
for stem cells also include a preliminary phase to clone the embryo. This aspect will be
discussed in Section VI.

SITUATION WITH REGARD TO DIRECTIVE 98/44/EC ON THE LEGAL

IV.
PROTECTION OF BIOTECHNICAL INVENTIONS

Although Article 5(1) of the Directive provides that "The human body, at the various stages of
its formation and development ... cannot constitute patentable inventions", paragraph 2 states
that "An element isolated from the human body ... may constitute a patentable invention".
Recital No 21 specifies that such an element "is not excluded from patentability since it is, for
example, the result of technical processes used to identify, purify and classify it and to
reproduce it outside the human body, techniques which human beings alone are capable of
putting into practice and which nature is incapable of accomplishing by itself."

This provision confirms the previous practice of the European Patent Office, whereby patents
can be issued for methods of treating body tissues or fluids after they have been removed
from the human or animal body (Guidelines for examination in the EPO, C-IV, 4.3) and for
products derived from them. For example, the processing of blood and the various products of
such operations can be patented.

Similarly, the patentability of cells isolated from the human body has never been at issue.

Patent applications for human stem cells, whether obtained from embryos, foetal tissue or
adult cells, do not appear to present problems of patentability under Article 5 of the Directive.
They are clearly elements isolated from the human body, at
its
formation, which result from technical processes.

the various stages of

But Article 6 of the Directive must also be taken into consideration.

Article 6 of the Directive considers inventions in terms of public order and morality.

Article 6(2)(c) is of particular relevance with regard to human stem cells. It provides that uses
of human embryos for industrial or commercial purposes are to be considered unpatentable.
What is more, the list of inventions considered unpatentable as given in Article 6(2) is not
exhaustive, so other categories of invention could also be excluded.

74

The following questions must be answered as a matter of the utmost importance:

-

-

-

-

Is an invention consisting of a method applied to human cells of embryonic origin subject
to the ban, even though the phases covered directly by the patent do not include the cell
isolation phase directly involving the embryo?

Are products resulting from these phases, such as modified stem cells or tissues
cultivated from these cells, covered by the ban?

Should we distinguish between cells derived from embryos, foetuses and adult human
bodies?

Should we differentiate on the basis of the fact that, in the specific case of embryonic stem
cells, the method involves the deliberate destruction of an otherwise viable embryo, even
though the foetuses used are the results of abortions which, whether spontaneous or
artificially induced, are legal?

- What about cases where non-viable embryos are harvested using parthenogenesis?

-

Can we justify the distinction made between foetuses and adults as sources of cells, for
example, with regard to issues of dignity of the person or informed consent?

V.

PATENTS AND COMMERCIALISATION

Some national laws on bioethics and international conventions ban the marketing of human
body parts. These conventions are listed in the introduction to the Opinion of the European
Group on Ethics of 14 November 2000 on ethical aspects of human stem cell research and
use.

We should first ascertain whether the ban on commercialisation or profit making affects the
issuing of patents for human stem cells.

In the classic case of blood products, for example, it is illegal in some countries to give blood
donors any remuneration. A ban of this kind does not, however, in any way affect the issuing
of patents for methods applied to donated blood and blood derivatives obtained from it. Blood
derivatives are marketed, although this is sometimes restricted to State-controlled institutions.

As regards human stem cells, paragraph 2.17 of the Opinion of the European Group on Ethics
argues that measures should be taken to prevent the commercialisation of embryos as well as
cadaveric foetal tissue. Paragraph 2.18, however, seems to authorise the commercialisation of
products obtained from human stem cells as it lays down conditions for such products to be
imported and exported (subject to compliance with ethical and safety rules).

It should, moreover, be noted that products derived from human foetal tissue are already
marketed within European Union Member States. For example, libraries of foetal cDNA are
available on the market.

If the research in question is authorised, subject to the reservations set out in the EGE
Opinion of 14 November 2000, and if the commercialisation of derived products is also
permitted in the light of considerations of public order and morality, then logically it should be
permitted to issue patents for techniques involving the isolation, growth and use of human
stem cells, regardless of whether they are of embryonic origin.

75

The "morality" criterion of Article 53(a) of the European Patent Convention and of Article 6 of
Directive 98/44/EC on the legal protection of biotechnical inventions applies to the exploitation
of the invention and not to the issue of the patent:

"Inventions shall be considered unpatentable where their commercial exploitation would be
contrary to ordre public or morality... "

According to these articles, if the commercial exploitation is not contrary to public order or
morality, then a patent application must not be rejected.

METHOD OF CLONING EMBRYOS FOR THE PURPOSES OF STEM CELL

VI.
HARVESTING

This aspect is dealt with in paragraph 2.7 of the Opinion of the European Group on Ethics,
which deals with research activities.

Some of the patent applications submitted to the European Patent Office deal with both the
embryo creation method and the harvesting of human embryo stem cells.

In such cases, the patentability of the cloning phases needs to be looked into. Article 6(2)(a) of
Directive No 98/44/EC stipulates that procedures for cloning human beings are not patentable.

If the patent application does not mention the source of the embryos, and if the patentability of
the techniques used to obtain human embryo stem cells is authorised, then there is no reason
to consider the method used to obtain the embryo.

VII.

THE PROBLEM OF CONSENT

In addition, the donor's free and informed consent, an important condition in its own right, is
not something that a patent office could be expected to check. Indeed, the principle of
anonymous donation would make checking impossible (cf. EGE Opinion: Ethical aspects of
human tissue banking, 21 July 1998).

76

THE EUROPEAN PATENT OFFICE

Information note

========================================

This text has been prepared
by Agueda Ollero Montiel (EGE Secretariat)

77

78

The European Patent Office

Information note1

The European Patent Office (EPO) is the executive branch of the European Patent
Organisation, an intergovernmental body set up under the European Patent Convention
(EPC), aiming to establish an uniform patent system in Europe. The European Patent
Organisation counts 20 memberships.

The activities of
composed of delegates from the contracting states. The EPO started working in 1978.

the EPO are supervised by the Organisation’s Administrative Council,

The EPO grants European patents for inventions, for the contracting states to the
European Patent Convention (EPC), which was signed in Munich on 5 October 1973 and
entered into force on 7 October 1977. The first revision of the EPC took place in 2000 and
was completed with a view to modernising the European patent system and adapting it to
meet the challenges of a globalising economy.

The EPC is linked to the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), an international treaty, which
offers to over 100 countries a unitary and simplified filing procedure.
The PCT is
administered by the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).

The EPO provides patent protection for Europe on the basis of a single patent application and
a single grant procedure. European patent applications and patents can also be extended to
countries signing agreements to that effect with the European Patent Organisation.

Over 80% of the world’s patents are granted by the EPO, by the Japanese Patent Office and
by the United States Patent and Trademark Office. To improve efficiency in dealing with the
growing number of patent applications, these three offices have been co-operating closely
since 1983 on projects involving automation and database.

The EPO develops technical co-operation projects in many countries and regions of
central and Eastern Europe, Africa, Latin America and Asia. These projects, some of
which carried out on behalf of the European Commission, are aimed at building up and
modernising industrial property systems to bring them into line with the provisions of
the TRIPS2 Agreements.

1 Note prepared by Agueda Ollero Montiel (EGE Secretariat).
2 TRIPS : Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights.

79

80

WORLD TRADE ORGANISATION

81

82

Thu-Lang TRAN WASESCHA

Counsellor in the Intellectual Property Division of the World
Trade Organisation (WTO) in Geneva

The WTO and the TRIPS Agreement

========================================

Presentation during the Round Table
On “Ethical aspects of patenting inventions involving human stem cells”
Organised by the EGE on November 20, 2001 in Brussels

83

84

The WTO and the TRIPS Agreement

Summary of Mrs Tran Wasescha’s presentation during the Round Table
On “Ethical aspects of patenting inventions involving human stem cells”
Organised by the EGE on November 20, 2001 in Brussels

The WTO and the TRIPS Agreement

The first part of
this presentation will address the WTO (World Trade Organisation)
architecture and the place of the TRIPS (Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights) in the WTO structure. The second part will deal with the patent provisions of
relevance to the debate of this Round Table. A brief description of the work in the TRIPS
Council will be given, in particular with regard to biotechnology and in the light of the results of
the Fourth Ministerial Conference in Doha in November. Finally, some comments will be
offered on the “case law” regarding some concepts of relevance to the debate, such as public
order or morality.

The WTO Architecture

The WTO, successor to the former GATT (which was not an intergovernmental organization
but an entity formed by the Contracting Parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
of 1947) has 144 Members1, one of the two last ones being China.
Its supreme body is the
Ministerial Conference, which is held every two years. Next to the Ministerial Conference is
the General Council, which acts on behalf of the Ministerial Conference in the interim. Three
main “pillars” form the architecture of the WTO system:

- the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade), dealing with goods;
- the GATS (General Agreement on Trade in Services);
- and TRIPS for intellectual property.

The GATT “pillar” covers a number of agreements dealing with various areas such as
agriculture. All these agreements, the GATS and the TRIPS Agreement form a “package”:
countries adhering to the WTO system must accept the whole “package”, they cannot “pick-
and-choose”. Apart from these agreements forming the package, adherence to certain
agreements (government procurement and civil aircraft) is not mandatory; they are referred to
as "plurilateral" agreements.

Disputes arising between WTO Members are resolved through the Dispute Settlement
Mechanism.
two bodies: - the Dispute Settlement Body. Rulings
pronounced by this body can be appealed to a distinct organ: - the Appellate Body.

is composed of

It

1 Situation as of 31 March 2002.

85

One of the reasons for the issue of intellectual property to be brought to the former GATT was
the fact that the dispute settlement system in the intellectual property conventions before and
at the time of the Uruguay Round was not deemed efficient enough. More than in any other
intergovernmental organizations, the WTO is essentially Member-driven. With regard to
decision-making, it works mainly on the consensus principle.

General comments on intellectual property

It
Intellectual property is not a new area created by the WTO as some would tend to believe.
is a very long standing discipline. One of its foundations at the multilateral level is the Paris
Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, administered by the World Intellectual
Property Organization in Geneva; it dates back from the end of the 19th century. This long-
standing discipline was built on through constant efforts to strike a balance between various
interests. As pointed out by previous speakers, there are, on one side, the interests of
innovators and researchers, who seek reward for their efforts in making research into the
development of new products and, on the other side, the interest of society at large to have
the technology disseminated.

The TRIPS Agreement is an example of this attempt to achieve a balance; this balance can be
It is enshrined in particular in two provisions in Part I on
found throughout the agreement.
General Provisions and Basic Principles.

Article 7 (Objectives) says that “The protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights
innovation and to the transfer and
technological
should contribute to the promotion of
dissemination of technology, to the mutual advantage of producers and users of technological
knowledge and in a manner conducive to social and economic welfare, and to a balance of
rights and obligations”.

Another provision, Article 8 (Principles) provides that “Members may,
in formulating or
amending their laws and regulations, adopt measures necessary to protect public health and
importance to their socio-
nutrition, and to promote the public interest in sectors of vital
economic and technological development, provided that such measures are consistent with
the provisions of this Agreement”.
It furthers says that “Appropriate measures, provided that
they are consistent with the provisions of this Agreement, may be needed to prevent the
to practices which
abuse of
unreasonably restrain trade or adversely affect the international transfer of technology.”

intellectual property rights by right holders or

the resort

It
Patent protection is important for Research & Development: this is worldwide recognized.
does not affect government efforts to safeguard ordre public, morality, public health or
environment, for example in the field of biotechnology. Nothing in the TRIPS Agreement
prevent Members to regulate Research & Development in the area of biotechnology, as long
as it does not contravene the provisions of the Agreement. As we will see later, there are a
number of provisions which allows flexibility for Members.

Finally, patent owners do not have the absolute right to do what they want with the patented
invention in the country where it has been granted if certain conditions are not fulfilled (safety,
environment, etc.).

86

The TRIPS provisions

The TRIPS Agreement contains minimum requirements.
It allows Members to have more
extensive protection if they want, provided it does not contravene the TRIPS Agreement.
Members, like the European Communities and their members States, the United States,
Switzerland, Australia or Japan as well as a number of developing countries have already
adopted higher level of protection than that provided in the TRIPS Agreement (for example
patent term restoration or certificate of supplementary protection, or patentability of plants).
With regard to patent protection, although it provides for a minimum level of protection, this
level represents a step forward in terms of protection: this is often referred to as the “Paris
plus”, Paris being the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property.

Subject to transitional arrangements for certain categories of Members (developing and least-
developed countries) and to certain exceptions, Members are obliged to provide for protection
to product and process inventions (Article 27.1). No discrimination between fields of
technology is permitted; this obligation of non-discrimination is subject to certain exceptions
(for example with regard to inventions relating to living material like plants).

Article 27.1 also provides the conditions for an invention to be patentable: novelty, inventive
step (or non-obviousness) and industrial applicability (or utility). The TRIPS Agreement does
not define these three concepts; definitions have to be found in nationals’ laws, regulations
and practices or in some other international
laws may
determine the test for these criteria might have led to some hot debate, for example in the field
of biotechnology with regard to the novelty or inventive step criteria.

treaties. The fact

that national

As said before, the obligation to provide for patent protection is not “absolute”. Again, the
constant attempt to strike a balance between various interests is well reflected in Article 27.2,
which gives Members the possibility to exclude from patentability inventions, "the prevention
within their territory of the commercial exploitation of which is necessary to protect ordre public
or morality, including to protect human life or health, animal life or health, plant life or health,
or to avoid serious prejudice to the environment". This provision is relevant to the debate in
this group. The wording is broad enough to cover ethical and other concerns in the field of
biotechnology. This possibility of excepting certain inventions from patent protection is subject
to the condition that such exclusion is not made merely because the exploitation is prohibited
by a law.

Another exclusion possible concerns "diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical methods for the
treatment of humans and animals" (Article 27.3(a)). Members have also the possibility to
exclude from patent protection plants and animals and essentially biological processes for
production of plants and animals; they have, however, the minimum obligation to grant patent
protection to inventions relating to micro-organisms and non-biological processes and micro-
In the area relating to plants,
biological processes for production of plants and animals.
Members have the obligation to protect plant varieties by patent protection, an effective sui
generis (special) system of protection or by both. The provisions under Article 27.3(b) are
In the course of the review, a number of questions and
subject to review since 1999.
concerns were raised, including on the patentability of living material. One feature of the
“social contract” made between the inventor and society at large is, in return to an exclusive
right for a limited period of time, the obligation to disclose the invention in a manner sufficiently
clear and complete for the invention to be carried out by a person skilled in the art (“enabling
clause”). The enabling clause is enshrined in Article 29.1.

Disclosure performs the function of dissemination of knowledge but it also has the advantage
of ensuring great transparency, allowing for example third parties to scrutinize certain patent
87

applications or patents, which could be rejected or cancelled for lack of novelty or of inventive
step or for violating other provisions like public order or morality. Recent cases like the
turmeric or neem tree ones, where third parties were enabled to challenge the protection
wrongly obtained, are good examples that the patent system can perform the functions
attributed to it by the legislator, and contains certain corrective mechanisms.

Patents give their owners the “negative” right to prevent others from performing certain acts
without their authorization. They do not have a “blank check” for doing anything they wish
(Article 28). This exclusive right lasts for a term of 20 years from the date of filing the patent
application (Article 33).
In certain areas, like pharmaceuticals, this term may be considerably
shortened due to other legal or administrative rules for marketing approval.

Rights are not absolute; they are subject to exceptions. The TRIPS Agreement provides for
limited exceptions to rights (Article 30).
It does not, however, list those exceptions and leave
this to national laws. Typically, exceptions are, for example private use, use for teaching
purposes or non-commercial experimentation. A WTO panel ruled out, in a dispute between
the EC and Canada in the field of patent protection for pharmaceuticals, that governments
may allow manufacturers of generic drugs to use the patented invention for the purpose of
obtaining marketing approval from public authorities; generic producers can then market their
generic versions as soon as the patent expires (WT/DS114/R).

the authorization of

In
The TRIPS Agreement provides safeguards both for the patent owner and third parties.
case of other use without
(compulsory licenses,
government use or dependent licenses), there are a series of conditions ensuring that these
tools are not unduly used against the right holder but also against third parties, including
competitors (Article 31). The flexibility available to Members was confirmed in Doha at the 4th
Ministerial Conference in the context of the Ministerial Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement
and Public Health.

the right holder

The TRIPS Agreement does not give any definition of "invention", "ordre public", "morality",
"plants", "animals", "micro-organisms", etc. Such definitions are mainly left to national laws.
Trying to give a worldwide definition of concepts like morality or ethics would be a daunting
exercise.
It was interesting to note that, during the Uruguay Round, the Swiss delegation
submitted a proposal whereby it mentioned violation of human dignity as a possible ground for
refusing patent protection to an invention.

The discussions in the TRIPS Council

The body in charge of administering the TRIPS Agreement, the TRIPS Council, did examine
certain questions of relevance to the debate in this Round Table. Questions and concerns
were raised in the review exercise under Article 27.3(b) (the “biotechnology provision”).

Issues raised could be grouped in the following categories:

-
-
-
-
-
-

Issues concerning the link between the provisions of Article 27.3(b) and development;
Technical issues relating to patent protection under Article 27.3(b);
Technical issues relating to sui generic protection of plant varieties;
Ethical issues related to the patentability of life-forms;
Relationship to the conservation and sustainable use of genetic material;
Relationship with the concepts of traditional knowledge and farmers’ rights.

88

I will cite a few examples of issues of relevance to our debate here:

-
-

-
-

The question of discovery versus invention;
The lack of novelty in general;
traditional knowledge;
Problems raised by broad claims in certain applications and patents;
Ethical concerns like the ownership of life-forms and commercialisation of life-forms.

the lack of novelty of patent applications involving

While a number of delegations insisted on discussing the issues in the review under Article
27.3(b), others were of the view that certain issues would rather fall in the review under Article
71.1 (provision relating to the review of the implementation of the Agreement).

The debate before Doha in the TRIPS Council will continue.
Issues relating to biotechnology
will be discussed in the regular sessions of the TRIPS Council (as opposed to the Special
Sessions of the TRIPS Council, which will deal with the negotiations on the establishment of a
multilateral system of notification and registration of geographical indications for wines and
spirits). Many of the issues debated before Doha are likely to be brought to the table again.

The Doha Ministerial Declaration (WT/MIN(01)/DEC/1) instructed the TRIPS Council,
in
pursuing its work programme including under the review of Article 27.3(b), the review of Article
71.1, and the work pursuant
the declaration (work related to
implementation the relationship between the TRIPS Agreement and the Convention on
Biological Diversity,
traditional knowledge and folklore, and other new
developments raised by Members under Article 71.1.

to paragraph 12 of

the protection of

on

only

public

focusing

declaration,

health, was

A separate
adopted
((WT/MIN(01)/DEC/2): Members recognize that intellectual property protection is important for
the development of new medicines and reaffirm commitments made in the TRIPS Agreement;
they agree that the TRIPS Agreement does not and should not prevent Members from taking
measures to protect public health;
they reaffirm Members’ right to use to the full, the TRIPS
provisions which provide flexibility for this purpose and this context, and recognize that each
provision must be read in the light of the object and purpose of the Agreement as expressed,
in particular, in its objectives and principles.

also

Ministers also adopted a Decision on Implementation-Related Issues and Concerns
they agree that outstanding
(WT/MIN(01)/17), which says in its paragraph 13 that
implementation issues be addressed in accordance with paragraph 12 of the Ministerial
Declaration; some of the “outstanding implementation issues” raised concern, for example, the
question of patenting of living organisms and their parts.

The GATT / WTO case law

As indicated before, the TRIPS Agreement does not give any definition of ordre public and
morality. Defining concepts like those mentioned is not an easy task, the more so at the
international level; some concepts like ordre public or morality are essentially linked to national
perceptions. This being said, it should be noted that ethical and other concerns are not terra
incognita in the GATT law. Article XX of the GATT 1947, often referred to as the “public order
clause”, reads as follows:

89

“Subject to the requirements that such measures are not applied in a manner which would constitute a means of
arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between countries where the same conditions prevail, or a disguised
the adoption or
restriction on international trade, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent
enforcement by any Member of measures:

(…)

necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or health;

(…)

This exception regarding certain concerns appears in Article 27.2 of the TRIPS Agreement.
It
is interesting to note that the public order or morality clause does not appear in other sections
of the TRIPS Agreement; this does not, however, imply that the concerns do not exist for other
categories of intellectual property rights. Most national
laws on trademarks or industrial
designs for example already contained clauses on public order or morality, some of them well
before the Uruguay Round.

As indicated some moments ago, the dispute settlement mechanism is a GATT / WTO
feature. Although the Appellate Body in the Japan – Alcoholic Beverages case rejected the
panel’s approach that “panel reports adopted by the GATT CONTRACTING PARTIES and the
WTO Dispute Settlement Body constitute subsequent practice in a specific case” as the
phrase “subsequent practice” is used in Article 31(3)(b) of the Vienna Convention on the Law
of Treaties, the Appellate Body held that “Adopted” panels reports are an important part of the
GATT acquis. They are often considered by subsequent panels. They create legitimate
expectations among WTO Members, and, therefore, should be taken into account where they
are relevant to any dispute. However, they are binding, except with respect to resolving the
It is interesting
particular dispute between the parties to that dispute.” (WT/DS8,10,11/AB/R).
to note that the same body commented that non-adopted panel reports had no binding effects
but could nevertheless serve as “useful guidance”. All these elements are interesting for the
debate here. So far, there is no case before the Dispute Settlement Body regarding Article
27.2, Article 27.3(b) or Article 27 in general in relation to biotechnology2. Cases dealing with
notions like public order or morality and which might help us to better understand the issue are
under the GATT 1947, whether in the field of health under the Agreement on the Application of
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS) or in the field of environment. The first step in
applying GATT Article XX exceptions is to identify whether the policy pursued through the
measure falls within the range of policies designed to protect human, animal or plant life or
health.

The second step consists in determining whether the specific requirements under Article XX
(b) are met. Such an examination comprises the elements of “necessary” for paragraph (b) of
that Article.
In the Thailand – Cigarettes case (dispute between the United States and
Thailand), the panel said that Article XX (b) clearly allowed contracting parties to give priority
to human health over trade liberalization” (BISD 37S/200, panel report, para. 73). The
conclusions of a panel, upheld by the Appellate Body, in a more recent case, the EC - Abestos
case, went in the same direction (WT/DS135). Paragraph (b) of Article XX requires the
performance of what has been commonly referred to as a “necessity test”: measures must be
necessary to “protect human, animal or plant life and health". The examination of what could
be necessary is a crucial step in panel practice. A requirement of so-called “least-trade
restrictiveness” was established to decide whether a measure was necessary under Article XX
(b). One may say that there has been some evolution in the interpretation of the necessity
requirement of Article XX (b); it has evolved from a least-trade restrictive approach to a less-
restrictive one, supplemented with a proportionality test (“a process of weighing and balancing
It is noteworthy that the TRIPS public order or morality clause also uses
a series of factors”).
there has not been any case yet with regard to
the necessity test. As said earlier,

2 See “update of WTO Dispute Settlement Cases” available at www.to.org

90

biotechnology in relation to Article 27.1, 27.2 or 27.3. One may wonder whether the “case
law” regarding Article XX could not serve as guidance, including for the test of proportionality.

Final remarks

Could the TRIPS Agreement give clear-cut replies to the concerns raised in the context of the
debate in this Roundtable?

- First, it should be recalled that it is a treaty containing minimum level of protection. Nothing
prevents Members from granting more extensive protection if it does not contravene the
TRIPS provisions.
- Second, the relevant provisions are drafted in a general way, with some flexibility (see for
example the “may” provisions); they would need interpretation, which can only be given by
panels.

As said earlier, the TRIPS provisions on patent appear to offer enough room for Members.
Diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical methods for the treatment of humans and animals can be
excluded from patent protection.

territory of

the prevention within their

inventions, it is possible for Members to
With regard to the patenting of biotechnological
exclude from patent protection “inventions,
the
commercial exploitation of which is necessary to protect ordre public or morality, including to
protect human, animal or plant life or health or to avoid serious prejudice to the environment,
provide that such exclusion is not made merely because the exploitation is prohibited by law.”
This key provision already appeared in a number of national laws and in international treaties
like the European Patent Convention. After the expiration of
the transition period for
developing countries, there will be more laws containing such provisions. Experience will
show how this type of clause is being applied in countries. To my knowledge, some laws –
among them, certain having this provision well before the TRIPS Agreement was negotiated -
have interpreted this type of clause so as to allow ethical considerations to be taken into
In some countries, human - or to some extent too animal - dignity is a consideration
account.
that
in the course of examination or challenges of patent
is being taken into account
applications or patents in some countries.

Before tackling the issue within the framework of the WTO and the TRIPS Agreement, one
may wish to ask which aspect of the debate relating to the use of stem cells is strictly IP-
related or is more general, i.e. linked to the general perception regarding life-forms, their use
and possible abuses in the exploitation. Could and should the patent system be the only key
to the problems raised?

Another point to consider is whether the existing TRIPS provisions, including the ordre public
or morality clause, or the limited exceptions under Article 30, do not already offer the
necessary safeguards and flexibility for countries.

Another important question relates to the definitions of concepts like “ordre public”, “morality”,
etc.: could or should they be “crystallised” in a treaty like the TRIPS Agreement? Is this
feasible?

It seems that the TRIPS provisions already offer enough flexibility to Members, who can
regulations and practices, according to their
determine these concepts in their
It is hoped that on certain basic issues involving
sensitiveness and domestic perceptions.

laws,

91

life-forms, there will be a growing understanding on certain common denominators which
In any event, it is of
might be accepted as yardsticks. However, this might take some time.
utmost importance that Research & Development into new therapies or drugs continue to be
encouraged, that the patent system continues to play its role of incentive. Erosion of the
patent system may result in pushing researchers into secrecy, thus depriving the society of the
knowledge which forms part of the "social contract". On the other hand important concerns by
the society, including those of ethical dimension, should be taken into consideration. Both
objectives are not mutually exclusive.

92

THE WORLD TRADE ORGANISATION

Information note

========================================

This text has been prepared
by Agueda Ollero Montiel (EGE Secretariat)

93

94

The World Trade Organisation

Information note1

international organisation
The World Trade Organisation (WTO) is the only global
dealing with the rules of trade between nations. The WTO came into force in 1995 and
was created following Uruguay negotiations (1986-94).
It is the successor of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), established in 1947, in the wake of the Second
World War.

The WTO has 144 membership. The decisions are made by entire membership. Their
purpose is to help producers of goods and services, exporters and importers to conduct their
business.

The WTO’s top-level decision making body is the Ministerial Conference, which meets every
two years. The last two meetings were held in Seattle in 1999 and in Qatar in 2001.

The heart of the WTO are the agreements, negotiated and signed by a large majority of the
world’s trading nations and ratified by their parliaments. These agreements are the legal
ground-rules for international commerce. Essentially, they are contracts, guaranteeing to the
member countries important trade rights. They also bind governments to keep their trade
policies within agreed limits to everybody’s benefit.

The General Agreements on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), revised during the 1986-1994 Uruguay
Round, is now the WTO’s principal rule book for trade in goods. The Uruguay Round also
created new rules namely for dealing with intellectual property.

The WTO’s Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS2),
which came into force on the first January 1995, is to date the most comprehensive
multilateral agreement on intellectual property.

The WTO’s intellectual property agreement fixes the rules for trade and investment in ideas
and creativity. The rules state how for example patents should be protected when trade is
involved.

The agreement also describes the minimum rights that a patent owner must enjoy. But it also
allows certain exceptions. Governments can refuse to issue a patent for an invention if they
have prohibited for reasons of public order or morality (art. 27.2).

The Doha Declaration of the Fourth Ministerial Conference in November 2001 concerning in
particular TRIPS and public health stresses that it is important to implement and interpret the
TRIPS Agreement in a way that supports public health, by promoting both access to existing
medicines and the creation of new ones. They refer to their separate declaration on this
subject.

1 Note prepared by Agueda Ollero Montiel (EGE secretariat).
2 TRIPS: Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights.

95

This separate declaration sets out two specific tasks: The TRIPS Council commitment to
address the problem that countries with too little or no pharmaceutical manufacturing capacity
may face for compulsory licensing and the extension of the deadline for applying provisions on
pharmaceutical patents until 1st January 2016 for the least developed countries.

96

WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ORGANISATION

97

98

Nuno Pires de CARVALHO

Head, Genetic Resources,

Biotechnology and Associated Traditional Knowledge Section
Global Intellectual Property Issues Division
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)

The Budapest Treaty

and its Applicability to Human Stem Lines;

the WIPO Approach on Ethical Issues

========================================

Hearing of scientific experts
organised by the European Group on Ethics
in Science and New Technologies, 8 January 2002

99

100

The Budapest Treaty and its Applicability to Human Stem Lines
the WIPO Approach on Ethical Issues

Summary1 of Mr Nuno Pires de Carvalho’s presentation during the Hearing
of scientific experts organised by the EGE on January 8, 2002

1.
In the first place, WIPO should like to thank the European Group on Ethics in Science
and New Technologies for having being invited to participate in this discussion. WIPO, being
the United Nations’ specialised agency on intellectual property, has the main objective of
promoting the protection of intellectual property throughout the world through co-operation
among States and, where appropriate,
international
organization. In order to attain that objective, the Convention that established WIPO has
assigned to it the mandatory function of promoting the development of measures designed to
facilitate the efficient protection of intellectual property throughout the world and to harmonise
national legislation in this field.

in collaboration with any other

2.
It should be clarified at the outset that WIPO’s role is not to increase intellectual
property protection at any cost, but to develop ways to facilitate its efficient protection. Efficient
protection of intellectual property, it goes without saying, is not necessarily the same as
increasing and expanding protection to areas where protection is not socially useful or
necessary. This is why, despite WIPO Treaties’ silence on ethical issues, it is so important for
WIPO and its Member States to engage in a constructive discussion on possible social
intellectual property protection. A precise and correct
constraints on the expansion of
identification of those constraints may indeed be a powerful tool to assist WIPO and its
Member States to draw a line between efficient and inefficient intellectual property protection.

3.
Before focusing on ethical matters, let me briefly take on the issue of the applicability
of the Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the Deposit of Micro-organisms for
the Purposes of Patent Procedure, of April 28, 1977, as amended on September 26, 1980, to
inventions involving human stem cells.

4.
The Budapest Treaty contains a practical solution to a basic problem generated by
patent law requirements in the biotechnological field, namely the requirement that the details
of an invention must be fully disclosed to the public, so as to permit a person skilled in the art
to carry out the invention.
In other words, the disclosure should enable the average expert
with access to the appropriate facilities to reproduce the invention for him/herself. Disclosure
is normally achieved by means of a written description supplemented where necessary by
drawings. However, inventions involving the use of new micro-organisms present problems of
disclosure in that repeatability often cannot be ensured by means of a written description
alone. This has led to the industrial property offices in an increasing number of countries to
either require or recommend that the written disclosure of an invention involving the use of a
new micro-organism be supplemented by the deposit of the micro-organism in a recognized
culture collection. The culture collection would then make the micro-organism available to the
public at the appropriate stage in the patenting procedure.

1 Summary prepared by the Secretariat of
Technologies to the European Commission).

the EGE (European Group on Ethics in Sciences and New

101

This was the practical solution adopted by the Budapest Treaty, under which certain culture
collections are recognized as international depository authorities (IDAs) and that a deposit
made with any one of them shall be recognized as valid for patent purposes by all the
countries in which protection for the relevant invention has been sought.

that

It should be emphasized that

is exclusively operational, rather

this particular background has given rise to an
5.
agreement
the
Budapest Treaty does not care about basic principles or concepts of patent law, but rather
about how to handle deposits of micro-organisms for the single purpose of disclosure. For this
reason, the Treaty does not even provide for a definition of “micro-organisms”; instead it
contains a carefully devised definition of “deposit of a micro-organism” (Article 2(ii)) and it
establishes how to grant “recognition and effect to the deposit of micro-organisms” (Article
3(1)).

than conceptual.

In other words,

6.
This means that, on the one hand, Contracting States and IDAs are free to adopt their
own definition of micro-organism, which, within reasonable scientific notions, may be more or
less restrictive.

7.
Furthermore, under Rule 3 of the Treaty, IDAs may limit their acceptance of micro-
organisms, provided that the kinds accepted are indicated to WIPO’s Director General. Lists of
accepted micro-organisms may also be extended, provided the respective Contracting State
also extends its assurances to the extended kinds of micro-organisms. Finally, under Rule 6,
refusal of deposits is mandatory only

a) where assurances have not been provided to the kind of micro-organism for which

a deposit is sought;

b) where the properties of the micro-organism are so exceptional that the IDA is not in

a position to perform the tasks under the Treaty and the Regulations; and

c) where the deposit is received in a condition which clearly indicates that the micro-
organism is missing or which precludes for scientific reasons the acceptance of the micro-
organism. In other words, IDAs are not under the obligation of refusing the deposit of material
where its nature may not correspond exactly to the scientific concept of a micro-organism.

8.
The fact that the term “micro-organism” is not defined in the Treaty, and having in
view that IDAs are not obliged to refuse the deposit of material that may not necessarily
correspond to the generally accepted definition of micro-organism, leads to the conclusion that
the term may be interpreted in a broad sense. In fact, IDAs in several Contracting States (such
as Belgium, Canada, China, Germany, France, the United Kingdom and the United States)
have stated that they accept the deposit of human cell lines under the terms of the Budapest
Treaty, even though they are not micro-organisms in the strict sense of the word. Of course,
given that the acceptance of specific material depends on the availability of technical means
and facilities to receive, handle and store biological material, it happens that within the same
Contracting State not all IDAs may be capable of accepting such deposits.

9.
Having said this, I should draw your attention to the note contained in the WIPO’s
Guide to the Deposit of Micro-organisms under the Budapest Treaty, according to which
whether an entity technically is or is not a micro-organism matters less in practice than
whether deposit of that entity is necessary for the purposes of disclosure and whether an IDA
will accept it. In other words, the Budapest Treaty’s operational solution is already available for
those countries whose patent law provides for the patentability in the field of human stem
cells, having in mind that some IDAs have indeed opted for accepting the deposit of such
material. However, where a country’s patent law fails to provide for that protection, the
possibility of depositing human stem cells with some IDAs is of no relevance for that same
country.

102

Besides, the decision of requiring the deposit of human cells resides ultimately, as explained
above, in the explicit language of patent law. Where patent law establishes that the description
of stem cells shall be completed by the competent deposit, the application of the Budapest
Treaty naturally comes to order. But where such a requirement is not imposed, the deposit
shall not be even necessary.

the Paris Convention for the Protection of

Turning now to the WIPO’s approach to ethical issues, it should be noted that, under
10.
Article 2 of
Industrial Property, Paris Union
Members are obliged to accord to nationals2 of other Union Members the same treatment as
they accord to their own citizens. Unlike WTO Members, who are obliged to accord to other
WTO Members’ nationals the TRIPS minimum standards even where they fail to accord those
same standards to their own nationals, if a Union Member does not accord some sort of rights
to its own nationals, that Member is entitled to treat other Members’ nationals likewise.

11.
Of course, this aspect is important only to the extent that it may provide a legal
argument for Paris Union Members that are not WTO Members, and which may be seeking to
reduce patent protection. However, it does not explain whether WIPO Member States should
be concerned in addressing ethical issues by means of patent-related legislative measures.

The debate – which, both in WIPO and other international fora, is far from being

12.
exhausted – is based on two common perceptions:
a)

firstly, there are some areas of knowledge into which scientific research should not
venture; speaking figuratively, there is – or there should be – a gate somewhere over
which the old paradigm nec plus ultra is prominently displayed as a warning that wizard’s
apprentices should not dare to trespass;

b) secondly, given that patents are incentives to invent, patent protection should be denied in
those areas beyond that gate, so that researchers and inventors should feel discouraged
to trespass it3.

13.
Unfortunately, the second perception is partly mistaken. Patents, actually, are titles of
private property and, therefore, only promote inventions in the private sector and only where
competitive market conditions prevail.
In sectors where governments do play an important
role, either because of their direct intervention or as a result of the grant of public subsidies,
patents have no relevance whatsoever.
Internalization of costs, in those cases, is obtained
the lack of patent
through taxation mechanisms, not
protection shall not discourage either basic research or applied research by public or
government-sponsored institutions, such as universities.

through prices. This means that

2 The concept of nationals of Paris Union countries extend, under the rule of assimilation established by Article 3
of the Paris Convention, to nationals of countries outside the Union who are domiciled or who have real and
affective industrial or commercial establishments in the territory of one of the countries of the Union.
3 Another common perception is that patents for biotechnological inventions lead to the private appropriation of
life. Nothing could be more wrong. Patents cover inventions, which are practical solutions for technical
problems. Patens permit the appropriation of those practical solutions, i.e., of the ideas, and not of the material
that embodies the solutions or ideas. Furthermore, patent law is not about capturing solutions that have been
developed by nature itself: it is about appropriating ideas created by human inventiveness which aim at solving
specific, previously identified technical problems. Unfortunately, the misuse of the patent system by some
entrepreneurs and the misguided interpretation of patent law by some patent offices have created the impression
that patents allow investors in the biotechnological field to claim property rights in genes that those investors
have merely identified and whose purpose they do not even know. Of course, it will take sometime until courts
and parliaments correct those misuses, thus reestablishing public confidence in the patent system.

103

14.
In its landmark opinion, delivered by Chief Justice Berger, in Diamond v. Chakrabarty
(447 U.S. 303, 1980), the United States Supreme Court unequivocally subscribed to that view.
Justice Berger wrote:

“The grant or denial of patents on micro-organisms is not likely to put an end to
genetic research or to its attendant risks. The large amount of research that has
already occurred when no researcher had sure knowledge that patent protection
would be available suggests that legislative or judicial fiat as to patentability will not
deter the scientific mind from probing into the unknown any more than Canute could
command the tides.” (447 U.S. 303, at 317)

Therefore, elimination of public incentives is surely a much more powerful deterrent
15.
It was not a coincidence
against unethical basic research than exclusion from patentability.
that the recent debate in the United States on stem cell research focused exclusively on
publicly funded research (in a nutshell, the US administration denied access to public funds for
unwanted research on material the preparation of which requires the production (and the
destruction) of new embryos).

16.
Likewise, it is not patent protection alone that will encourage the private sector to
engage in R&D in a given economic activity that is controlled by a state monopoly or on a
market where barriers to entry guarantee the possibility of collusion among private
entrepreneurs.

On the other hand, even as far as the private sector is concerned, it should be noted
17.
that patent protection is just one mechanism among others for private investors in R&D to
internalize costs and appropriate gains. Patents do compete directly with trade secret
protection, where knowledge is susceptible of being kept secret, and other indirect means of
appropriation, such as existing barriers to entry, brand loyalty, exclusive dealership, etc.

Thus, to prohibit market access is much more effective in preventing the private
if

18.
sector from engaging in unethical research than denying access to patents – which,
commercial exploitation is prohibited, are meaningless pieces of printed paper.

19.
This does not mean, however, that WIPO sees this debate as being irrelevant.
Actually, as said above, WIPO cannot recommend unrestrained patentability because of its
mandate to seek efficient intellectual property protection. The very issuance of patents
represents a commitment of scarce social resources to the activities of patent offices in
the enforcement of
handling, processing and examining patent applications. Moreover,
patents for socially undesirable, unethical inventions represents an additional engagement of
resources that might otherwise be diverted to the enforcement of more useful areas of law.
In
many countries, on the other hand, patent offices must be subsidized because national
inventors cannot afford the fees that patent offices should charge in order to cover the
respective administrative costs.
In those countries patents, therefore, represent a burden
which society carries in exchange of the expectation of gains in inventive activity, creation of
new businesses and job opportunities, transfer of technology, etc. Of course, patents for
unethical inventions.

104

That society, in the first place, did not wish to be developed are not a burden – they are
indeed a waste of social resources. For this single reason, patents for unethical inventions
should be made unavailable, not so as to discourage their creation – because primarily,
patents do not work like that – but in order to avoid the waste of social resources in protecting
and enforcing those same unethical inventions.

20.
On a different but related issue, recent scientific advances in research on human stem
cells have dramatically increased the importance of looking anew to the matter of patenting
therapeutic methods. With the exception of one or two countries, therapeutic methods have
consistently been held non-patentable subject matter. The reason generally indicated for that
legal solution is based on professional ethics – therapeutic methods have traditionally been
scrutinized by peer review, not by patent offices, and the inventors’ colleagues should
naturally be entitled to share the inventions. Actually, the true reason for the lack of patent
protection in the field of therapeutic methods (or for the immunity against patent infringement,
as established in the United States a few years ago) lies somewhere else. Therapeutic
methods, as well as diagnostic and surgical methods, are, with a very few exceptions,
individual procedures whose success depends much more on the individual skills of doctors or
surgeons than on the methods themselves.
In other words, therapeutic methods are not to be
mass applied (even where they are repeatedly applied), which characteristic confines their
economic relevance to the extremely narrow market of the few patients of a given doctor or
surgeon. Therefore, it is not necessary to patent those methods in order to appropriate them.
Creative doctors and surgeons shall be paid through increased professional prestige and
higher fees4.

21.
However, recent advances in biotechnology increase the importance of therapies and
methods, especially as far as regenerative medicine is concerned. Both gene therapy and
therapeutic transplantation tend to become standardized and repetitive procedures, and,
therefore, they tend to be no longer performed individually by doctors and surgeons in their
private offices, but rather become mass-used methods. Therapies in the biotechnology field,
therefore, may become as economically important as the biotechnological products
themselves, and thus have an economic role to perform on the market – rather than, allow me
to repeat,
Inventors of mass-used
individual doctors and surgeons.
biotechnological therapeutic methods will no longer be able to internalize R&D costs through
individual prestige and fees.
If society is interested in promoting inventive activities of private
companies in the field of biotechnological therapeutic methods, the time may come soon for a
review of the scope of patent protection.

in the offices of

4 Mutatis mutandis this also explains why patents are not granted for recipes, in spite of the fact that recipes are
nothing else than literary expressions of chemical formula (and that, incidentally, that recipes were the subject
matter of protection of the first patent law ever adopted, in the Greek colony of Sybaris, in the 6th century b.C.).
Like therapeutic methods, the success of recipes depends on the individual skills of chefs, whose gains will stem
from one or two additional stars in some cuisine guide, an expanded clientele, and higher prices, of course.
Recipes, like therapeutic methods, do not need patent protection to be privately appropriated.

105

106

THE WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ORGANISATION

Information note

========================================

This text has been prepared
by Agueda Ollero Montiel (EGE Secretariat)

107

108

The World intellectual property organisation

Information note1

The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) was created in 1974. The WIPO is one
of the 16 specialized agencies of the United Nations system of organizations with a
mandate to administer intellectual property matters recognized by the Member States of
the UN.

The WIPO is the successor of
the Protection of
Intellectual Property (BIRPI) created in 1893 from the union of the Paris Convention for the
Protection of Industrial Property and the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literacy and
Artistic Works.

the United International Bureaux for

The WIPO is intended to promote the use and protection of intellectual property worldwide.

The organization counts 178 memberships.
Intellectual protection is divided in 2 categories:
industrial property which includes inventions (patents), trademarks, industrial designs and
geographic indications of source and copyright which covers literary and artistic works.

The value of the WIPO’s program of work was enhanced by the entry into force of the
TRIPS2 Agreements on January 1st 1995, which opened a new concept in the protection
and enforcement of intellectual property rights.
Later on, on January 1st 1996 an
agreement between the WIPO and the WTO provided for co-operation concerning the
implementation of the TRIPS Agreement (notification of laws and regulations, legal, technical
assistance and co-operation to developing countries).

The WIPO administers 23 treaties (16 on industrial property and 6 on copyright, plus the
convention creating WIPO).

Under the Global Protection System Treaties, The Budapest Treaty, done in Budapest on
April 28, 1977 and amended on September 26, 1980, establishes the international recognition
of the deposit of microorganisms for the purposes of patent procedure.

1 Note prepared by Agueda Ollero Montiel (EGE Secretariat).
2 TRIPS : Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights.

109

110

POINT OF VIEW FROM AN INDUSTRIAL

REPRESENTATIVE

111

112

Philippe BOUVET

Aventis Pharma S.A., Direction des Brevets

POINT OF VIEW FROM AN INDUSTRIAL REPRESENTATIVE

Are the rules for patenting drugs applicable to human stem cells?

========================================

Hearing of scientific experts
Organised by the European Group on Ethics
In Science and New Technologies, 4 September 2001, in Brussels

113

114

Are the rules for patenting drugs applicable
to human stem cells?

Summary1 of Mr Bouvet’s presentation during the hearing of
scientific experts organised by the European Group on Ethics
In Science and New Technologies, 4 September 2001, in Brussels

Vision of industrial property practitioners and, in particular, industry practitioners.

Outline of speech:

1. Current provisions concerning the acquisition and exercising of rights, more specifically in

the pharmaceutical field;

2. Possible claims based on issued patents or patent applications;

3. Chief perceived obstacles to patentability of stem cells and the reasons why, in our view,

these do not apply;

4. Conclusion and recommendations regarding the patentability of stem cells.

1. Current provisions concerning the acquisition and exercising of rights, more
specifically in the pharmaceutical field

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

According to Article 52 of the European Patent Convention, patentable inventions must be
new, involve an inventive step and be susceptible of industrial application.

Methods for treatment (by surgery or therapy) are not patentable in Europe, the aim being
to ensure that doctors and veterinary surgeons are not prevented from carrying out their
activities.

These provisions can be found in France, in the national
countries and in the European Patent Convention.

law of the other European

The situation is different in the United States, where treatment methods can be patented.

1 Summary prepared by the Secretariat of
Technologies to the European Commission).

the EGE (European Group on Ethics in Sciences and New

115

(cid:1)

The following are patentable in Europe:

The products themselves;
Compositions containing those products, in particular formulations;
Feedstocks derived from those products;
The processes whereby those products are obtained.

(cid:1)

The following are not patentable:

Treatment methods (whereas they are in the USA).

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

the European Patent Convention concern the patentability of
Other provisions of
therapeutic use of substances, whether this concerns the first or second use. Claims of
this type are difficult to interpret in France or elsewhere in Europe.
In addition, their
validity could be called into question, particularly in France (as happened in a Court of
Cassation judgement).

Specific provisions on applications concerning biotechnological inventions are set out in
Directive 98/44/EC, which has been incorporated into the regulations implementing the
Convention on the Grant of European Parents.

They should be incorporated into national law. They have been in some instances but for
the time being certain countries (France in particular) have refused to incorporate them.

Thus isolated elements of
the human body may constitute a patentable invention
(Article 5(2) of the Directive). There are also specific provisions concerning the deposit of
biological material (Article 13 of the Directive) which may apply in certain particular cases.

Current European legislation concerning the exercising of patent rights:

Patents do not confer power to take action but to prevent action.

Applied in a pharmaceutical context,
authorisation for marketing drugs is necessary for them to be launched on the market.

this means that

irrespective of

the patent, an

The rights granted by patents are limited:
they enable well-defined actions to be
prohibited. Exceptions to the banned actions can be found in the national law of various
countries: patent rights do not extend to actions carried out on an experimental basis.
In
addition, various mandatory licences may be required by third parties:
(cid:2)

For example, mandatory licences exist in cases of non-exploitation or the marketing of
insufficient quantities, or even in cases where exploitation rights are discarded;

There are also automatic licences if
(Article L613-16);

this is in the interest of public health

There are also processing licences where a processing patent depends for its
exploitation on a third-party patent (Article L613-11).

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

All
the above provisions (experimental exemptions as well as mandatory licences) are
safeguards against an exorbitant patent monopoly. They apply to "classic" drugs and can be
applied to any other patented product or method, for example stem cells.

116

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2. Possible claims based on patents issued or applied for

I have attempted to draw up a list of types of stem cell which we could consider protecting:
adult stem cells, embryo stem cells, stem cells derived from therapeutic cloning or families of
cells, foetal stem cells, etc.

Various recently published articles suggest to me that there is no certainty vis-à-vis stem cells
which could be used subsequently for therapeutic purposes. Scientific opinion is divided as to
the cell type which would eventually be used.

One of the main problems concerns the rejection of transplanted cells by the recipient.

This list shows that for each cell type, specific problems will arise in scientific terms and in
terms of patents.
It is difficult to gain an overall vision of the patent-related problems arising
for all the stem cells envisaged.

Possible types of claim:

Product claims:

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

Human cells characterised by their cell composition;

Composition comprising human stem cells and an additive (Biocyte patent);

Families of cells.

"Therapeutic" claims:

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

Compositions comprising human stem cells to be used as medicine;

Use of a composition comprising human stem cells to produce medicine for the treatment
of a given illness.

Claims relating to production methods for stem cells:

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

Enrichment or isolation methods;

Methods to maintain these stem cells in vitro;

Conservation methods.

A final possible type is the use of stem cells as a research tool or as a screening tool for small
molecules (chemical molecules). These stem cells are used to determine whether a given
component has an effect on a family of cells or a composition of stem cells.

117

3. Chief perceived obstacles to patentability of stem cells and the reasons why, in our
view, these do not apply

I have tried to list the obstacles to the patentability of human stem cells which have been
raised, and particularly those which have been discussed in the media.

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

The lack of established families of cells which can be used for therapeutic purposes. This
is a technical obstacle but one which has legal implications.

According to the scientific press, one of
the problems of human stem cells is that
individuals may reject them. Legal implications arise in so far as the only product which
could be protected would be a composition of stem cells defined e.g. by its cell
composition.

Another technical problem which could have legal
immune
rejection is that the human stem cells could be prepared from an individual. What would
be the impact of patent protection (the operation would be carried out in a hospital and it
would be difficult to take action against the doctors)?

implications by virtue of

CCL:

protection as a product of human stem cells seems to me to be relatively difficult.

The preparation methods for these stem cells could be patented. Under European law, claims
to methods cover the products directly obtained from methods. However, it is difficult to
In general, patent protection of
demonstrate that method X was used to produce product Y.
methods is more difficult to exercise than protection via product patents.

(cid:1)

Article 6(2) of the Directive is another potential obstacle (but I do not see it as such for the
reasons I have mentioned):

According to this article, the following are considered non-patentable:

Processes for cloning human beings;

Processes for modifying the germ line genetic identity of human beings;

Uses of human embryos for industrial or commercial purposes.

My fear (which is shared by the companies involved in this research on human stem cells) is
that this article will be interpreted broadly.
(cid:2)

It is a feature of French case law that such provisions must be considered on a restrictive
basis. Exceptions must be interpreted strictly.

(cid:2)

Which means that:

with regard to Article 6(2)(a), therapeutic cloning methods cannot be excluded on the
grounds that they might give rise to reproductive cloning, for they are just one of the
stages of reproductive cloning;

with regard to Article 6(2)(c): Isolated preparations of embryo stem cells cannot be
considered as non-patentable. This article concerns trade in embryos rather than
isolated cells.

118

-
-
-
-
-
4. Conclusion and recommendations regarding the patentability of stem cells

The question was: are the rules for patenting traditional medicines applicable to human cells?

My opinion is that:

general patents law can apply to human stem cells especially since the rules for
patentability are complemented by specific rules on the protection of biological materials;

but the degree of protection which these patents afford would depend on the type of
human stem cells used;

in addition, other provisions on the protection of classic drugs apply, with the obstacles
associated with the lack of protection for treatment methods in Europe (unlike the USA).

¤ We need to understand that the protection provided by patents in Europe is regarded as
more limited than that provided in the USA because of the non-patentability of treatment
methods and the difficulty for patent owners to enforce their rights on method patents.

Further restrictions on the protection of inventions relating to stem cells would, at most,
encourage firms which have invested in this field to keep their research findings secret or
even to lose interest
in them altogether, and therefore would have very negative
consequences for the public health care system.

On the other hand, effective patent protection would certainly stimulate research in this field.
¤ We feel that it would be unjustified for several reasons to limit protection by incorporating

ethical considerations into patent legislation:

the patents field has its own "ethical" rules which are not found in general law;

patents are not an operating licence;

ethical problems may be linked to social problems and may evolve over time; clearly, it is
not desirable for the protection of costly investments to be linked to such changes.

Recommendations

Stem cells should be considered as patentable inventions.

It should be clearly stated that Article 6(2) of
patentability of stem cells or the methods used to prepare them.

the Directive does not apply to the

119

-
-
-
¤
-
-
-
¤
¤
120

= ANNEX

=

121

AGENDA OF THE ROUND TABLE

Organised by the European Group on Ethics

“ETHICAL ASPECTS OF PATENTING INVENTIONS
INVOLVING HUMAN STEM CELLS”

Tuesday 20 November 2001, Brussels

10.00

Welcome by Mrs Noëlle LENOIR, President of the European Group on Ethics

10.10

10.40

11.10

“Preliminary results of a study on the patenting of inventions
related to human stem cell research”
Prof. Geertrui VAN OVERWALLE, Professor of Law, University of Leuven

“Preliminary results of a study on the ethical aspects of patenting life”
Prof. Daniel KEVLES, Professor of History, Yale University

“Intellectual Property and Access Issues on Stem Cell Technology”
Dr. Maria FREIRE, Global Alliance for TB Drug Development, USA

11.40

Discussion

13.00

14.30

14.50

15.10

15.30

~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ L U N C H ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

The TRIPPS agreements
Ms Thu-Lang TRAN WASESCHA, World Trade Organisation

The approach of the European Patent Office
Mr André REMOND, Director, European Patent Office, Munich

“Human stem cells from blood cord”
Prof. Eliane GLUCKMAN, Professor of Haematology,
Department of Bone Marrow Graft, St Louis Hospital, Paris

“Cryoconservation of blood cord stem cell:
perspective of a service provider”
Marc WAETERSCHOOT and Dr Christine BRUNAUD, Cryo-Cell Europe

15.50

Discussion

17.00

End of the Round Table

123

124

LIST OF THE PARTICIPANTS TO THE ROUND TABLE

Organised by the European Group on Ethics

“ETHICAL ASPECTS OF PATENTING INVENTIONS

INVOLVING HUMAN STEM CELLS”

Tuesday 20 November 2001, Brussels

125

Speakers

Dr Christine BRUNAUD
Cryo-Cell Europe

Prof. Eliane GLUCKMAN
Department of Bone Marrow Graft,
St Louis Hospital Paris

Prof. Daniel KEVLES
Yale University

Ms Maria FREIRE
National Institute of Health, USA

Mr André REMOND
European Patent Office

Ms Thu-Lang TRAN WASESCHA
World Trade Organisation

Prof. Geertrui VAN OVERWALLE
University of Leuven

Mr Marc Jan WAETERSCHOOT
Cryo-Cell Europe

Members of the European Group on Ethics

Ms Noëlle LENOIR, President
Former Justice of the French
Constitutional Court (1992-2001)

Mr Göran HERMERÉN, Vice-President,
Philosopher, Professor of Medical Ethics,
Faculty of medicine, Lund University

Ms Inez DE BEAUFORT
Professor of Health Care Ethics,
Medical Faculty of the Erasmus
University, Rotterdam

Mr Rafael CAPURRO
Professor of Information Management
and Information Ethics at
Fachhochschule Stuttgart, Hochschule
der Medien, University of Applied
Sciences

Mr Yvon ENGLERT
Head of Fertility Clinic, Free University of
Brussels (ULB), Professor of Medical
Ethics and Deontology

127

Ms Anne McLAREN
Geneticist, Research Associate at
Wellcome CRC Institute, Cambridge

Ms Linda NIELSEN
Professor of Law, University of
Copenhagen

Mr Pere PUIGDOMÈNECH ROSELL
Research Professor, Department for
Molecular Genetics, Director of Institut de
Biologia Molecular de Barcelona, CSIC

Mr Stefano RODOTA
Professor of Civil Law, University of Rome,
Chairman of the Italian Data Protection
Authority, Chairman of the European Group
of the Data Protection Authorities

Mr Günter VIRT
Professor of Theology, Institut of Catholic
Moral Theology, University of Vienna

Mr Peter WHITTAKER
Biologist, Professor of Biology, Head of the
Biology Department, National University of
Ireland, Maynooth

Secretariat of
the EGE

Ms Christiane BARDOUX

Ms Marie CHIROL

Ms Agueda OLLERO MONTIEL

Ms Marina PATRIARKA

European Commission

Ms Alexandra BITUSIKOVA, DG Research

Mr Didier BOUIS, DG Entreprise

Ms Roswitha BRAUCKMANN-JACKSON, SDT

Ms Paola DI PIETROGIACOMO, JRC

Mr Jean-Luc GAL, DG Internal Market

Mr Bruno HANSEN, DG Research

Ms Anna KARAOGLOU, DG Research

Mr Waldemar KÜTT, DG Research

Mr Antonio LACERDA DE QUEIROZ,
DG Entreprise

Ms Line MATTHIESSEN, DG Research

Ms Barbara RHODE, DG Research

Ms Carmelita STOFFELS, DG Research

European Parliament

Mr Jean-Marie DEHOUSSE
MEP

Ms Geneviève FRAISSE
MEP

Mr Robert GOEBBELS
MEP

Ms Helene HALDORF ROMERO
Assistant to MEP Lenart Sacredens

Mr Gordon LAKE
DG Research

Mr Dan LESKIEN
Adviser

Ms Emilie MAZZACURATI
Assistant to MEP Didier Rod

Mr Steve McGIFFEN
MEP

Ms Emilia MÜLLER
MEP

Mr John PURVIS
MEP

Ms Evelyn WALDHERR
MEP

Mr Jonathan EVANS
MEP

International Organisations

Mr Massimo CORSI
European Patent Office, Brussels Office

Ms Orio IKEBE
UNESCO, Division of Human Sciences,
Philosophy and Ethics of Science and
Technology, France

National Instances

Ms Andrea ARZ DE FALCO
Ethics Committee on Non-Human Gene
Technology, Suisse

Ms Maureen DALZIEL
Human Fertilisation Embryology Authority, United
Kingdom

Mr Frank DEMEYERE
Cabinet du Commissaire du Gouvernement
belge
adjoint au Ministre de la recherche
scientifique, Yvan Ylieff

Ms Hélène GAUMONT-PRAT
Comité Consultatif National d’Ethique, France

Mr Jean-Paul HARPES
Commission Nationale Consultative d’Ethique du
Luxembourg

Mr Markus ROTHHAAR
Assistant to MEP Evelyne Gebhardt

Mr Gilbert HOTTOIS
Comité consultatif de bioéthique de Belgique

Ms Mathilda ROTKIVCH
Assistant to MEP Astrid Thors

Ms Sally TAYLOR
Assistant to MEP John Purvis

Ms Astrid THORS
MEP

Ms Anne LYRRESKOV
Danish Council of Ethics

Mr Octavi QUINTANA TRIAS
Ministry of Health and Consumer Affairs, Spain

Ms Isabel SERINA
Spanish Patent and Trade Mark Office

128

Ms Ann-Charlotte SMEDLER
National Council on Medical Ethics, Sweden

Ms Marja SORSA
Nordic Committee on Bioethics, Finland

Erling TIEDEMANN
Danish Council of Ethics

Ms Ariane WILLEMSEN
Ethics Committee on Non-Human Gene
Technology, Suisse

Representatives of industry

Mr Philippe BOUVET
Aventis Pharma, France

Mr Giampiero DE LUCA
Serono International, Switzerland

Mr Paul HERRLING
Novartis Pharma AG, Switzerland

Mr Joachim KOWALLIK
Akzonobel international, Belgium

Mr Eberhard LAMPETER
VITA 34, Private blood bank, Germany

Mr Enrico LASTREGO
Novartis Management Services sa, Belgium

Ms Catherine LEVINSON,
Serono International, Switzerland

Ms Anne PAPIN-DI POMPEO
European Federation of Pharmaceutical
Industries and Associates

Andrea RAPPAGLIOSI
Serono International, Switzerland

Ms Charlotte RETZLER
Serono International, Switzerland

Ms Annie VAN BROEKHOVEN
Innogenetics Nv, Belgium

Representatives of associations

Mr Markku AARIMAA
Comité permanent des Médecins européens (CP)

Mr Georges BINAME
Association belge de bioéthique

Mr Adrian VAN BELLEN
The Netherlands Dutch Genetic Alliance of
Parent/Patient Organisations

Mr Ben DUNCAN
British Medical Association

Ms Susanne DÖRING
German Medical Association

Mr Christoph THEN
Greenpeace, Germany

Representatives of religion

MS Heidrun BACK
Büro Brüssel des Bevollmächtigten des Rates der
Evangelischen Kirche in Deutschland (EKD)

Mr Silvio MARCUS-HELMONS
Commission of the Bishop’s Conferences of the
EU

Mr Panagiotis MOSCHONAS
Représentation de l’Eglise de Grèce auprès de
l’UE

Ms Katharina SCHAUER
Commission of the Bishop’s Conferences of the
EU

Academics

Ms Danielle BERNEMAN
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France

Mr Maurice DE WACHTER
Consultant Bioethics, Belgium

Ms Donna DICKENSON
Centre for the Study of Global Ethics
University of Birmingham, United Kingdom

129

Medias

Mr Jean-Michel BADER
Le Figaro, France

Ms Helen BIRD
Cordis News, Belgium

Thomas A. FRIEDRICH
Welt Science, Germany

Mr Paul KING
Cordis News, Belgium

Mr Christophe LENNERT
Katolische Nachrichten – Agentur (KNA)
Germany
Jean-Yves NAU
Le Monde, France

Mr Olivier JEHIN
Agence Europe

Mr Pascal LE SEGRETAIN
Corsis Sygma, France

Ms Christine DOSQUET
Unité de thérapie cellulaire et espace éthique
Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France

Ms Anne-Françoise GILLARDIN
Centre de génétique humaine, Belgium

Mr Sefik GÖRKEY
Medical Ethics Department
Marmara University, Faculty of Medecine
Istanbul, Turkey

Mr Bart HANSEN
Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law
Catholic University Leuven, Belgium

Mr Paul JANIAUD
Institut National de Recherche Médicale
(INSERM), Belgium

Prof. Outi HOVATTA
Huddinge University Hospital, Sweden

Mr Jean-Noël MISSA
Centre de Recherches Interdisciplinaires
en Bioéthiques, Belgium

Mr Jacques SCHERES
Clinical Genetics Centre, Academic Hospital
Maastricht, The Netherlands

Ms Christine VERELLEN-DEMOULIN
Centre de génétique humaine, Belgium

Ms Patricia WALSH
Centre of medical ethics and law
Kings College London, Great Britain

130

Secretariat of the European Group on Ethics

Ms Christiane Bardoux

Tel: 32 (0) 2 295 45 47
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65
E-mail: 

christiane.bardoux@cec.eu.int

Ms Joelle Bezzan

Tel: 32 (0) 2 296 19 48
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65
E-mail: 

joelle.bezzan@cec.eu.int

Ms Marie Chirol

Tel: 32 (0) 2 296 25 84
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65
E-mail: 

marie.chirol@cec.eu.int

Ms Agueda Ollero Montiel

Tel: 32 (0) 2 295 71 35
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65
E-mail: 

agueda.ollero-montiel@cec.eu.int

Mail address

European Commission
Group of Policy Advisers
BREY 10/128
B – 1049 – Brussels - Belgium

Office

European Commission
Avenue d’Auderghem 45
B – 1049 – Brussels - Belgium

Web site

http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics

131

132

