Survey on the 

National Regulations in the European Union regarding 

Research on Human Embryos

by

Brigitte Gratton1

- July 2002 -

1  Trainee  with  the  Secretariat  of  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New
Technologies to  the  European  Commission  from  1  March  2002  to  31 July  2002;  philosophy

and  law  Ph.D.  student  (University  of  Paris  I  –  Panthéon-Sorbonne)  and  trainee  solicitor

(London).

                                                          
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction

Definitions

Austria

A - The legal situation

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

C - Links

Belgium

A - The legal situation

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

C - Links

Denmark

A - The legal situation

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

C - Links

Finland

A - The legal situation

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

C - Links

France

A - The legal situation

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

C - Links

Germany

A - The legal situation

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

C - Links

Greece

A - The legal situation

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

C - Links

1

3

5
5

7

7

9
9

11

12

13
13

15

16

17
17

19

20

23
23

27

28

29
29

32

33

35
35

36

36

Ireland

A - The legal situation

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

C - Links

Italy

A - The legal situation

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

C - Links

Luxembourg

A - The legal situation

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

C - Links

The Netherlands

A - The legal situation

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

C - Links

Portugal

A - The legal situation

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

C - Links

Spain

A - The legal situation

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

C - Links

Sweden

A - The legal situation

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

C - Links

United Kingdom

A - The legal situation

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

C - Links

Annex

A - Council of Europe

B - European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies to the European Commission

37
37

38

38

39
39

40

41

43
43

43

44

45
45

48

49

51
51

52

53

55
55

58

60

61
61

63

64

65
65

68

71

73
73

75

INTRODUCTION

The  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New  Technologies  (EGE)  is  an  independent
multicultural and multi-disciplinary body composed of twelve experts representing a variety of
viewpoints and disciplines.

The  EGE  has  been  set  up  by  decision  of  the  European  Commission  of  December  1997  to
advise  the  European  institutions  on  the  ethical  aspects  of  European  regulatory  activities  or
policies.

On 14 November  2000,  the  EGE issued its  15th  Opinion  on  Ethical  Aspects  of  Human  Stem
Cell Research and Use. This Opinion contains a survey on national regulations in the European
Union regarding research on embryos. 

Since  November  2000,  there  have  been  many  advances  in  stem  cell  research.  As  a  result,
legal changes have occurred within  the member  States  of  the  European  Union or  are still  in
discussion. The present document is updating and deepening the previous survey included in
Opinion 15.

Brigitte Gratton

1

2

DEFINITIONS

The  terminology  used  in  the  various  legislations  differs.  Therefore,  in  the  core  text  of  this
document, the above terms are defined as follows:

-  Non-therapeutic research on embryo: research that is not done for the direct benefit of
the individual embryo concerned and is likely to harm it and to lead to its destruction.

- 

Therapeutic research on embryo: intended to be in the interests of the embryo, which is
going to be transferred in a woman’s womb.

3

4

AUSTRIA

A - The legal situation

The Reproductive Medicine Act of 4 June 1992 defines the conditions to be respected in using
gametes and embryos for medically assisted procreation.  The 1992 Act also covers research
on embryos.  

11..    DDeeffiinniittiioonn  ooff  tthhee  eemmbbrryyoo

The Reproductive Medicine Act 1992 does not properly define the term embryo.  Instead, the
expression “cells capable of development” is used.  Article 1 (3) of the Reproductive Medicine
Act 1992 defines “cells capable of development” as “fertilised eggs” and “cells developed from
fertilised eggs”.

22..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss

aa  ––  TThheerraappeeuuttiicc  rreesseeaarrcchh

Pursuant to the Reproductive Medicine Act 1992, therapeutic research on in vitro embryos, in
vivo  embryos  and  foetuses  may  be  performed  for  no  other  purpose  than  medically  assisted
reproduction.  

bb  ––  NNoonn--tthheerraappeeuuttiicc  rreesseeaarrcchh

Research  on  embryos  for  non-therapeutic  purposes  is  forbidden.    The  donation  of  eggs  or
embryos either to another couple or for research purposes is not permitted by the Reproductive
Medicine Act 1992.

Moreover, the Austrian law requires that a minimum of surplus embryos be created.  Indeed,
Article 10 states that “when combining eggs and sperm outside a woman's body, the number of
eggs fertilised may not be more than is required, in the light of current medical knowledge and
experience,  within  one  cycle  for  the  purposes  of  ensuring  reasonable,  medically  assisted
reproduction with good prospects of success”.

Thus, the spirit of the Reproductive Medicine Act 1992 is that there should not be any surplus
embryos.  However, this is not possible from a practical point of view, and therefore the 1992
Act provides that surplus embryos can be stored for one year, and after this period, they must
be destroyed.  

5

33..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellllss

The Reproductive Medicine Act 1992 does not explicitly cover research on human embryonic
stem  cells,  therefore  the  legal  situation  is  unclear.    Human  embryonic  stem  cell  research  is
going to be discussed in the course of the amendment of the Reproductive Medicine Act 1992
(planned for 2003).  

Following the interpretation of the Austrian Ministry of Justice, the Reproductive Medicine Act
1992  prohibits  research  on  human  embryonic  stem  cells.    This  prohibition  covers  both  the
harvesting  of  stem  cells  from  embryos  and  research  on  imported  embryonic  stem  cell  lines.
Indeed, both situations presuppose the destruction of embryos, which is against the spirit of the
1992 Act.

Others (scientists and professors of law members of the Bioethics Commission) consider that
actions that are not explicitly prohibited by the 1992 Act are allowed.

44..    CCrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  ssoolleellyy  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess

Article 9 (1) of the Reproductive Medicine Act 1992 provides that “viable cells may not be used
for purposes other than medically assisted reproduction.  They may be examined and treated
only so far as this is required, in the light of current medical knowledge and experience, for the
purposes of inducing a pregnancy.  The same applies to semen and eggs, which are intended
for use in medically assisted reproduction”.

The principle of the law is that in vitro fertilisation is only acceptable for reproductive purposes.
Thus an embryo can be created for the purpose of inducing a pregnancy, but absolutely not for
research purposes.

55..    HHuummaann  cclloonniinngg

There is no explicit regulation regarding human cloning.  

In 2003, the Reproductive Medicine Act 1992 will be amended in order to forbid reproductive
cloning.

As  regards  therapeutic  cloning,  there  are  two  different  interpretations  of  the  Austrian  legal
position: 

- 

- 

Following the interpretation of the Austrian Ministry of Justice, the production of viable cells via
cell nuclear transfer is forbidden, because viable cells can only be used for procreating children
and not for any other use (Article 9 of the Reproductive Medicine Act 1992).

Following the interpretation of one of the most important legal scholars in Austria, the ban of
cell  nuclear  transfer  is  not to  be  found  in  the  law,  because  in  1992,  when  the  Reproductive
Medicine  Act  was  drafted  and  the  term  “viable  cells”  defined,  these  new  technologies  were
unknown.  Therefore, it is unclear whether the organisms obtained by cell nuclear transfer are

6

 
covered  by  the  Reproductive  Medicine  Act  1992  or  not,  and  further  legislation  should  be
enacted.   

66..    CCoouunncciill  ooff  EEuurrooppee’’ss  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  BBiioommeeddiicciinnee

Until now, Austria has not signed the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, because
it is considered too permissive regarding embryo research.

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

The Austrian Bioethics Commission was established at the Federal Chancellery in June 2001.  

No opinion on research on embryos, on human embryonic stem cells, or on human cloning has
yet been given.  

framework:  Finanzierung  von  Stammzellenforschung 

The  only  related  opinion  already  issued  by  the  Austrian  Bioethics  Commission  is  an  opinion
regarding  the  financing  of  human  stem  cells  research  within  the  6th  European  research
im  Rahmen  des  6.
programme 
Rahmenprogrammes  der  EU  für  Forshung,  technologische  Entwicklung  und  Demonstration
(2002-2006):  Beratungen  der  Bioethik-Kommission  abgeschlossen  (8  May  2002).      In  this
opinion, a majority of eleven members voted in favour of research on human embryonic stem
cells  under  strict  conditions,  when  a  minority  of  eight  were  against  it  and  considered  that
European funds should not be spent on such research.

C / Links 

Bioethics Commission: www.bka.gv.at/bka/bioethik/

Parliament (Federal Chancellery): www.bka.gv.at

7

8

BELGIUM

A - The legal situation

11..    CCuurrrreenntt  ssiittuuaattiioonn

There is presently no specific regulation concerning human embryo research.  The only piece
of law related to embryos is a Royal Decree of 1999,  which  determines the  conditions  to  be
complied with by in vitro fertilisation centres.  No embryo can be created outside these agreed
centres.  

Thus,  the  current  practice  is  as  follows:  researchers  carrying  out  research  projects  involving
human  embryos  must  perform  the  research  within  an  agreed  in  vitro  fertilisation  centre,  and
obtain  approval  for  their  research  protocol  from  the  ethical  committee  of  their  institution
(university,  institution,  etc…).    Provided  that  these  conditions  are  fulfilled,  research  projects
involving  the  embryos  may  be  carried  out.    But  otherwise,  there  are  no  legal  limitations  to
embryo research and cloning.

22..    LLaaww  pprrooppoossaall  rreeggaarrddiinngg  rreesseeaarrcchh  oonn  iinn  vviittrroo  eemmbbrryyooss

Senators Philippe Monfils and Philippe Mahoux put forward a law proposal regarding research
on  in  vitro  embryos.    The  proposal  covers  research  on  embryos,  stem  cell  research  and
therapy,  and  human  cloning.    On  10  June  2002,  the  proposal  and  its  amendments  were
discussed  before  the  Bioethics  Commission  of  the  Belgian  Senate  and  the  proposal  was
approved.  However, the proposal still has to be scrutinised and voted by the second chamber
of  the  Belgian  Parliament.    Final  approval  will  not  take  place  before  October  2002,  as  the
Parliament is waiting for the opinion of the Belgian National Consultative Bioethics Committee
before voting the legislation.

The substance of the Monfils and Mahoux proposal is as follows.

aa  --  RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss

Article 3 of the proposal allows research on in vitro embryos provided that the research project
satisfies the following six conditions:

it is for therapeutic purposes or for the advancement of the understanding of infertility, sterility,
organ or tissue transplants, congenital or genetic diseases or cancer;

it must be based on the most recent scientific knowledge;

it must be carried out in a registered laboratory affiliated to a university reproductive medicine
programme;

- 

- 

- 

9

- 

- 

- 

it is carried out using embryos up to 14 days old, excluding any cryoconservation period;

it must be carried out under the supervision of a specialist doctor and by qualified persons;

it will only be authorised if an alternative method of research would not be as effective.

Article 5 of the proposal provides for limitations into research on in vitro embryos.  It prohibits
implanting  human  embryos  in  animals  and  re-implanting  embryos  that  have  undergone
research, except where the research benefits the embryo (therapeutic research) or where the
research does not affect the embryo (observational research).  It also forbids the commercial
use of embryos and research with eugenic purposes.  However, the proposal does not forbid
germinal therapy.  The authors of the proposal made a  distinction  between  germinal  therapy
with eugenic purposes (forbidden by Article 5) and germinal therapy with therapeutic purposes
for  the  embryo  itself  and  its  descendants.    This  position  contravenes  Article  13  of  the
Convention on Human rights and Biomedicine, which forbids germinal therapy2.  

Following Article 8 of the proposal, the “concerned persons” (i.e.  the couple for which embryos
are created and the donors of gametes) must give their free and informed consent for the use
of the embryos for research purposes.   

Research on in vitro embryos would be controlled at both the local and federal level.  Article 9
of  the  proposal  provides  for  the  setting  up  of  a  federal  commission  in  charge  of  monitoring
embryo research.  Report on the advancement of the research project must be communicated
yearly to the federal commission, and failure to do so will be punished by a fine.

bb  --  RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellllss

The  legal  framework  provided  for  embryo  research  by  the proposal  would  allow  research on
human embryonic stem cells.  One of the reasons for the enactment of such a piece of law is to
encourage human embryonic stem cell research.

cc  --  CCrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  ssoolleellyy  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess

Article 4 of the proposal prohibits the creation of embryos solely for research purposes, except
where  the  objectives  of  the  research  project  cannot  be  achieved  by  research  on  surplus
embryos.  

2  Article  13  of  the  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine  provides  that  “an
intervention  seeking  to  modify  the  human  genome  may  only  be  undertaken  for  preventive,

diagnostic or therapeutic purposes and only if its aim is not to introduce any  modification in

the genome of any descendants”.

10

                                                          
dd  --  HHuummaann  cclloonniinngg

The proposal prohibits reproductive cloning3 and authorises a contrario therapeutic cloning.  

The proposal does not allow explicitly therapeutic cloning and does not go into details regarding
the authorised methods to be used to create embryos solely for research purposes.  However,
in their comments on the law proposal, the authors explain that the prohibition of reproductive
cloning  does  not  include  therapeutic  cloning  for  research  purposes  aiming  at  therapeutic
applications.

The creation (Article 4) and the re-implantation (Article 5) of embryos outside the limitations set
up  by  the  law,  and  the  production  of  human  clones  (Article  6)  constitute  criminal  offences
punishable by a fine and up to five years of imprisonment.  

33..    CCoouunncciill  ooff  EEuurrooppee’’ss  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  BBiioommeeddiicciinnee

Belgium  has  neither  signed  the  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine  nor  its
Additional Protocol on the Prohibition of Cloning Human Beings.

If this proposal is adopted, Belgium will have to make reservations in respect of Article 13 and
Article  18  of  the  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine  before  signature  and
ratification.  

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

TThhee   BBeellggiiuumm   NNaattiioonnaall   BBiiooeetthhiiccss   CCoommmmiitttteeee   wwaass   ccrreeaatteedd   oonn   1155   JJaannuuaarryy   11999933   wwiitthh   tthhee   ttaasskk   ooff
iinnffoorrmmiinngg   aanndd   ooff   ddeelliivveerriinngg   ooppiinniioonnss   ttoo   tthhee   ppuubblliicc,,   tthhee   BBeellggiiaann   GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt   aanndd   tthhee   BBeellggiiaann
ppaarrlliiaammeenntt..

11..    PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  eemmbbrryyoo  rreesseeaarrcchh

TThhee   BBeellggiiuumm   NNaattiioonnaall   CCoonnssuullttaattiivvee   BBiiooeetthhiiccss   CCoommmmiitttteeee   hhaass   nnoott   ppuubblliisshheedd   aannyy   ooppiinniioonn   oonn
rreesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss  oorr  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellllss..    HHoowweevveerr,,  iinn  iittss  OOppiinniioonn  nn..    22  oonn  tthhee
CCoonnvveennttiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  BBiioommeeddiicciinnee  ddaatteedd  2277  JJuullyy  11999977,,  tthhee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  mmeennttiioonneedd
AArrttiiccllee   1188   ooff   tthhee   CCoonnvveennttiioonn   tthhaatt   iiss   ddeeaalliinngg   wwiitthh   eemmbbrryyoo   rreesseeaarrcchh..      OOppiinniioonnss   wwiitthhiinn   tthhee
CCoommmmiitttteeee   ccoouulldd   nnoott   rreeaacchh   aa   ccoommmmoonn   ppoossiittiioonn,,   eessppeecciiaallllyy   aass   rreeggaarrddss   AArrttiiccllee   1188   ((22))   tthhaatt
pprroohhiibbiittss  tthhee  ccrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess..    WWhhiillee  ssoommee  mmeemmbbeerrss  bbeelliieevvee  tthhaatt  tthhee
ccrreeaattiioonn   ooff   hhuummaann   eemmbbrryyooss   ffoorr   rreesseeaarrcchh   ppuurrppoosseess   wwoouulldd   sseerrvvee   ppaattiieennttss’’   iinntteerreessttss,,   ootthheerrss
ccoonnssiiddeerr  tthhaatt  iitt  wwoouulldd  ccoonnttrraavveennee  hhuummaann  ddiiggnniittyy..         

3  See  the  conclusion  of  the  Belgium  National  Consultative  Committee,  which  contains  three
proposals:  a  definitive  prohibition  of  reproductive  cloning,  a  prohibition  by  law  for  the  time

being, or a moratorium.  The proposal follows the first solution.

11

                                                          
22..    PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  hhuummaann  cclloonniinngg

In its Opinion n.  10 on Human Reproductive Cloning dated 14 June 1999, the  Belgium National
Consultative Bioethics Committee considered the legal, philosophical and ethical issues raised
by cloning techniques.  It concluded that reproductive cloning should be excluded for the time
being.    However,  while  some  members  believe  that  the  law  should  definitively  prohibit
reproductive cloning, others  considered  that  a  moratorium  would  be  sufficient.    This  Opinion
prompted the drafting of the previously mentioned law proposal regarding research on in vitro
embryos.

No opinion on therapeutic cloning has been released yet.  However, the Committee will deal
with  the  subject  in  its  Opinion  on  the  law  proposal  on  research  on  in  vitro  embryos,  to  be
released in September 2002.

C - Links

Belgium National Consultative Bioethics Committee: www.health.fgov.be/bioeth

Parliament: www.parlement.be ; www.lachambre.be ; www.senat.be

12

 
DENMARK

A - The legal situation

In Denmark, two pieces of law apply as regards embryo research and human embryonic stem
cell research: the 1997 Act on Medically Assisted Reproduction (no.460) and the 1992 Act on
the Scientific Ethical Committees and the Handling of Biomedical Research Projects (no.  503).  

11..    DDeeffiinniittiioonn  ooff  tthhee  eemmbbrryyoo

The  1997  Act  on  Medically  Assisted  Reproduction  does  not  define  properly  the  embryo.
Instead, the terms « fertilised ova », « fertilised eggs » or «pre-embryos » are generally used.  

22..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss

Chapter  7  (sections  25-28)  of  the  1997  Act  on  Medically  Assisted  Reproduction  entitled
“Prohibition  against  research  and  experiments”  stipulates  the  conditions  for  research  on
embryos (both therapeutic and non-therapeutic research).  

Section  25  (1)  states  that  research  on  embryos,  more  precisely  “biomedical  experiments  on
fertilised  human  ova  and  on  gametes  that  are  intended  to  be  used  for  fertilisation”  can  be
undertaken only in the following cases:

if the research seeks to improve in vitro fertilisation techniques in order to induce pregnancy; 

if the research seeks to improve preimplantation diagnosis techniques.

Additionally, the following conditions must be complied with: 

fertilised eggs can only be kept in vitro up to 14 days excluding any period of cryopreservation
(Section 26);

fertilised eggs used in research projects complying with Section 25 may be transferred into the
womb  only  if  the  fertilised  ovum is  genetically  unmodified  and  if the  experts  believe  that  the
research has not caused any damage to the development potential of the embryo (Section 27
(1));

research  projects  have  been  approved  by  the  Science  Ethical  Committee  System4  that  will
assess  whether  the  purposes  of  the  research  projects  fall  within  the  scope  of  Section  25
(Section 27 (2));

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

4 The Committee System is made up of seven regional committees and the Central Scientific
Ethical Committee.  The task of regional committees is to assess biomedical research projects.

13

 
                                                          
Research  projects  involving  embryos  and  research  projects  involving  imported  human
embryonic stem cells fall within the scope of the 1992 Act on the Scientific Ethical Committees
and the Handling of Biomedical Research Projects.  The Central Scientific Ethical Committee
must approve all these projects.

33..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellllss

There is no specific legislation on stem cell research in Denmark.  

Because of the 1997 Act on Medically Assisted Reproduction, the harvesting of stem cells from
embryos cannot take place in Denmark.  However, the 1997 Act does not cover research using
imported  human  embryonic  stem  cell  lines,  thus  such  research  is  not  legally  prohibited  in
Denmark and can be carried out.  Although this interpretation of the law has some opponents, it
was recently confirmed in a statement of the Danish Ministry of the Interior.

44..    CCrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  ssoolleellyy  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess

Section 25 (2) of the 1997 Act on Medically Assisted Reproduction provides that the “collection
and  fertilisation  of  ova  for  the  purpose  of  conducting  other  experiments  than  the  ones
mentioned  above  in  subsection  (1)  shall  not  be  allowed”.    Therefore,  the  creation  of  human
embryos  for  research  purposes  is  only  allowed  for  research  projects  intending  to  improve  in
vitro fertilisation or preimplantation diagnosis techniques, but not for other types of experiments,
such as stem cell research.

55..    HHuummaann  cclloonniinngg

aa  ––  RReepprroodduuccttiivvee  cclloonniinngg

Experiments  aiming  at  producing  “genetically  identical  human  individuals”  are  forbidden  by
Section 28 of the 1997 Act on Medically Assisted Reproduction.  Thus the Danish legislation
does not permit research into reproductive cloning.   

Moreover,  Section  4  of  the  1997  Act  forbids  the  simultaneous  or  subsequent  implant  of
“identical unfertilised or fertilised ova into one or several women for the purpose of procreation”.
The  provision  covers  both  embryo  splitting  and  somatic  cell  nuclear  transfer.    Additionally,
Section  2  is  also  presumed  to  include  a  ban  on  reproductive  cloning  when  stating  that
“medically  assisted  procreation  shall  not  take  place  unless  it  is  performed  for  fertilising  a
genetically  unchanged  (unmodified)  ovum  with  a  genetically  unchanged  (unmodified)  sperm
cell”.  Thus the 1997 Act specifically bans reproductive cloning.

The task of the Central Scientific Ethical Committee is to coordinate the work of the regional

committees and to assess research projects involving embryos or embryonic stem cells.

14

 
                                                                                                                                                        
bb  ––  TThheerraappeeuuttiicc  cclloonniinngg

Therapeutic cloning is not dealt with by the Danish legislation.  

Research  into  therapeutic  cloning  does  not  comply  with  Section  25  of  the  1997  Act  on
Medically Assisted Reproduction (research on embryos can only be undertaken for improving in
vitro fertilisation or preimplantation techniques) and seems therefore to be prohibited.

Finally, research involving the fusion of genetically different embryos or parts of embryos, the
production of hybrids, or the development of human individuals in a species-extraneous uterus
is also forbidden.

A person infringing a provision of the 1997 Act on Medically Assisted Reproduction is liable to a
fine or imprisonment.

66..    CCoouunncciill  ooff  EEuurrooppee’’ss  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  BBiioommeeddiicciinnee

Denmark  signed  the  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine  on  4  April  1997,  and
ratified it on 10 August 1999.  The Convention entered into force in Denmark on 1 December
1999.  

Denmark signed the Additional Protocol to the Convention on the Prohibition of Cloning Human
Beings on 12 January 1998, but has not yet ratified it.

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

The Danish Council of Ethics was established by the Danish Council Act 1988 and set up by
the  Ministry  of  Health.    The  Council  has  an  advisory  function  for  the  health  authorities,  and
according  to  the  legislation,  it  must  give  recommendations  to  the  Ministry  of  Health  on  the
establishment  of  rules  and  provisions  in  statutes  on  fertilised  eggs,  embryos,  genetic
experiments on sex cells and other issues.

In January 2001, the Danish Council of Ethics issued a statement on therapeutic cloning.

11..    PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellll  rreesseeaarrcchh  aanndd  cclloonniinngg

In this statement, a majority of the Danish Council of Ethics estimated that, in principle, human
embryonic stem cells could be used as long as substantial benefits are available  for  treating
diseases.

15

A  majority  of  the  Danish  Council  of  Ethics  estimated  that  there  was  no  urgent  need  at  the
moment  to  allow  human  embryonic  stem  cells  to  be  produced  for  research,  either  by  cell
nuclear transfer or by in vitro fertilisation technique.  Research into embryonic stem cells should
be confined to surplus embryos.  Therapeutic cloning is not recommended for the time being.

22..    PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  rreepprroodduuccttiivvee  cclloonniinngg

The  Danish  Council  of  Ethics  unanimously  rejected  reproductive  cloning  because  it  would
violate human dignity, because it could have adverse consequences for the cloned person and
because permitting research on reproductive cloning would reflect a disregard for the respect
due to the moral status of embryos.

C - Links

Council of Ethics: www.etiskraad.dk

Ministry of Health: www.sum.dk/uk/ukmenu.htm

Parliament: www.folketinget.dk

Research Agency: www.forsk.dk/eng/index.htm

16

FINLAND

A - The legal situation

Since 1 November 1999, embryo research is regulated in Finland by the Medical Research Act
issued in Helsinki on 9 April 19995.  This piece of law covers medical research carried out on
persons,  human  embryos  and  foetuses.    It  is  completed  by  the  Medical  Research  Decree6,
which also entered into force on 1 November 1999 and gives the preconditions of institutions
applying for permission to carry out embryo research.  

11..    DDeeffiinniittiioonn  ooff  tthhee  eemmbbrryyoo  aanndd  ffooeettuuss

Section  2  of  the  Medical  Research  Act  1999  defines  an  “embryo”  as  “a  living  group  of  cells
resulting from fertilisation not implanted in a woman’s body”, and a “foetus” as “a living embryo
implanted in a woman’s body”.  Thus the term “embryo” covers only in vitro embryos, while the
term “foetus” includes both in vivo embryos and foetuses.  

22..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss

aa  --  RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  iinn  vviittrroo  eemmbbrryyooss

No  distinction  between  therapeutic  and  non-therapeutic  research  as  such  is  made  regarding
research on in vitro embryos.  In the Medical Research Act 1999, medical research is defined
as  the  “research  involving intervention  in the  integrity  of  a  person,  human  embryo  or  human
foetus for the purpose of increasing knowledge of the causes, symptoms, diagnosis, treatment
and prevention of diseases or the nature of disease in general” (Section 2).

Research on “embryos” can be carried out in Finland on surplus embryos up to 14 days after
fecondation, providing that a licence from the required authority is granted.

Section 11  of  the  Medical  Research  Act  1999  provides that  “research  on  embryos  outside  a
woman's  body  may  be  carried  out  only  by  agencies  that  have  been  granted  the  appropriate
licence by the National Authority for Medicolegal Affairs.  The conditions for the granting of the
licence shall be laid down by Decree.7 Medical research shall be permitted on embryos only if

5 Statute n.  488/1999.
6 N.  986/1999.
7  Section  4  of  the  Medical  Research  Decree  of  29  October  1999  set  up  the  “conditions
governing institutions that are carrying out research involving embryos”.  The institutions must

have the appropriate research facilities, equipment and staff needed to carry out  the  research

proposal.  

17

                                                          
no more than 14 days have passed from their formation.  The time during which an embryo is
kept frozen shall not count for the purposes of calculating this time limit”.

Such research cannot be “undertaken without the written consent of the persons who donated
the  gametes”  (Section  12).    If  this  consent  is  withdrawn  later  on,  the  research  using  the
concerned gametes must be stopped.

Finally, the Medical Research Act 1999 sets up some restrictions on research on “embryos”:

embryos used for research cannot be implanted in a human body or be kept alive for more than
14 days from their formation, not including the time during which they have been kept frozen
(Section 13 on restrictions on research on embryos);

research may use embryos that have been stored for up to 15 years, but after that period the
embryos must be destroyed (Section 13);

research on embryos and gametes for the purpose of modifying their hereditary properties are
prohibited, unless the research is for the purpose of curing or preventing a serious hereditary
disease (Section 15 on prohibited research).

bb..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  iinn  vviivvoo  eemmbbrryyooss  aanndd  ffooeettuusseess

Research on “foetus”8 is allowed under specific conditions: 

The written consent of the pregnant woman is required;

The research involving the pregnant women is only possible if it would not be possible to obtain
the same scientific results by using other research subjects; and

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

-  Either the research is likely to benefit directly the health of the woman or the “foetus”, or the

research is likely to benefit the health of people related to the woman or the foetus.  

33..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellllss

There are no specific additional regulations on human embryonic stem cell research in Finland.
Thus,  as  research  on  embryos  for  non-therapeutic  purposes  is  permitted  by  the  Medical
Research  Act  1999  under  certain  conditions  (licence,  consent,  etc…),  research  on  human
embryonic stem cells is implicitly possible subject to the same conditions.  

44..    CCrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  ssoolleellyy  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess

The production of “embryos” exclusively for the purpose of research is forbidden by Section 13
of the Medical Research Act 1999.  However, the current issue is whether an embryo created
by  cell-nuclear-transfer  is  actually  covered  by  the  Medical  Research  Act  1999,  as  Section  2
defines an embryo as “a living group of cells resulting from fertilisation”.  

8 Reminder: under the Medical Research Act 1999, the term “foetus”means “a living embryo
implanted in a woman’s body” and thus covers both in vivo embryos and foetuses.

18

 
                                                          
55..    HHuummaann  cclloonniinngg

Section  26  on  unlawful  intervention  on  the  genome  provides  that  any  person  conducting
research with the aim of cloning human beings shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for a
period not exceeding two years.  Thus, reproductive cloning constitutes  a  criminal  offence  in
Finland on the ground of unlawful intervention on the genome.

66..    CCoouunncciill  ooff  EEuurrooppee’’ss  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  BBiioommeeddiicciinnee

Finland  signed  the  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine  on  4  April  1997.    The
ratification of  the  Convention  awaits  the  adoption of  the  Human  Fertilisation  Act  (currently  in
preparation).  A Government Bill  on  Human Fertilisation  Treatments  was  handed  over  to  the
Finish Parliament on 5 June 2002.  

Finland also signed the Additional Protocol on the Prohibition of Cloning Human Beings on 12
January 1998, but has not yet ratified it.

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

11..    NNaattiioonnaall  eetthhiiccss  ccoommmmiitttteeeess

Finland has four major national ethics committees concerning biomedicine and research:

- 

- 

- 

the Board for Gene Technology, which was set up to ensure a safe and ethically acceptable
use  of  gene  technology  and  which  mainly  deals  with  issues  raised  by  genetically  modified
organisms;

The  National  Advisory  Board  for  Biotechnology,  which  also  deals  with  the  ethical  issues  in
biotechnology;

The National Advisory Board on Health Care Ethics, which is an expert committee concerned
with  ethical issues related to health care and patients’ status;

- 

The National Research Ethics Council of Finland, set up to resolve issues of research ethics.

Finland also has several regional and institutional ethics committees on research on humans as
required by the Medical Research Act 1999.

None of these committees has issued an opinion on embryo research or on embryonic stem
cell research so far.  But as Finland is part of the Nordic Committee on Bioethics with Denmark,
Iceland,  Norway  and  Sweden,  the  Opinion  on  Human  Stem  Cell  Research  from  the  Nordic
Committee on Bioethics based on the workshop “Ethical issues in human stem cell research”
(10 & 11 October 2000) prevails.

19

22..    NNoorrddiicc  CCoommmmiitttteeee  oonn  BBiiooeetthhiiccss

In 1996, the Nordic Committee on Bioethics was formed out of the Nordic Committee on Ethics,
which  was  set  up  in  1989  by  the  Nordic  Council  of  Ministers  to  co-operate  in  the  fields  of
biotechnology and Bioethics within the Nordic region.

aa  --  PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  eemmbbrryyoo  rreesseeaarrcchh

The Nordic Committee has not issued an opinion on embryo research as such.  However, in its
Opinion on Human Stem Cell Research, it is assumed that research on surplus in vitro embryos
until day 14 of the embryonic development is allowed for a majority of the Nordic Committee’s
members (except Norway).

bb  --  PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  tthhee  ccrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  ssoolleellyy  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess

The  Nordic  Committee  on  Bioethics  considers  that  creation  of  human  embryos  solely  for
research purposes is not necessary at the present stage.  

cc  --  PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellll  rreesseeaarrcchh

The  majority  of  the  members  of  the  Nordic  Committee  on  Bioethics  are  of  the  opinion  that
embryonic stem cell research may be carried out if the following conditions are complied with:

the stem cells used are derived from human spare embryos produced for  in vitro fertilisation
but no longer needed;

the embryos can be used until day 14 of their embryonic development;

informed and free consent has to have been obtained from the donating couple;

the  research  proposal  must  be  of  high  quality  and  accepted  by  an  independent  ethics
committee.

- 

- 

- 

- 

dd  --  PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  hhuummaann  cclloonniinngg

The Nordic Committee on Bioethics recognises the potential advantages of therapeutic cloning
in connection with stem cells.  However, because the therapeutic perspectives of this technique
seem  very  remote  and  because  “slippery  slope”  possibilities  to  reproductive  cloning  may  be
seen, the Nordic Committee feels that therapeutic cloning should be forbidden at this stage of
embryonic stem cell research.

C - Links

Ministry of Education: www.minedu.fi

Ministry of Justice: www.om.fi

National Advisory Board on Health Care Ethics: http://pro.tsv.fi/tenk/english1.htm

20

National Research Ethics Council of Finland:
www.minedu.fi/minedu/research/organisation/research_ethics_council/research_ethics_council.
html 

Nordic Committee on Bioethics: www.ncbio.org

21

 
 
22

FRANCE

A - The legal situation

11..    TThhee  ccuurrrreenntt  ssiittuuaattiioonn::  tthhee  BBiiooeetthhiiccss  llaawwss  ooff  11999944

In  France,  research  on  human  embryos  is  currently  governed  by  one  of  the  1994  Bioethics
laws9, the law 94-654 of 29 July 1994 regarding the “donation and use of human body parts
and derivatives, medically assisted procreation and antenatal diagnosis”.  

aa  ––  DDeeffiinniittiioonn  ooff  tthhee  eemmbbrryyoo

French  law  does  not  define  the  embryo.    Because  Article  16  of  the  Civil  Code  ensures  the
protection of the human being from the beginning of life, the French Constitutional Court has
had  to  examine  the  provisions  of  the  law  94-654,  which  is  dealing  with  the  conservation,
destruction  and  even  selection  of  embryos.    In  its  decision  dated  27  July  1994,  the
Constitutional Court stated that the constitutional principle of human dignity applies, but that the
selection of embryos for pre-implantation diagnosis purposes during in vitro fertilisation and the
destruction of embryos do not give rise to any constitutional objections, since the right to life
and the principle of equality do not apply to embryos.

bb  --  RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  iinn  vviittrroo  eemmbbrryyooss

As a general principle, research on in vitro embryos is forbidden.  Article 152-8 of the Public
Health Code provides that “any experimentation on embryos is forbidden”.

- 

- 

However, the law 94-654 authorises studies that have a medical aim and that do not harm the
concerned embryo.  These studies are subject to certain conditions:

the obtaining of written consent from the man and the woman; 

the authorisation by the Minister for Health with the approval of the National Commission for
Reproductive Medicine and Biology.

The French law merely makes a distinction between research for medical purposes that does
not harm the embryo and may be authorised, and other types of research, which are prohibited. 

9 The Bioethics laws include law 94-653 of 29 July 1994 regarding the “respect of the human
body” and integrated in the Civil Code; law 94-654 of 29 July 1994 regarding the  “donation

and  use  of  human  body  parts  and  derivatives,  medically  assisted  reproduction  and  antenatal

diagnosis” and integrated in the Public Health Code; law 94-548 of 1 July 1994 regarding the
“use of nominative data for research purposes in the field of health and modifying law 78-17 of
6 January 1978 on informatique, files and liberties” and integrated in the Public Health Code.

In addition, there is the 1988 law regarding the protection of persons involved in biomedical

research projects and the 1975 law on abortion.

23

 
 
                                                          
  
But research for medical purposes does not need to be therapeutic in the sense that it does not
needs to treat the embryo, as long as it does not harm it (for example, research for improving
medically assisted reproduction techniques or antenatal diagnosis).

The  94-654  law  provides  that  surplus  embryos  produced  during  in  vitro  fertilisation  may  be
frozen and stored for a maximum of five years.  After this period, the embryos cannot be used
for research and must be destroyed.

cc  ––  RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  iinn  vviivvoo  eemmbbrryyooss  aanndd  ffooeettuusseess

Research on in vivo embryos and foetuses is governed by Article 209-4 of the Public Health
Code regarding research involving pregnant women.  Research that is expected to be of direct
personal  benefit  to the  person  undergoing it  (the mother) may be  carried  out  if  the  informed
consent of the mother is obtained and if approval from the advisory committee for the protection
of persons involved in biomedical research is granted.  Research without direct personal benefit
may only be carried out if it presents no foreseeable serious threat to the health of the mother
or to the health of the child, if it makes a useful contribution to the knowledge about pregnancy
and if it cannot be carried out otherwise.  

dd  ––  RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellllss

There  is  currently  no  specific  regulation  regarding  human  embryonic  stem  cell  research  and
use.    The  harvesting  of  stem  cells  from  human  embryos  is  obviously  not  permitted  by  the
French  legislation,  as  it  would  lead  to  the  destruction  of  the  embryo.    However,  research
involving already isolated human embryonic stem cell lines is not prohibited.  

Under a law dated 1 July 1998, the Ministry of Research is able to issue licences to import and
export  human  organs,  tissues  and  cells.    A  decree  dated  23  February  2000  sets  out  the
conditions for issuing such licences.  Thus the importation of human embryonic stem cells has
been legally possible since 2000.  However, the French Ministry of Research waited until the
National Assembly had agreed on the principle of research involving human embryonic  stem
cells.    Agreement  was  given  on  22  January  2002  when  the  National  Assembly  passed  the
proposal bill for the revision of the Bioethics laws.  The proposal expressly allows research on
human embryonic  stem  cells,  but  it  will not  come  into  effect  before  the  second half  of  2003.
Consequently, in April 2002, the French government decided to allow the importation of human
embryonic  stem  cells  derived  from  surplus  embryos  only  for  research  purposes  until  the
proposal becomes law.

ee  ––  CCrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  ssoolleellyy  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess

As research on in vitro embryos is forbidden except if it does not harm the concerned embryo,
the creation of embryos solely for research purposes is obviously prohibited.  Article 152-3 of
the public Health Code prohibits the creation of human embryos in vitro for purposes other than
medically assisted reproduction, and Article 152-8 (1) of the same Code prohibits explicitly the
creation of human embryos for purposes of study, research or experimentation.  

24

ff  ––  HHuummaann  cclloonniinngg

French law does not explicitly ban human cloning.  However, in a report dated 22 April 1997,
the National Consultative Bioethics Committee concluded that this lack of an explicit prohibition
could  not  be  interpreted  either  as  a  legal  vacuum  or  as  implying  that  human  cloning  is
authorised in France.  Indeed, the creation of human embryos in vitro for other purposes than
medically assisted reproduction (Article L 152-3) and especially for research purposes (Article L
152-8) is prohibited.  Thus the creation of human clones for therapeutic purposes (therapeutic
cloning), and for research purposes, which includes both research into reproductive cloning and
therapeutic cloning, are not permitted.

As  regards  reproductive  cloning,  because  the  terms  of  Articles  L  152-2  and  L  152-3  of  the
Public  Health  Code  restrict  the  possibilities  of  in  vitro  fertilisation  to  the  context  and  for  the
purposes  of  medically  assisted  reproduction  and  mention  only  techniques  that  enable  an
embryo to be constituted by sexual reproduction, it follows that the French legislation intended
to authorise only the forms of assistance to childbearing that entail the induced fusion of the
gametes  of  a  couple  desiring  parenthood,  and  not  reproductive  cloning10.    Consequently,
French law in its present state is deemed not to authorise human cloning, although it does not
contain a specific prohibition.

22..    TThhee  pprrooppoossaall  ffoorr  tthhee  rreevviissiioonn  ooff  tthhee  11999944  BBiiooeetthhiiccss  llaawwss

The 1994 laws provide for their revision every five years.  Because of delays in the legislative
calendar, the proposal for the revision of the Bioethics laws was only discussed by the French
National  Assembly  in  January  2002,  and  adopted  on  22  January  200211.    The  proposal  still
needs  to  have  its  first  reading  before  the  Senate  and  then  a  second  reading  before  both
houses, with implementing decrees to follow.  Therefore, the proposal is unlikely to come into
force until the second half of 2003.

The main objectives of the revision proposal regarding embryo research and stem cells are to
prohibit certain practices such as reproductive cloning and to allow, with limitations, others such
as embryo research whose medical interest can no longer be underestimated.

aa  ––  RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss  aanndd  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellllss

Chapter IV of the proposal on « research on embryos and embryonic and foetal stem cells »
provides new conditions for research on embryos and embryonic stem cells.  Following Article
19 of the proposal, research on human embryos and human embryonic stem cells is allowed on
condition that it is carried out for medical purposes only and that there is no alternative method
regarding the state of the art.

Only in vitro embryos created for medically assisted reproduction and that are no longer going
to be implanted in a woman’s uterus can be used in research projects.  The donating couple

10 See the report of the National Advisory Ethics Committee dated 22 April 1997.
11 National Assembly: text n.  763; Senate: text n.  189.

25

                                                          
must give its informed consent in writing and after a three-month period of reflection.  Article 18
suppresses  the  five-year  period  for  cryoconservation,  thus  there  is  no  limitation  period  for
cryoconservation any more.  

Finally, the Procreation, Embryology and Human Genetics Agency must approve the research
projects.  The proposal makes an important change regarding the administrative framework of
medically  assisted  reproduction  by  creating  this  Agency  to  replace  the  current  National
Commission for Reproductive Medicine and Biology.  The Procreation, Embryology and Human
Genetics Agency is controlled by both the Ministry of research and the Ministry of Health and
responsible for monitoring research in reproduction, biology and genetics.

Carrying out research on embryos without authorisation or outside the limitations set up by the
law is punishable by a fine of 100 000 Euros and seven years of imprisonment (Article 21).

bb  --  CCrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  ssoolleellyy  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess

The  creation  of  human  embryos  for  research  is  still  forbidden  by  Article  19  of  the  proposal.
Consequently, therapeutic cloning is deemed to be banned as well12.  

cc  --  HHuummaann  cclloonniinngg

Article 15 of the revision proposal prohibits reproductive cloning.  It states that it is forbidden to
make any intervention for the purpose of giving birth to a child or for the purpose of developing
an embryo that does not come directly from the gametes of a man and a woman.

Infringement  of  Article  15  constitutes  a  criminal  offence.    The  person  committing  such  an
offence is liable to 20 years of imprisonment (Article 21).

33..    RReeppoorrttss  lliinnkkeedd  ttoo  tthhee  rreevviissiioonn  ooff  tthhee  11999944  BBiiooeetthhiiccss  llaawwss

The prospective revision of the laws gave rise to the publication of several official reports.  The
following  ones  are  more  specifically  concerned  with  research  on  human  embryos  and  on
human embryonic stem cells:

- 

a 1998 parliamentary report on cloning, cell therapy and the therapeutic use of embryonic stem
cells presented by Alain Claeys (Member of Parliament) and Claude Huriet (Senator) (French
National Assembly document n.  2198 and Senate’s document n.  238).  

12  In  its  first  draft  of  the  proposal,  the  French  Government  of  Lionel  Jospin  had  intended  to
allow therapeutic cloning, when the president Jacques Chirac stated he was against it.  Finally,

the Government decided not to go ahead with legislation allowing therapeutic cloning on the

advice of the Council of State (Opinion on the proposal to the Government dated June 2001).

Therapeutic cloning was also rejected by the Special Commission charged by the Parliament to

examine  the  proposal.    On  the  contrary,  the  National  Consultative  Bioethics  Committee

favoured therapeutic cloning by a short majority in its Opinion dated 7 February 2001.

26

                                                          
- 

a  1999  Council  of  State  report.    This  report,  drawn  up  at  the  Government's  request,  also
stresses the need to re-examine the ban on embryo research.  

-  A 2002 parliamentary  report  on  the law  proposal n.    3166  regarding  bioethics,  presented by
Bernard Charles and Alain Claeys for the Special Commission (National Assembly document
n.  3528).  

44..    CCoouunncciill  ooff  EEuurrooppee’’ss  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  BBiioommeeddiicciinnee

France signed the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine on 4 April 1997, but has not
yet ratified it.

France  signed  the  Additional  Protocol  on  the  Prohibition  of  Cloning  Human  Beings  on  12
January 1998, but has not yet ratified it.

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

The French National Consultative Bioethics Committee was established by a decree from the
President  of  the  French  Republic  on  23  February  1983.    The  Committee  is  an  independent
body linked to the Ministers for Research and for Health.

The position of the National Consultative Bioethics Committee will mainly be summarised from
its latest Opinion n.  067 dated 18 January 2001 on the preliminary draft revision of the laws on
Bioethics13.  

11..    PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  rreesseeaarrcchh  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyooss  aanndd  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellllss

The National Consultative Bioethics Committee considers that, where the parents do not want
to pursue theirs parental project and do not want to donate their embryos to other couples, the
use of surplus embryos for research purposes is ethically acceptable and should be allowed by
law.

The  Committee  favours  opening  up  limited  and  regulated  possibilities  of  research  on  spare
embryos,  especially  as  regards  isolating  human  embryonic  stem  cells,  because  of  their
promising therapeutic prospects.

22..    PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  tthhee  ccrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  ssoolleellyy  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess

The  Committee  considers  that  the  production  of  human  embryos  by  in  vitro  fertilisation  for
research purposes should remain prohibited.

13 Not the adopted proposal.  However, the adopted one mainly follows the advice given by the
Committee, except on therapeutic cloning.

27

 
 
 
                                                          
Regarding the creation of embryos by cell nuclear transfer, however, opinions differ.  A majority
of  the  Committee  is  in  favour  of  a  controlled  authorisation  to  engage  in  therapeutic  cloning
because of the promising therapeutic possibilities it offers.

33..    PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  rreepprroodduuccttiivvee  cclloonniinngg

The Committee is unanimously in favour of explicitly prohibiting human reproductive cloning.

C - Links

Minister for Health, Family and Disabled Persons: www.sante.gouv.fr/index.htm

Minister of Research and New Technologies: www.recherche.gouv.fr

National Assembly (Parliament): www.assemblee-nat.fr

National Consultative Bioethics Committee: www.ccne-ethique.fr

Senate (Parliament): www.senat.fr

State’s Council: www.conseil-etat.fr

28

GERMANY

A - The legal situation

The  legal  aspects  of  research  on  embryos  and  of  the  harvesting  of  human  embryonic  stem
cells from embryos are regulated by the Embryo Protection Act of 13 December 1990, which
was enacted to prevent the misuse of artificial fertilisation and of in vitro embryos.  The 1990
Act covers the embryo in vitro up to its nidation in the uterus of a woman.

11..    DDeeffiinniittiioonn  ooff  tthhee  eemmbbrryyoo

In Article 8 (1) of the Embryo Protection Act 1990, an embryo is defined as a « single fertilised
human egg cell capable of development, from the time of nuclear fusion onwards, and further
any  totipotent  cell  derived  from  an  embryo  which  is  capable,  given  the  further  necessary
conditions, of dividing and developing into an individual ».  

This means that a fertilised and viable human ovum is considered as an embryo from the time
of nuclear fusion.  The same applies  to  every  totipotent  cell  taken  from  an embryo,  which  is
capable of division and development into an individual.  During the first 24 hours after nuclear
fusion, a human ovum is deemed viable unless it is established before this period of time has
elapsed  that  the  human  ovum  concerned  is  not  capable  of  developing  further  that  one  cell
stage.

22..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss

aa  --  NNoonn--tthheerraappeeuuttiicc  rreesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss

The Embryo Protection Act 1990 forbids any embryo research, which is not for the benefit of
the concerned embryo.  Non-therapeutic research on embryos and on individual totipotent cells
is therefore prohibited.

Article 2 (1) of the Act stipulates that it is a criminal offence to  dispose  of  “a human  embryo
created outside the body or taken from a woman before completion of its nidation in the uterus
or to give away, acquire or use it for purposes other than its maintenance”.  To undertake the
“further development of a human embryo outside the body for a purpose other than to give rise
to a pregnancy” constitutes a criminal offence as well.

Infringement of the law is sanctioned by imprisonment for up to 3 years or a fine (Article 2).

29

 
bb  --  TThheerraappeeuuttiicc  rreesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss

An experiment on an embryo is permitted only when  it serves  the  purpose  of preserving  the
embryo concerned.    Such  research  for  therapeutic purposes  may  require  consideration  by  a
multidisciplinary 
function  and  give
recommendations  on  a  case  by  case  basis.    The  legal  framework  applying  is  the  Embryo
Protection Act 1990 as well.  Therapeutic research is lawful on in vitro and in vivo embryos and
on foetuses as long as it serves the purpose of preserving its own life.

local  Ethics  Committee 

that  has  an  advisory 

It is a criminal offence to use human gametes with artificially modified genetic information for
creating in vitro embryos for the purpose of procreation (penalty: up to 5 years’ imprisonment).

33..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellllss

The German legislation does not allow the production of stem cells from fertilised eggs.  Article
1 (2) (c) of the Embryo Protection Act 1990 provides that it is an offence to “separate and use
totipotent  cells  of  an  embryo  for  research  and  diagnosis”.    Therefore  the  harvesting  of
embryonic human stem cells from an embryo is unlawful.

However,  embryonic  stem  cells  research  is  not  completely  barred  in  Germany,  as  since  30
January 2002, research on imported human embryonic stem cells is authorised.  Indeed, last
January,  a  majority  of  the  German  Bundestag  opted  in  favour  of  a  motion  that  would  allow
research on imported human embryonic stem cells under strict conditions and only on already
existing stem cell lines.

44..    IImmppoorrttaattiioonn  ooff  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellllss

aa  ––  SSiittuuaattiioonn  aass  bbeeffoorree  3300  JJaannuuaarryy  22000022

The  importation  of  totipotent  stem  cells  for  research  purposes  was  covered  by  the  Embryo
Protection Act 1990.  Indeed, under the terms of Article (1) (8), totipotent cells are equivalent to
embryos.  The acquisition and use of embryos for a purpose other than preserving their life is
prohibited by Article (2) (1) of the Embryo Protection Act 1990.  Thus the importation, which is
covered  by  the  term  “acquisition”,  of  totipotent  stem  cells  for  use  in  embryonic  stem  cell
research was therefore prohibited in Germany.

The  situation  regarding  the  importation  of  pluripotent  embryonic  stem  cells  was  different.
Indeed, although pluripotent embryonic stem cells are derived from embryos or totipotent cells,
they  are  neither  embryos  nor  totipotent  cells,  since  they  can  no  longer  develop  into  human
beings.  Thus, the importation of pluripotent  stem cells  was  not  specifically prohibited by  the
Embryo Protection Act 1990.

30

bb  ––  CCuurrrreenntt  ssiittuuaattiioonn

Since the decision of the German Bundestag on 30 January 2002, the importation of human
embryonic stem  cells  from  already  existing  stem  cell  lines  is  allowed  under  strict  conditions.
Both totipotent and multipotent stem cells are covered by this decision.  

The conditions for importation are the following ones: 

only already existing stem cell lines produced from surplus embryos created for reproduction
are used;

the informed consent of the donor couple was freely obtained; 

the aims of the research are worthy;

research applications are assessed by a high-level ethics committee;

there is a licensing authority to administer the system.

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

55..    CCrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  ssoolleellyy  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess

The creation of human embryos for research purposes is forbidden by the Embryo Protection
Act  1990  Article  2  (1)  provides  that  it  is  an  offence  to  “any  person  undertaking  the  artificial
fertilisation of a human egg for a purpose other than to lead to the pregnancy of the woman
from  whom the egg cell originates (…) will be liable to imprisonment for up to three years or a
monetary fine”.

66..    HHuummaann  cclloonniinngg

The  Embryo  Protection  Act  1990  prohibits  both  therapeutic and  reproductive  human  cloning.
Article 6 (1) of the Embryo Protection Act provides that “any person artificially causing a human
embryo with the same genetic information as another embryo, foetus, human or cadaver to be
created will be punished by imprisonment for up to five years or with a fine”.  It is deemed that
the  ‘causing  a  human  embryo’  includes  the  creation  of  embryos  by  cell  nuclear  transfer,
although the definition of article 8 of the Act assumes that the creation of embryo is by means
of the fusion of the cell nuclei of egg and sperm cells (Cf.  The Federal Government Report on
Cloning  dated  26  August  1998).    However,  an  amendment  may  be  added  to  the  Embryo
Protection Act 1990 that would result in the specific prohibition of therapeutic cloning.

77..    CCoouunncciill  ooff  EEuurrooppee’’ss  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  BBiioommeeddiicciinnee

Germany has not signed the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine because it found it
too permissive regarding embryo protection.

31

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

11..    GGeerrmmaann  NNaattiioonnaall  EEtthhiiccss  CCoommmmiitttteeee

The Federal Chancellor Gerhard Schröder created the German National Ethics Council in May
2001.  The Council primarily focused on the importation of human embryonic stem cells, which
was largely debated  in Germany at that time.  In December 2001, the Council issued its first
Opinion on the import of human embryonic stem cells.  

The majority of the members were for the provisional import of human embryonic stem cells for
a limited period only and subject to strict conditions as follow: 

the stem cells must be issued from surplus embryos;

the  couple  whose  embryo  was  used  to  derive  stem  cells  had  to  have  given  an  informed
consent;

the relevant stem cell line has to have been derived independently form the research project in
Germany and before the project was requested;

the  details  of  the  imported  stem  cell  line  have  to  have  been  recorded  at  a  central  public
registration office;

the  research  project  must  have  a  medical  aim  and  its  results  should  not  be  obtainable  in  a
comparable way with other human cells;

the scientific quality of the project must be verified by expert review;

an ethics committee must approve the project;

the results of the project must be published;

the import should be permitted for an initial period of three years.

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

All these conditions should apply equally to state-funded and private research, and they should
be satisfied prior to importation.

The Bundestag mainly followed these conditions, and added that only human embryonic stem
cells from already isolated embryonic stem cell lines could be imported.

22..    OOtthheerr  iinnssttaanncceess

aa  --  TThhee  CCeennttrraall  EEtthhiiccss  CCoommmmiissssiioonn  ooff  tthhee  GGeerrmmaann  MMeeddiiccaall  AAssssoocciiaattiioonn

The  Central  Ethics  Commission  of  the  German  Medical  Association  issued  a  Statement  on
Stem Cell Research on 23 November 2001.  The majority of the Central Ethics Commission is
of  the  opinion  that surplus  embryos  from  in vitro  fertilisation  could  be  used  for  research  and
stem cell research purposes (1 dissenting vote).  The import of pluripotent of pluripotent stem
cells should not be obstructed (4 dissenting votes).  However, the creation of human embryos
solely for research purposes and reproductive cloning is not ethically justifiable.

32

bb  --  TThhee  GGeerrmmaann  RReesseeaarrcchh  OOrrggaanniissaattiioonn

The  German  Research  Organisation,  which  is  the  central  public  funding  organisation  for
academic  research  in  Germany,  called  for  standardisation  and  co-operation  in  human
embryonic stem cell research in May 2001.  It specifically stated that it considers reproductive
and therapeutic cloning as neither scientifically nor ethically responsible.

cc  --  TThhee  SSttuuddyy  CCoommmmiissssiioonn  oonn  LLaaww  aanndd  EEtthhiiccss  iinn  MMooddeerrnn  MMeeddiicciinnee

The German Bundestag set up this commission on 24 March 2000.  It issued a report on stem
cell research as well as a supplement focussing on importation problems, entitled Research in
imported human embryonic stem cells.

C - Links

Bundestag: www.bundestag.de

Central Ethics Commission of the German Medical Association: www.aerzteblatt.de

National Ethics Council: www.nationalerethikrat.de

33

34

GREECE

A - The legal situation

Greece does not have any legislation regarding research on embryos or on human embryonic
stem  cells.  However,  since  Greece  ratified  the  Council  of  Europe’s  Convention  on  Human
Rights  and  Biomedicine  and  since  research  on  embryos is  carried  out  in  Greece,  the  Greek
Government had to establish a  protective  framework for  the embryo.  This  framework  did  not
have to be a piece of law, as long as it was binding for the scientists carrying out experiments
involving  embryos.  Thus,  in  1998,  the  Greek  Central  Council  for  Health,  which  regulates
medically  assisted  reproduction  and  also  deals  with  embryo  research,  issued  guidelines  on
medically assisted reproduction. 

11..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss  aanndd  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellllss

As regards research on embryos, these guidelines provide as follows: 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

research on embryos is authorised only during the first 14 days from fertilisation (excluding any
period of storage);

the consent of the parents is required;

the approval of the relevant ethics committee must be obtained;

the left over embryos should be stored and not immediately destroyed;

the embryos cannot be stored for more than one year, and must be destroyed after that period;

the informed and written consent of the parents before in vitro fertilisation should be obtained.

22..    HHuummaann  cclloonniinngg

There  is  no  national  legislation  dealing  with  human  reproductive  cloning  or  with  therapeutic
cloning.  However, it seems that cloning would be unlawful under the Greek Constitution and
the general legislation.

Furthermore,  the  guidelines  issued  by  the  Greek  Central  Council  for  Health  specifically
excludes reproductive cloning.

Finally, since the Additional Protocol on the Prohibition of Cloning Human Beings entered into
force on 1 March 2001, human cloning is prohibited in Greece.  

35

33..  CCoouunncciill  ooff  EEuurrooppee’’ss  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  BBiioommeeddiicciinnee

Greece signed the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine on 4 April 1997, and ratified
it on 6 October 1998.  The Convention entered into force in Greece on 1 December 1999.

Greece  signed  the  Additional  Protocol  on  the  Prohibition  of  Cloning  Human  Beings  on  12
January 1998 and ratified it on 22 December 1998.  The Additional Protocol entered into force
in Greece on 1 March 2001.  

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

The National Bioethics Commission, established by law 2667/1998, is an independent advisory
body of experts, which shall be subject to the Primeminister. The Commission is expected to be
aware  about  the  possible  applications  of  biological  sciences.  Its  mission  is  to  explore  their
ethical, social and legal impact. 

On 21 December 2001, the National Bioethics Commission issued a recommendation “On the
use of stem cells in biomedicine and clinical medicine”. Until now, however, no legislation has
been adopted.

In principle, scientific committees of the hospitals where embryo research is carried out should
oversee the research done in their hospitals.

CC  --  LLIINNKKSS

Ministry of Health and Welfare: www.ypyp.gr

Parliament: www.parliament.gr

National Bioethics Commission: www.bioethics.gr 

36

IRELAND

A - The legal situation

11..    DDeeffiinniittiioonn  ooff  tthhee  eemmbbrryyoo

The Irish law does not properly define the embryo.  Instead of embryo, the Irish Constitution
used the term “unborn”, which is not defined either.   

22..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss

There is no legislation dealing with research on embryos in Ireland.  However, Article 40 (3) (3)
of  the  Section  on  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  Irish  Constitution  1937  (as  amended  in  1983)
provides that “the State acknowledges the right to life of the unborn and, with due regard to the
equal right to life of the mother, guarantees in its laws to respect, and, as far as practicable, by
its laws to defend and vindicate that right.”

Thus,  in  the  Irish  constitutional  context  where  protection  of  the  life  of  the  “unborn”  prevails,
research  on  embryos  is  implicitly14  forbidden.    This  implicit  prohibition  applies  for  both  non-
therapeutic and therapeutic research on embryos, although the situation is  unclear  regarding
therapeutic research.

14 Implicitly, because it is unclear whether the term “unborn” in Article 40 (3) (3) designates
not only the in vivo embryo but also the in vitro embryo, as the term  “unborn” has  not been

legally interpreted.  There are two possible interpretations, as follows:

(1) If Article 40  (3)  (3)  applies  from  the  moment  of  fertilisation  and  for  both in  vivo  and  in

vitro embryos, the State would have to defend the right to life of the in vitro embryo as well.

As  a  result,  both  embryo  and  human  embryonic  stem  cell  research  should  be  held

unconstitutional.

(2) On the contrary, if “unborn” designates the embryo in the  womb, then  Article  40  (3)  (3)

would apply from implantation in the womb, and research on in vitro embryos could be held

lawful.

But in the Irish constitutional context where protection of the life of the unborn prevails, the

common interpretation is the first one (1).  This is reinforced by the Twenty-fifth Amendment

of the Constitution (Protection of Human Life in Pregnancy) Bill 2001, which proposes to add

a subsection to Article 40 (3) of the Irish Constitution providing protection to  the  life  of  the

“unborn  in  the  womb”  in  accordance  with  the  Protection  of  Human  Life  in  Pregnancy  Act

2002.  Indeed, the addition of a subsection providing protection for the “unborn” specifically

in the womb, even though this refers to the issue of abortion, suggests that the term “unborn”

alone may designate in vitro embryos (out of the womb) as much as in vivo embryos.

37

                                                          
IInn  tthhee  ssaammee  ppeerrssppeeccttiivvee,,  tthhee  creation of embryos solely for research purposes is deemed to be
unconstitutional.

33..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellllss

There is no legislation dealing with stem cells research in Ireland.  However, a Commission on
Assisted Human Reproduction was established by the Department of Health and Children on
25 February 2000 in order to “prepare a report on the possible approaches to the regulation of
all aspects of assisted human reproduction and the social, ethical and legal factors to be taken
into  account  in  determining  public  policy  in  this  area”  (Department  of  Health  and  Children).
This  report  is  expected  for  late  2002  or  early  2003  and  will  provide  a  basis  for  an  informed
public  debate  and  then  policy  proposals.    This  report  should  address  the  issue  of  human
embryonic stem cells research.  

44..    HHuummaann  cclloonniinngg

Ireland does not have a specific legislation covering human cloning.  

By  acknowledging  “the  right  to  life  of  the  unborn”,  Article  40  (3)  (3)  of  the  Irish  Constitution
implicitly  forbids  research  on  embryos,  but  does  not  cover  human  cloning.    Thus,  there  is
currently no legal prohibition of human cloning in Ireland.  

However,  the  Medical  Council  Guidelines,  which  regulate  medical  activities  and  medical
research would not permit the reproductive cloning of human beings.

55..    CCoouunncciill  ooff  EEuurrooppee’’ss  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  BBiioommeeddiicciinnee

Ireland has not signed the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine.

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

The  Royal  Irish  Academy  at  the  request  of  the  Department  of  Enterprise,  Trade  and
Employment recently established the Irish Council for Bioethics.  It has not given any opinion
yet.

C - Links

Department of Health and Children: www.doh.ie
Government: www.gov.ie
Health Research board: www.hrb.ie
Irish Council for Bioethics: www.ria.ie

38

 
ITALY

A - The legal situation

11..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss

There  is  currently  no  specific  legislation  governing  research  on  embryos  and  on  human
embryonic stem cells in Italy15.  

22..    IImmppoorrttaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss

An  Order  issued  by  the  Minister  of  Health  on  25  July  2001  bans  the  importation  and  the
exportation of human gametes and embryos until 31 December 2001.  This period has been
extended until 30 June 2002 by a further order dated 18 December 2001, which applies also to
another previous order banning the commercialisation of human gametes and embryos.

33..    HHuummaann  cclloonniinngg

An  order  issued  by  the  Minister  of  Health  on  5  March  1997  bans  all  forms  of  cloning,  both
human  and  animal  for  a  period  extending  until  31  December  2000.    This  order  has  been
extended three times up to 30 June 2002.

However,  the  Court  of  Verona  in  a 1999 decision  stipulated  that  a  mere  order,  without  legal
basis,  could  not  prevent  scientific  research.    Therefore,  it  seems  that  research  into  human
cloning could take place without infringing the law.

44..    CCoouunncciill  ooff  EEuurrooppee’’ss  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  BBiioommeeddiicciinnee

Italy signed the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine on 4 April 1997, but has not yet
ratified it.

Italy signed the additional protocol on the Prohibition of Cloning Human Beings on 12 January
1998, but has not yet ratified it.

15  There  is,  however,  a  law  proposal  on  in  vitro  fertilisation  that  has  been  approved  by  one
chamber of the Italian Parliament and is currently (i.e. as in June 2002) discussed before the

second  chamber.    But  the  proposal  covers  only  medically  assisted  reproduction,  and  not

research  on  embryos.    It  forbids  reproductive  cloning,  which  constitutes  a  criminal  offence

punishable by 20 years of imprisonment.

39

                                                          
B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

11..    TThhee  NNaattiioonnaall  BBiiooeetthhiiccss  CCoommmmiitttteeee

The Italian National Bioethics Committee was set up following the approval of the resolution n.
6-00038 dated 5 July 1988.  Since its creation, in connection with this publication, it has issued:
-  a  Report  on  the  Identity  and  Status  of  the  Human  Embryo  (22  June  1996);  -  a  Report  on
Cloning ( 17 October 1997); - an Opinion on the Convention on Human rights and Biomedicine
(21  February  1997) ;  -  an Opinion  on  the  Preliminary  Draft  Protocol  on  the  Protection  of  the
Human  Embryo  and  Foetus  of  the  Bioethics  Committee  of  the  Council  of  Europe  (31  March
2000); and an Opinion on the Therapeutic Use of Stem Cells (27 October 2000).

From  all  these  publications,  the  position  of  the  National  Bioethics  Committee  can  be
summarised as follows:  

aa  --  PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  sstteemm  cceellll  rreesseeaarrcchh

The  Italian  National  Bioethics  Committee  considered  that  it  is  possible  to  use  tissues  from
aborted embryos / foetuses (Report on the Identity and Status of the Human Embryo) and that
it is ethically legitimate to derive stem cells from the cells of spontaneously aborted foetuses or
those  produced  by  voluntary  interruption  of  pregnancy,  provided  that  there  is  no  relation
between the abortion and the derivation of stem cells (Opinion on the Therapeutic Use of Stem
Cells).

Furthermore,  in  its  Opinion  on  the  Therapeutic  Use  of  Stem  Cells,  part  of  the  Committee
considered that it is ethically acceptable to derive human embryonic stem cells for therapeutic
purposes  from  embryos  that  were  created  during  infertility  treatments  but  were  no  longer
suitable for implantation.  Consent by the donating woman or couple should be obtained, and
research  projects  should  be  rigorously  assessed  by  an  ethical  committee  as  regards  the
suitability of the concerned embryo for implantation, the donation consent procedure and the
therapeutic  purposes  of  the  experimentation.    Other  members  of  the  National  Bioethics
Committee  were  however  against  using  supernumerary  or  spare  embryos  for  stem  cell
research in any case.  

bb  --  PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  tthhee  ccrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  ssoolleellyy  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess  aanndd  oonn  tthheerraappeeuuttiicc
cclloonniinngg

The  National  Bioethics  Committee  opposed  the  creation  of  human  embryos  for  the  sole
purpose of research and considered therapeutic cloning to be morally unacceptable (Opinion
on the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, Report on Cloning, and Opinion on the
Therapeutic  Use  of  Stem  Cells).    However,  according  to  some  members,  “the  experimental
results  of  somatic  nuclear  replacement  may  suggest  that  this  new  line  of  research  could
produce therapeutic  results  of  great impact  for  the  beings  without any  alternative  such  as  to
suggest evaluating the ethical aspects of future applications on a case by case basis” (Opinion
on the Therapeutic Use of Stem Cells).

40

 
cc  --  PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  rreepprroodduuccttiivvee  cclloonniinngg

The National Bioethics Committee is opposed to reproductive cloning.

22..    RReeppoorrtt  bbyy  tthhee  CCoommmmiitttteeee  ffoorrmmeedd  bbyy  tthhee  IIttaalliiaann  MMiinniisstteerr  ooff  HHeeaalltthh  oonn  tthhee  uussee  ooff  sstteemm
cceellllss  ffoorr  tthheerraappeeuuttiicc  ppuurrppoosseess

On 28 December 2000, a committee formed by the Italian Minister of Health and presided over
by Professor Dulbecco published a report on  the  use  of stem  cells  for  therapeutic  purposes.
The  conclusions  of  the  report  favoured  both  research  on  supernumerary  embryos  and
therapeutic  cloning,  thus  opposing  the  position  of  the  National  Bioethics  Committee  on  the
latest point.   

C - Links

Ministry of Health: http://ministerosalute.it

National Bioethics Committee: www.palazzochigi.it/bioetica/ or www.governo.it/bioetica 

Parliament: www.camera.it

41

42

LUXEMBOURG

A - The legal situation

11..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss  aanndd  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellllss

aa  ––  CCuurrrreenntt  ssiittuuaattiioonn

Luxembourg has no legislation dealing with embryo research, and no embryo research or stem
cells research is performed in the country.

bb  ––  LLaaww  pprrooppoossaall

However, a law proposal on medically assisted reproduction was made in 1998 by the deputy
Marc Zanussi (proposal 4567).  The proposal provides that the use of surplus embryos should
be possible for research having a medical purpose.  The informed consent of the parents and
the  approval  of  the  National  Commission  of  Medicine  and  Reproductive  Biology  should  be
required.  The creation of embryos for commercial, industrial or research purposes should be
forbidden.    But  the  proposal  does  not  make  the  distinction  between  therapeutic  research  on
embryos and non-therapeutic research having a medical purpose.

22..    HHuummaann  cclloonniinngg

There is no legislation on human cloning in Luxembourg.  However, the Health Commission of
the Parliament is taking the issue of human cloning into consideration.

33..  CCoouunncciill  ooff  EEuurrooppee’’ss  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  BBiioommeeddiicciinnee

Luxembourg signed  the  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine  on  4  April  1997,  but
has not yet ratified it.

Luxembourg signed the Additional Protocol on the Prohibition of Cloning Human Beings on 12
January 1998, but has not yet ratified it.

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

The  National  Consultative  Ethics  Committee  for  Life  and  Health  Sciences  has  issued  an
Opinion  on  the  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine  that  raises  the  question  of
embryo research.  

43

 
Moreover, following a Health Minister’s proposal, the Government of Luxembourg agreed on 8
February  2002  to  request  the  formal  opinion  of  the  National  Consultative  Ethics  Committee
regarding research on in vitro embryos for therapeutic purposes and policy recommendations
on  the  question.    The  Government  of  Luxembourg  is  therefore  waiting  for  the  report  before
drafting regulations on embryo research.

C - Links

Government: www.gouvernement.lu/gouv/

National Consultative Ethics Committee for Life and Health Sciences of Luxembourg: 

20, Montée de la Pétrusse 
L-2912 Luxembourg.

44

THE NETHERLANDS

A - The legal situation

Before  June  2002  and  the  adoption  of  the  Embryo  Act,  there  was  no  legislation  regarding
embryo  research  in  the  Netherlands.    However,  the  Ministry  of  Health  asked  all  research
protocols  involving  embryos  to  be  submitted  for  approval  by  the  Central  Committee  for
Research  Involving  Human  Subjects  (CCMO).    The  CCMO  had  to  use  a  1995  Government
Memorandum  on  Embryo  Research  when  evaluating  the  research  projects.    This  1995
Memorandum  precluded  embryonic  stem  cell  research  except  on  already  existing  stem  cell
lines and the creation of embryos for non-reproductive purposes.

Research on human embryos is now covered by the Embryo Act, which was adopted by the
Dutch Parliament in June 2002 and will enter into force probably before the end of 2002.  This
recent piece of law regulates the uses of human gametes and embryos and contains provisions
governing  the  donation  of  embryos  for  research,  including  human  embryonic  stem  cell
research.

11..    DDeeffiinniittiioonn  ooff  tthhee  eemmbbrryyoo  aanndd  ffooeettuuss

Section  1  of  the  Embryo  Act  defines  an  embryo  as  « a  cell  or  a  complex  of  cells  with  the
capacity to develop into a human being » and a foetus as « an embryo in the human body ».

22..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss

aa   --   GGeenneerraall   pprriinncciipplleess   rreeggaarrddiinngg   rreesseeaarrcchh   iinnvvoollvviinngg   eemmbbrryyooss   aanndd   ggaammeetteess   lleeaaddiinngg   ttoo
tthhee  ccrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss

All  research  involving  embryos  and  gametes  leading  to  the  creation  of  embryos  must  be
performed in accordance with a research protocol containing a full description of the intended
research and this research protocol must be approved by the Central Committee (Section 3).

The  donation  of  gametes  (Section  5)  or  embryos  (Section  8)  is  allowed  by  the  Act  with  the
following conditions: 

- 

- 

- 

the donors are adults capable of making a reasonable assessment of their interests (Section 5
(1) for gametes and Section 8 (1) for embryos); 

the information was supplied in such a way that it is reasonably certain that it was understood
(Section 6); 

a written informed consent was obtained without consideration (Section 5 (2) for gametes and
Section 8 (2) for embryos).  

45

With  respect  to  the  donation  of  surplus  embryo  for  research,  Section  8  (1)  stipulates  more
specifically that:

“Adults who are capable of making a  reasonable  assessment  of their interests in  this  regard
may make available for the following purposes embryo which have been created outside the
body for their own pregnancy, but which will no longer be used for this purpose:

(a) to induce pregnancy in another person;

(b)  to  culture  embryonic  cells  for  medical  purposes,  medical  and  biological  research  and
medical and biological education;

(c) to carry out research that is permissible under this Act using those embryos.”

The permissible research under the Embryo Act is the following:

bb  --  NNoonn--tthheerraappeeuuttiicc  rreesseeaarrcchh  iinnvvoollvviinngg  iinn  vviittrroo  eemmbbrryyooss

Division 3 of the Embryo Act regulates « research with embryos outside the human body which
does not induce a pregnancy ».  Following Section 10, such research is allowed on condition
that the required approval by the Central Committee is obtained.  This approval will be obtained
only if the research can reasonably be expected to “lead in new insights in the field of medical
science” and if those “insights” cannot be obtained using other methods.  

Additionally,  the  embryos  or  the  gametes  from  which  they  are  created  have  to  be  made
available for research purposes, the written informed consent of the donors must be obtained
without consideration (Section 12), and a protocol has to be drafted as required in Section 3.

cc  --  TThheerraappeeuuttiicc  rreesseeaarrcchh  iinnvvoollvviinngg  iinn  vviittrroo  eemmbbrryyooss

Division 4 of the Embryo Act regulates « research with embryos outside the human body, which
is  intended to  induce  pregnancy ».    The  required  approval  by  the  Central  Committee  will  be
delivered  only if  the  research  will  probably  « lead  to  new  insights  with  regard  to  research  or
therapeutic methods that are aimed at inducing pregnancy and the birth of a healthy child », if
the expected results cannot be achieved by other less invasive methods, and if « the interests
to be served by the research are proportional to the drawbacks and risks for the potential child
and the woman » (Section 16).

Additionally,  the  written  consent  of  the  woman  and  her  husband  /  life  companion  must  be
obtained after the giving of information in writing and in such a way that it is reasonably certain
that the concerned persons have understood it (Section 17).

dd  --  TThheerraappeeuuttiicc  rreesseeaarrcchh  iinnvvoollvviinngg  ffooeettuusseess

Division 5 of the Embryo Act governs “research with foetuses”.  Research involving a foetus is
allowed only if it is in the interests of the foetus.  Section 20 provides that “research using a

46

foetus is  permitted  only  if it  might  assist  in  the  diagnosis,  prevention  or  treatment  of  serious
diseases in the foetus concerned and if it cannot be postponed until after birth”.  

Research  concerned  with  a  foetus  will  be  approved  by  the  Central  Committee  only  if  the
research will probably “lead to new medical insights in relation to unborn and new-born children
or regarding the continuation of pregnancies to term”, if other less invasive methods of research
cannot be used, and if the interests of the research are “proportional to the drawbacks and risks
for the foetus and the woman” (Section 19).

Full  informed  consent  must  be  obtained  in  writing  from  the  pregnant  woman,  who  must  be
capable  of  making  a  reasonable  assessment  of  her  interests,  or  from  her  parents,  legal
representative, guardian, husband or life companion (Section 21).  

33..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellllss

In addition to research on already existing stem cell lines, which was already allowed before
June  2002,  the  Embryo  Act  makes  it  possible  to  conduct  research  in  order  to  isolate  new
embryonic stem cell lines from existing embryos left over after in vitro fertilisation (Section 8 (1)
(b)).  

The Dutch legislation provides that research involving the isolation  of  new  human  embryonic
stem cell lines can be carried out on surplus embryos during the 14 days following fertilisation,
after consent of the donors has been obtained.  

The Central Committee (CCMO) must review all research projects involving embryos and the
production  of  new  human  embryonic  stem  cell  lines.    This  requirement  does  not  apply  to
research projects involving already existing stem cell lines.

44..    CCrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  ssoolleellyy  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess

The  Embryo  Act  enounces,  as  a  general  principle,  the  prohibition  of  the  creation  of  human
embryos solely for research purposes.  Section 24 (a) of the Embryo Act bans the creation of
human embryos « specifically for research purposes or for purposes other than the induction of
a  pregnancy ».    Thus  the  creation  of  human  embryos  for  the  purpose  of  isolating  new
embryonic stem cell lines is forbidden.  

However, this ban is not irreversible and could be lifted by Royal Decree (Section 33 (2)) within
five years after the coming into force of the Act.  It is therefore more accurate to talk about a
moratorium.

Furthermore, the Embryo Act already contains provisions that will enter into force on the date
the ban is lifted:

-  Section 11 provides as follows: « Carrying out research with embryos created specifically for
this  purpose  is  prohibited.    This  prohibition  shall  not  apply  to  research  which  is  reasonably
likely  to  lead  to  new  insights  in  the  fields  of  infertility,  artificial  reproduction  techniques,

47

 
hereditary or congenital diseases or transplant medicine, and which can only be performed by
making use of embryos as referred to in the first sentence ».

-  Section 9 provides that adults « capable of making a reasonable assessment of their interests
in this regard may make their gametes available for the creation of embryos specifically for: a.
culturing embryonic cells intended for implantation in human where this can only be achieved
using cells from specially created embryos; b.  carrying out research using those embryos that
is permissible under this Act ».

55..    HHuummaann  cclloonniinngg

Because of this ban / moratorium, the creation of embryos by cell nuclear transfer for research
purposes (therapeutic cloning) is precluded in the Netherlands for the moment.  

If this ban is lifted, following Section 11 of the Act, therapeutic cloning will then be allowed in
order to produce embryonic stem cells to  be transplanted  on  condition that  the  same  results
could not be achieved by another means (for example by the transplant of adult stem cells).  

66..    CCoouunncciill  ooff  EEuurrooppee’’ss  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  BBiioommeeddiicciinnee

The Netherlands signed the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine on 4 April 1997.  It
intends to ratify it.  However, before ratification and because of the ban / moratorium of Section
33 (2) of the Embryo Act, the Dutch Government intends to make a provision to article 18 (2) of
the Convention.

The Netherlands signed the Additional Protocol to the Convention on the Prohibition of Cloning
Human Beings on the 4 May 1998, but it has not yet ratified it.

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

The Health Council of the Netherlands was established by the first Health Act in 1902.  It is an
independent pluridisciplinary instance whose task is to advise the Dutch Government on social
and scientific issues related to health.  The Health Act 1956, as amended in 1997, defines the
Health  Council’s  duties  as  follows:  “…  to  advise  the  government  and  the  parliament  on  the
current level of knowledge with respect to public health issues…”.  

11..    PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  eemmbbrryyoo  rreesseeaarrcchh  aanndd  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellll  rreesseeaarrcchh

In  1997,  the  Health  Council  published  a  first  report  on  research  and  use  of  embryonic  stem
cells.  This report focused on the need to take into account embryonic stem cell research while
drafting legislation on embryo research.  The Council concluded that the research purposes for
which  embryo  research  could  be  allowed  should  be  extended  to  research  of  high  medical
interest and no longer limited any more to research on infertility, medically assisted procreation
or genetic diseases.  

48

On 27 June 2002, the Health Council issued a second report dealing with embryonic stem cell
research: Stem cell for tissue repair:  Research on therapy using somatic and embryonic stem
cells.

In this second report, the Council concluded (among other points) that research into embryonic
stem cells was important for the possible development of new forms of cell therapy and that the
creation of new embryonic stem cell lines may be of major importance since the availability of
the current cell lines is limited, and those lines may also be contaminated and one-sided in their
genetic composition.

Thus it agrees with the Embryo Act that permits isolating new embryonic stem cell lines from
spare embryos.

22..    PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  tthheerraappeeuuttiicc  cclloonniinngg

In the same report, the Council concluded that the research dealing with cell nuclear transplant
was  in  the  long  term  important  for  the  research  dealing  with  the  possibility  of  preventing
rejection, but that there were no urgent scientific reasons based cell research for lifting, in the
short term, the moratorium in the Embryo Bill on cell nuclear transplant.  

Therefore, it recommended « no ban (statutory or non-statutory) in advance on research into
the possibility of nuclear transplants and the creation of new embryonic stem cell lines ».

Furthermore,  the  Council  recommended  the  inclusion,  in  the  Embryo  Act,  of  research  into
transplants  of  human  nuclei  into  animals’  egg  cells,  and  the  conducting  of  research  into  the
practicality of using somatic stem cells for transplantation purposes.

C - Links

Dutch Parliament: www.parlement.nl

Health Council: www.gr.nl

Minister of Health: www.minvws.nl

49

50

PORTUGAL

A - The legal situation

11..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss

There is currently no specific national legislation either on medically assisted procreation or on
research involving embryos or human embryonic stem cells.  

The  Ministry  of  Health  has  elaborated  a  law  proposal  to  regulate  assisted  reproduction
techniques,  which  was  approved  by  the  Parliament  in  1998.    However,  this  proposal  had
encountered a veto from the President of the Portuguese Republic in 1999.  As a result, there
is not yet any national legislation regulating medically assisted procreation.

Consequently, the legal status of the in vitro embryo is not established despite two propositions
on the Civil Code (regarding the establishment of paternity) and on the Penal Code.

Furthermore, since Portugal ratified the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, Article
18 of the Convention applies, which means that, in the absence of a protective framework for
the embryo, embryo research cannot be carried out.

22..    CCrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  ssoolleellyy  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess

Although  the  Portuguese  law  does  not  deal  with  the  creation  of  human  embryos  solely  for
research purposes, it is now forbidden in Portugal because of the ratification of the Convention
on Human Rights and Biomedicine.  Indeed, Article 18 (2) prohibits the creation of embryos for
research purposes.  

33..    HHuummaann  cclloonniinngg

There are no national regulations on human cloning in Portugal. But since 1 December 2001,
cloning human beings is prohibited because of the ratification of the Additional Protocol on the
Prohibition of Cloning Human Beings.

44..    CCoouunncciill  ooff  EEuurrooppee’’ss  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  BBiioommeeddiicciinnee

Portugal signed the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine on 4 April 1997, and ratified
it on 13 August 2001.  The Convention entered into force on 1 December 2001.  

Portugal  signed  the  Additional  Protocol  on  the  Prohibition  of  Cloning  Human  Beings  on  12
January 1998, and ratified it on 13 August 2001.  The Additional Protocol entered into force on
1 December 2001.

51

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

The  Portuguese  National  Council  of  Ethics  for  the  Life  Sciences  published  the  following
relevant opinions: 

-  Report-Opinion 3/CNECV/93 on Medically-Assisted Reproduction, issued on 1 February 1993;

-  Report-Opinion 15/CNECV/95 on Experimentation on the Human Embryo, issued on 4 October

1995; 

-  Opinion 21/CNECV/97 on the Ethical Implications of Cloning, issued on 1 April 1997.  

11..    PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  eemmbbrryyoo  rreesseeaarrcchh

The Portuguese National Council of Ethics considers that research on embryos is not ethically
acceptable with regard to the special status of the embryo.  In its Opinion on Experimentation
on the Human Embryo from 1995, it stipulates that “it is seriously illicit to conduct upon embryo
experimentation  from  which  it  will  not  benefit  and  which,  on  the  contrary,  will  lead  to  its
destruction  (since  any  embryo  subjected  to  experimentation  may  not  be  implanted  in  the
uterus)".

The National Council of Ethics founds its position on Article 24 of the Portuguese Constitution
that establishes the inviolability of human life. Consequently, as « it seems impossible to deny
the existence of a new human life in the embryo as from syngamy, the embryo cannot be the
object of any experimentation that leads, or might lead, to its destruction.  » 

Although the National Council does not adopt a specific definition of the embryo and foetus, it
mentions in its report that the real start of a new human life is the fertilisation of the egg by the
sperm,  precisely  when  two  pronuclei  (one  maternal  and  one  paternal)  fusion.    Therefore,
experimentation  could  be  possible,  namely  on  the  ovum  after  penetration  by  the  sperm,  but
before the fusion of the nuclei.  In its conclusions, the National Council says that « there are no
objections to the utilisation, for experimental purposes, of activated oocytes (pathenotes); nor,
though  with  some  reserve,  to  the  recourse  to  fertilised oocytes,  so  long  as  the  fusion  of  the
pronuclei (syngamy) has not yet taken place ».  

this  means 

that  research  carried  out  on  gametes  (including  studies  of
Practically, 
cryopreservation, maturation and parthenogenesis using oocytes) prior to syngamy is ethically
acceptable.    But  research  carried  out  on  the  embryo  following  syngamy  is  ethically
unacceptable.

Research carried out with the intention of benefiting the embryo should also be prohibited in the
present state of scientific knowledge, but may in the future be ethically acceptable.  This should
be distinguished from experimental therapy that is acceptable so long as the general principles
that regulate experimental therapy are respected.

52

 
The National Council recommends avoiding the creation of surplus embryos.

The  Committee  called  for  the  elaboration  of  a  specific  regulation  on  medically  assisted
procreation and on the status of the embryo to avoid the legal limbo resulting from the absence
of legislation.

  22..    PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellll  rreesseeaarrcchh

The  National  Council  of  Ethics  mentioned  the  issue  of  human  stem  cells  in  its  1999  annual
report, but has not yet issued an opinion on the subject.  In pursuance to its position on embryo
research,  the  National  Council  of  Ethics  is  likely  to  oppose  human  embryonic  stem  cell
research.

33..    PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  hhuummaann  cclloonniinngg

In its Opinion on the Ethical Implications of Cloning dated 1997, the National Council of Ethics
of  Portugal  states  that  “the  cloning  of  human  beings,  because  of  the  problems  it  raises
concerning the dignity of the human person, the equilibrium of the human species and life in
society, is ethically unacceptable and must be prohibited.”

Focusing on the analysis of the ethical issues of cloning, the opinion of the council is mainly
founded  on  the  dignity  of  the  human  person,  which  precludes  being  used  as  an  object  or
instrument for whatever purposes and on a previous opinion, which excludes “the creation of
genetically 
form  of
“instrumentalisation  of  the  reproductive  process”.    The  Council  considers  that  “the  deliberate
production  of  genetically 
intolerable
instrumentalisation of such production”.  

through  cloning  or  other  means”  as  a 

identical  human  beings 

identical  human  beings 

[…]  would  entail  an 

No distinction is made between reproductive and therapeutic cloning.  It is worth remembering
that in 1997, stem cells research and therapeutic cloning were not an issue.  

C - Links

Parliament: www.parlamento.pt

Portuguese National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences: www.cnecv.gov.pt

53

54

SPAIN

A - The legal situation

The law 35/1988 on Assisted Reproduction Techniques of 22 November 1988, the law 42/1988
on Donation and Use of Human Embryos and Foetuses or their Cells, Tissues or Organs of 28
December  1988,  and  two  Constitutional  Rulings  of  1996  (STC  212/96)  and  of  1999  (STC
116/99)  constitute  the  Spanish  legal  framework  regarding  research  on  human  embryos  and
human embryonic stem cells.

11..    DDeeffiinniittiioonn  ooff  tthhee  eemmbbrryyoo

The  law  35/1988  on  Assisted  Reproduction  Techniques  defines  and  distinguishes  the  pre-
embryo,  the  embryo  and  the  foetus.    The  term  « pre-embryo »  designates  an  embryo  from
fecondation until it is 14 days old.  The term « embryo » designates an embryo aged from 15
days  until  three  months.    This  period  corresponds  with  the  formation  of  organs.    The  term
« foetus » is use for embryos of more than three months.

The law 35/1988 on Assisted Reproduction Techniques regulates the creation and use of « pre-
embryos » of less than 15 days.  The law 42/1988 on Donation and Use of Human Embryos
and  Foetuses  or  their  Cells,  Tissues  or  Organs  provides  the  conditions  for  the  donation  of
« embryos » of more than 14 days and their cells, tissues and organs.

22..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss

aa  --  RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  ““pprree--eemmbbrryyooss””

When setting conditions upon which research can be carried out on embryos of less than 15
days,  the  Assisted  Reproduction  Techniques  Act  distinguishes  between  the  viable16,  non-
viable, dead and aborted nature of the “pre-embryos”: 

-  Research on viable in vitro “pre-embryos” can only be carried out for therapeutic, diagnostic or
prophylactic purposes, and on condition that no change is made to the genetic non-pathologic
inheritance of the embryo.

-  Non-therapeutic research is permitted on non-viable and on dead  “pre-embryos”, excluding

voluntary aborted embryos.  

-  All kind of research on in vivo or voluntary aborted  “pre-embryos” is forbidden.

16 Viable means “biologically” competent and non-viable means “biologically” incompetent.

55

                                                          
Furthermore, Section 15 of the Act outlines the required conditions that all kinds of research on
human “pre-embryos” must satisfy:

- 

- 

- 

- 

the progenitors must give their informed consent in writing;

the research cannot be done on animals;

the pre-embryo does not develop in vitro for more than 14 days;

the research is carried out by agreed centres and qualified teams of professionals.

bb  --  RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  ““eemmbbrryyooss””  aanndd  ““ffooeettuusseess””

Non-viable  or  dead  “embryos”  and  “foetuses”  can  be  used  for  diagnostic,  therapeutic,
pharmacological,  clinical,  surgical  or  non-therapeutic  research  purposes  in  the  conditions
defined by the law regarding the use of “pre-embryos” (free informed consent in writing of the
donors, no abortion, qualified medical team).  

In  1989  the  constitutionality  of  the  law  35/1988  on  Assisted  Reproduction  Techniques  was
challenged by the popular party (then in the opposition) before the Constitutional Court.  One of
the grounds of the claim was that the Act breached the mandatory constitutional protection of
human  life  contained  in  Article  15  of  the  Spanish  Constitution  by  not  protecting  the  embryo.
The  claim  failed  after  the  Constitutional  Court  ruled  on  17  June  1999  that  the  Assisted
Reproduction Techniques Act was in accordance with the Spanish Constitution.  

The relevant aspects of the Constitutional Court decision regarding research on embryos are
as follows:

-  Article 15 of the Spanish Constitution does not recognise a fundamental right to life to unborn

human beings.  

-  However,  unborn  human  beings  (and  thus  in  vivo  and  in  vitro  embryos)  deserve  some

protection under a rather constitutionally protected interest.  

- 

- 

In  vitro  “pre-embryos”  do  not  deserve  the  same  protection  as  in  vivo  “pre-embryos”.    Thus
interventions  such  as  diagnosis,  therapy  and  prevention  are  only  allowed  on  in  vitro  “pre-
embryos”.

This protection is only applicable to the viable embryo.  This means that non-viable embryos
have no legal protection under the Spanish Constitution.  The debate has been focused on the
clarification of the meaning of non-viability.  Some people considered that a non-viable embryo
is an embryo which is “biologically” incompetent. Others argued that it designates an embryo
which  is  not  going  to  be  transferred  into  a  woman’s  womb  and  is  therefore  considered  as
“functionally” incompetent.  This last definition of non-viability would have allowed the use of
surplus embryos for non-therapeutic research.  

However, in the 1999 Constitutional Court decision, non-viability was deemed to refer only to a
biological competence, thus a surplus “pre-embryo” is viable even though it is not transferred
into a woman.  Non-therapeutic research can therefore only be carried out on biologically non-

56

viable embryos (either  in vitro  “pre-embryos”  or  embryos), and  not  on surplus  “pre-embryos”
that are biologically competent.  

33..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellllss

There are no specific regulations on human embryonic stem cell research in Spain.  

Pursuant to the Act on Assisted Reproduction Techniques, the harvesting of human embryonic
stem  cells  can  only  take  place  on  biologically  non-viable  “pre-embryos”,  as  non-therapeutic
research  can  only  take  place  on  non-viable  “pre-embryos”  or  “embryos”,  and  if  the  research
cannot be done on animals.  Therefore, surplus embryos cannot be used for embryonic stem
cell research purposes.17

Furthermore,  it  is  unclear  whether  Spanish  law  allows  the  importation  of  already  isolated
human  embryonic  stem  cells  for  research  purposes.    The  current  Spanish  Government
opposes the carrying out of such research anyway.

44..    CCrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  ssoolleellyy  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess

Section 20 of the Act 35/1988 prohibits the creation of human embryos for purposes other than
reproduction.

Additionally, the Act prohibits the creation of chimeras or hybrids.

55..    HHuummaann  cclloonniinngg

As  the  law  35/1988  prohibits  the  creation  of  human  embryos  for  purposes  other  than
reproduction, therapeutic cloning is not permitted.

As regards reproductive cloning, since 1995, Article 161-2 of the Spanish Penal Code prohibits
cloning of human beings.  Such an action would be punished by imprisonment from one to five
years and suspension of professional activities for six to ten years.  

66..    CCoouunncciill  ooff  EEuurrooppee’’ss  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  BBiioommeeddiicciinnee

Spain signed the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine on 4 April 1997 and ratified it
on 1 September 1999.  The Convention entered into force in Spain on 1 January 2000.  

Spain signed the Additional Protocol on the Prohibition of Cloning Human beings on 12 January
1998 and ratified it on 24 January 2000.  The Protocol entered into force on 1 March 2001.  

17  It  is  important  to  note  that  the  cryopreservation  of  embryos  is  allowed  by  Spanish  law,
which means that having surplus embryos is not excluded.

57

 
                                                          
Both  pieces  of  law  are  now  part  of  the  Spanish  legal  framework  dealing  with  research  on
human embryos, human embryonic stem cells and human cloning.

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

11..    TThhee  NNaattiioonnaall  CCoommmmiissssiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  AArrttiiffiicciiaall  RReepprroodduuccttiioonn

The National Commission on Human Artificial Reproduction was created by the law 35/1988 on
Assisted Reproduction Techniques in order to supervise the correct application of this Act.  It
gained its full status in 1999, only after the Constitutional Court decision was  released.    The
National Commission on Human Artificial Reproduction, which has an advisory function, is in
favour  of  using  surplus  embryos  from  in  vitro  fertilisation  and  stored  embryos  for  research
purposes.  The Commission is also in favour of therapeutic cloning and recommends modifying
the law.

22..    TThhee  EEtthhiiccss  CCoommmmiitttteeee  ((SSppaanniisshh  FFoouunnddaattiioonn  ffoorr  SScciieennccee  aanndd  TTeecchhnnoollooggyy,,  MMiinniissttrryy  ooff
SScciieennccee  aanndd  TTeecchhnnoollooggyy))

The Ministry of Science and Technology created the Ethics Committee in April 2002.  It has an
advisory  function  to  the  Government.    By  contrast  with  the  National  Commission  on  Human
Artificial  Reproduction,  the  Ethics  Committee  is  opposed  to  the  use  of  human  embryos  for
research purposes.

33..    TThhee  BBiiooeetthhiiccss  aanndd  LLaaww  OObbsseerrvvaattoorryy

The  Opinion  Group  of  the  Bioethics  and  Law  Observatory,  based  in  the  Scientific  Park  of
Barcelona, was formed to study the ethical, social and legal implications of new biotechnology
techniques and to make proposals for legislative action (advisory function as well).

aa   --   PPoossiittiioonn   oonn   eemmbbrryyoo   rreesseeaarrcchh   aanndd   oonn   tthhee   ccrreeaattiioonn   ooff   eemmbbrryyooss   ssoolleellyy   ffoorr   rreesseeaarrcchh
ppuurrppoosseess

In  its  Declaration  on  Embryo  Research  dated  July  2000,  the  Group  considers  that  research
involving in vitro embryos is not objectionable and should not be limited to purely diagnostic or
therapeutic purposes, but should be extended to scientific purposes.  Non-therapeutic research
should also be carried out in the following cases:

on left over embryos with the consent of the donors;

on embryos « created expressly for research into pathologies suffered by the donor couples »;

on embryos « created from gametes donated for research purposes and not in connection with
any fertility project »;

- 

- 

- 

- 

on « somatic embryos obtained by cloning ».

58

 
Such research projects should only take place within the first 14 days of development of the
embryo and should be evaluated, regulated, approved and controlled by the competent body.
Embryos used for non-therapeutic research should not be transferred.  Finally, the creation of
gametic embryos for research purposes should only take place if the same results cannot be
obtained by using animal models, surplus embryos or somatic embryos.

bb  --  PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellll  rreesseeaarrcchh  aanndd  oonn  tthheerraappeeuuttiicc  cclloonniinngg

In its Declaration on Embryonic Stem Cells dated December 2001, the Group recommends the
modification of the Spanish legislation in order to allow scientists to obtain embryonic stem cells
for research purposes.  The Group considers that the use of human embryonic stem cells for
therapeutic  and  research  purposes  is  acceptable  in  the  following  cases  and  provided  that
informed consent of the donors has been obtained:

stem cells obtained from spare embryos donated for the purpose of scientific research;

stem cells obtained from non-transferable in vitro embryos;

stem  cells  obtained  from  frozen  embryos  that  have  exceeded  the  legally  permitted
cryopreservation period;

stem cells obtained from embryos created by cell nuclear transfer;

stem cells  obtained from  gametic  embryos  (i.e.    created  for  the  creation  of  stem  cells  using
human gametes).

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Such  projects  should  be  evaluated,  regulated,  approved  and  controlled  by  a  competent
authority.    The  creation  of  embryos  from  human  gametes  is  « recommendable  if  it  is  not
possible to use spare embryos donated for research purposes », or embryos that have become
available for the reasons outlined above.  It says that the obtaining of embryonic stem cells in
these ways is justifiable « in the absence of proof that identical results can be obtained in all
respects by using foetal or adult stem cells ».

44..    TThhee  SSppaanniisshh  CCoommmmiitttteeee  ooff  EExxppeerrttss  oonn  CClloonniinngg

In its report dated June 1999, the Spanish Committee of Experts in Cloning supports the lifting
of the existing ban on therapeutic cloning.  The Committee is however strictly opposed to the
legalisation of human reproductive cloning.

55..    TThhee  SSppaanniisshh  RRooyyaall  AAccaaddeemmyy  ooff  MMeeddiicciinnee

In March 2002, the Spanish Royal Academy of Medicine declared its opposition to any use of
human embryos for research purposes.  It said that all supernumerary embryos should be used
for implantation into women.  It also rejected human embryonic stem cell research because the
harvesting of stem cells from an embryo entails its destruction, and the importation of human
embryos  for  research  purposes.    Finally,  the  Academy  is  against  both  reproductive  and
therapeutic cloning.  

59

C - Links

Bioethics and Law Observatory: www.ub.es/fildt/bioetica.htm

Ministry of Health: www.msc.es

Ministry of Science and Technology: www.mcyt.es

Parliament: www.congreso.es

60

SWEDEN

A - The legal situation

The Act (1991: 115) on Measures for Purposes of Research and Treatment Involving Fertilised
Human Ova issued on 14 March 1991 defines the conditions under which research on human
embryos and human embryonic stem cells can be performed.  The Health and Medical Care
Act (1992: 763) applies as well.

11..    DDeeffiinniittiioonn  ooff  tthhee  eemmbbrryyoo

Instead  of  the  term  embryo,  the  1991  Act  on  Measures  for  Purposes  of  Research  and
Treatment  Involving  Fertilised  Human  Ova  generally  uses  the  expression  “fertilised  (human)
ovum”.

22..  RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss

Non-therapeutic research on surplus in vitro embryos is allowed until day 14, after which the
embryo  must  be  destroyed.  The  research  projects  must  be  carried  out  for  the  following
purposes:

- 

- 

- 

to improve infertility treatments;

to improve contraceptive methods;

to develop the knowledge of the embryonic development and the causes of defects.

Section 2 of the 1991 Act provides that “experiments on fertilised ova for purposes of research
or  treatment  may  be  performed,  at  most,  up  to  and  including  the  fourteenth  day  after
fertilisation.  Experiments  may  not  have  the  purpose  of  developing  methods  for  achieving
potentially hereditary genetic effects”.

Consent of the donors must be obtained. Section 1 of the 1991 Act on Measures for Purposes
of Research and Treatment Involving Fertilised Human Ova states that “measures under this
Act involving fertilised human ova require the consent of the donors of ova and sperm cells”.

Pursuant  to  Section  2  and  Section  4  of  the  1991  Act,  a  fertilised  ovum,  an  ovum  before
fertilisation or the sperm cells used for fertilisation that have been subject of experimentation
must not be implanted in a woman’s womb. They must be destroyed without delay. 

All research projects must be submitted to an Ethics Committee. 

61

 
33..  RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellllss

Although  the  1991  Act  on  Measures  for  Purposes  of  Research  and  Treatment  Involving
Fertilised Human Ova was enacted before human embryonic stem cell research took place, it
covers such a research. 

As stem cell research elucidates mechanisms for cell differentiation, it was deemed to fall within
the  third  category  of  authorised  research  projects  (to  develop  knowledge  of  the  embryonic
development and the causes of defects) by the Ethics Committees and the Swedish Research
Council.  Thus  the  1991  Act  does  not  forbid  stem  cell  research.  A  large  number  of  human
embryonic stem cell lines have been isolated in Sweden, which is one of the leading countries
in the field of stem cell research so far. 

44..    CCrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  ssoolleellyy  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess

The production of human embryos solely for research purposes is not allowed according to the
1991  Act  on  Measures  for  Purposes  of  Research  and  Treatment  Involving  Fertilised  Human
Ova.

55..    HHuummaann  cclloonniinngg

The  Swedish  legislation  has  been  interpreted  as  containing  an  implied  prohibition  to  cloning
human beings: “If a fertilised ovum has been the subject of experimentation for the purposes of
research or treatment, it may not be implanted in a woman’s body.  The same applies  if  the
ovum,  before  fertilisation,  or  the  sperm  cells  used  for  fertilisation  have  been  a  subject  of
experimentation”  (Section  4  of  the  1991  Act  on  Measures  for  Purposes  of  Research  and
Treatment Involving Fertilised Human Ova).

Reproductive cloning seems to be embodied in this prohibition.

Therapeutic  cloning  does  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  Section  4.  Swedish  law  could  be
interpreted  as  implicitly  forbidding  therapeutic  cloning  because  it  prohibits  the  production  of
embryos  solely  for  research  purposes.  But  there  is  a  legal  vacuum  as  regards  therapeutic
cloning.  

66..  CCoouunncciill  ooff  EEuurrooppee’’ss  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  BBiioommeeddiicciinnee

Sweden signed the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine on 4 April 1997, but has not
yet ratified it.

Sweden  signed  the  Additional  Protocol  on  the  Prohibition  of  Cloning  Human  Beings  on  12
January 1998, but has not yet ratified it.

62

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

11..    PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellll  rreesseeaarrcchh

The Swedish Research Council issued ethical guidelines for stem cell research in December
2001.  The Council considered  that  the  use of  embryos  in  research  is  ethically  acceptable  if
there is no alternative to obtain equivalent results and if the project is judged to be necessary
for the advancement of stem cell research.  

Stem cells may be taken from surplus embryos created for in vitro fertilisation purposes.  The
embryos  cannot  be  older  than  14  days.    The  donating  couples  have  to  give  their  informed
consent.    Embryos  that  have  been  frozen  for  possible  later  use  may  be  used  for  stem  cell
research providing that their storage is to be terminated (legal period of five years) and that the
donating couple has given its informed consent.  

The  number  of  embryos  used  to  implement  the  research  project  must  be  limited  to  the
necessary number.

22..    PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  tthhee  ccrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  ssoolleellyy  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess

The guidelines do not accept the creation of human embryos from eggs and sperm solely for
research purposes.

33..    PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  tthheerraappeeuuttiicc  cclloonniinngg

However, in the same guidelines the Council found that the creation of embryos by somatic cell
nuclear transfer to get access to stem cells is ethically defensible, because of the prospect for
major  long-term  advances  in  treating  diseases.    Thus,  a  distinction  is  drawn  between  the
creation of embryos by fertilisation and the creation of embryos by cell nuclear transfer.

Consequently,  as  the  current  legislation  does  not  allow  therapeutic  cloning,  the  Council
proposes a review of the legislation.  

Therapeutic cloning should be subject to the following conditions :

-  A government authority should issue a licence and monitor the research activities ;

- 

Legislation  prohibiting  the  implantation  of  embryos  created  by  somatic  cell  nuclear  transfer
should be adopted.  

As Sweden has signed the European Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine according
to which human embryos cannot be produced for research purposes, Sweden would therefore
be  obliged  to  make  a  reservation  in  respect  of  Article  18  (2)    of  the  Convention  before
ratification in order to be able to legalise therapeutic cloning.

63

 
The Swedish Research Council judges the commercialisation of embryos and stem cells to be
incompatible with ethical research and recommends that such a commercialisation should be
established as a criminal offence.

C - Links

Swedish National Ethics Council: www.smer.gov.se

Swedish Research Council: www.vr.se/english/

64

UNITED KINGDOM

A - The legal situation

The  Human  Fertilisation  and  Embryology  Act  1990  regulates  the  practice  of  assisted
reproduction and embryo research.  The Warnock Committee’ s report on human fertilisation
and embryology (dated 1985) formed the basis of this piece of law.  The Act sets up a statutory
body, the Human Fertilisation and Embryology  Authority,  which  regulates  the  activities  which
are authorised under the Act.

11..    DDeeffiinniittiioonn  ooff  tthhee  eemmbbrryyoo

Section 1  (1)  of  the  Human  Fertilisation and  Embryology  Act  1990  states  that  the  term  “  (a)
embryo means a live human embryo where fertilisation is complete, and (b) references to an
embryo include an egg in the process of fertilisation, and, for this purpose, fertilisation is not
complete until the appearance of a two cell zygote”.

22..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss  aanndd  ccrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  ssoolleellyy  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess

aa  --  GGeenneerraall  ccoonnddiittiioonnss

Research on either spare human embryos or human embryos created for research purposes is
allowed under strict conditions and provided that the required licence has been granted by the
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990.   Research  on  embryos  older  than  14  days  is
prohibited.  Embryos can be stored for a  period  not exceeding  five  years,  and  then  must  be
destroyed (Section 14 (4)).

Section 3 (1) of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990 prohibits the creation, the
keeping or the use of a human embryo outside the human body without a licence, and Section
3 (3) lists the activities that a licence cannot authorise:

- 

- 

- 

keeping or using an embryo after the appearance of the primitive streak18,

placing an embryo in any animal,

keeping or using an embryo in any circumstances in which regulations prohibit its keeping or
use, or

18 Following Section 3 (4), “the primitive streak is to be taken to have appeared in an embryo
not later than the end of the period of 14 days beginning with the day  when the  gametes are

mixed, not counting any time during which the embryo is stored”.

65

                                                          
- 

replacing  a  nucleus  of  a  cell  of  an  embryo  with  a  nucleus  taken  from  a  cell  of  any  person,
embryo or subsequent development of an embryo.

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

bb  --  LLiicceenncceess  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh

Schedule 2 of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990 lists the three different types
of licences that can be issued under the Act: - licences for treatments; - licences for storage of
embryos  and  gametes;  -  licences  for  research  on  embryos.    A  licence  for  research  may
authorise the “creation of embryos in vitro”, and the “keeping or using of embryos” (Schedule 2
(3) (1)).  

In order for a research licence to be issued, the Fertilisation and Embryology Authority must be
satisfied that firstly the use of human embryos is necessary for the purposes of the research
(Section 3 (6)) and that secondly the research activity is “necessary or desirable” for one of the
following purposes stated in Schedule 2 (3) (2):

promoting advances in the treatment of infertility,

increasing knowledge about the causes of congenital disease,

increasing knowledge about the causes of miscarriages,

developing more effective techniques of contraception, or

developing  methods  for  detecting  the  presence  of  gene  or  chromosome  abnormalities  in
embryos before implantation,

or for such other purposes as may be specified in regulations.

These other purposes must aim to “increase knowledge about the creation and development of
embryos, or about disease, or enable such knowledge to be applied”.  Consequently, although
the  law  does  not  distinguish between  research  on  embryos  for  therapeutic  purposes  and  for
non-therapeutic  purposes,  and  although  the  latter  is  not  forbidden  in  principle,  it  is  strictly
limited by the 1990 Act.  Until 2001, it did not include stem cell research.  

It  is  the  Human  Fertilisation  and  Embryology  Authority  that  is  in  charge  of  supervising  the
licensing process.  All applications for research licences are subjected to peer review, and the
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority insists on the fact that it must be satisfied that
the  use  of  embryos  is  essential  for  the  purpose  of  the  research  project  before  granting  a
licence.

33..    RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellllss  aanndd  oonn  tthheerraappeeuuttiicc  cclloonniinngg

The Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990 was completed by the Human Fertilisation
and Embryology (Research Purposes) Regulations 2001, which were passed by the House of
Lords on 22 January 2001 (Statutory Instrument 2001 n.  188).  They were drafted following the
recommendations made by the Expert group chaired by the Chief Medical Officer in its report
dated August 2000, Stem Cell Research: medical progress with responsibility (see above).  

66

- 

- 

- 

The  2001  Regulations  make  research  on  human  embryonic  stem  cells  and  on  therapeutic
cloning lawful in the United Kingdom since January 2001.  They amend the 1990 Act to include
further  purposes  for  which  embryo  research  is  allowed,  so  as  to  permit  the  use  of  human
embryos up to 14 days old for research on  the  derivation and  potential  of  human  embryonic
stem cells.  The creation of embryos by somatic cell nuclear transfer for stem cell research is
also legal under the 2001 Regulations.  Section 2 (2) provides that a licence for research may
be issued for the following purposes:

increasing knowledge about the development of embryos;

increasing knowledge about serious disease, or

enabling any such knowledge to be applied in developing treatments for serious disease.

These  purposes  have  to  be  added  to  the  ones  listed  in  Schedule  2  (3)  (2)  of  the  1990  Act.
Thus the producing of stem cells from blastocyst-stage embryos, whether these were donated
by in vitro fertilisation patients, created in vitro for research purposes, or produced by somatic
cell nuclear transfer, can be licensed.  

In  November  2001,  an  Administrative  Court Judge  ruled  that  cloning  by  somatic  cell  nuclear
transfer,  whether  for  creating  stem  cells  or  babies,  could  not  be  regulated  by  the  Human
Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990, since an organism created by cell nuclear transplant did
not fall within the definition of an embryo contained in Section 1 (1) of the 1990 Act (i.e.  an
embryo is the product of fertilisation)19.  

The  British  Government  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Administrative  Court  Judge  in
order  to  bring  the  technique  of  somatic  cell  nuclear  transplant  back  within  the  scope  of  the
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990 and to avoid the technique being ungoverned by
the law.  On 18 January 2002, the Court of Appeal reversed the decision and refused leave to
petition  to  the  House  of  Lords  (highest  Court  in  the  United  Kingdom),  which  means  that  the
decision cannot be appealed anymore.  Thus it was held that an organism created by somatic
cell nuclear transfer fell within the definition of an embryo contained in Section 1 of the 1990
Act, and that therapeutic cloning was within the scope of the Act20.  

44..    HHuummaann  rreepprroodduuccttiivvee  cclloonniinngg

The  Human  Reproductive  Cloning  Act  2001,  which  was  introduced  to  the  Parliament  on  21
November 2001 and came into force on 4 December 2001, prohibits reproductive cloning by
rendering it a criminal offence to « place in a woman a human embryo which has been created
otherwise  than  by  fertilisation ».    A  person  guilty  of  such  an  offence  is  liable  to  a  term  of
imprisonment not exceeding 10 years and/or a fine.

19 See R (on the application Quintavalle on behalf of Pro-Life Alliance) v Secretary of State for
Health.
20 See R (on the application Quintavalle on behalf of Pro-Life Alliance) v Secretary of State for
Health (CA).

67

                                                          
This piece of law was rushed before the Parliament in order to avoid a legal vacuum regarding
reproductive  cloning  following  the  November  2001  decision  and  before  the  Court  of  Appeal
decision as regards the capacity of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority to govern
reproductive cloning.

55..    CCoouunncciill  ooff  EEuurrooppee’’ss  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  BBiioommeeddiicciinnee

The  United  Kingdom  has  neither  signed  nor  ratified  the  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and
Biomedicine.

The United Kingdom has neither signed nor ratified the Additional Protocol on the Prohibition of
Cloning Human Beings.

B - Position of the relevant national ethics instances

In  the  United  Kingdom,  there  is  one  internationally  recognised  independent  Bioethics
committee,  the  Nuffield  Council  on  Bioethics.    In  addition,  several  committees  have  been
appointed by the British Government to report on the scientific, legal and ethical issues raised
by human embryonic stem cell research and therapeutic cloning21.

11..    TThhee  NNuuffffiieelldd  CCoouunncciill  oonn  BBiiooeetthhiiccss

Stem Cell Therapy: the ethical issues

The Nuffield Council on Bioethics was established by the Trustees of the Nuffield Foundation in
1991  to  identify,  examine  and  report  on  the  ethical  questions  raised  by  recent  advances  in
biological and medical research.  The Council is an independent body, which provides advice
that  assists  policy-making.    In  April  2000,  the  Nuffield  Council  on  Bioethics  published  a
discussion paper: Stem Cell Therapy: the ethical issues.

aa  ––  PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  hhuummaann  eemmbbrryyoonniicc  sstteemm  cceellll  rreesseeaarrcchh

The Council concluded that « the removal and cultivation of stem cells from a donated embryo
does not indicate a lack of respect for the embryo ».  The Council considered that there were
« no  grounds  for  making  a  moral  distinction  between  research  into  diagnostic  methods  or
reproduction which is permitted under the UK legislation and research into potential therapies
which is not permitted ».  The Council therefore recommended that « research involving human
embryos  be  permitted  for  the  purpose  of  developing  tissues  to  treat  diseases  from  derived

21 In the same line, the Warnock Committee was appointed in 1985 by the British Government
to report on embryo research.

68

                                                          
embryonic stem cells and that Schedule 2 of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act be
amended accordingly ».  Since then, the Act has been amended in that sense.

bb  ––  PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  tthhee  ccrreeaattiioonn  ooff  eemmbbrryyooss  iinn  vviittrroo  ssoolleellyy  ffoorr  rreesseeaarrcchh  ppuurrppoosseess

The Council considered that while there is a sufficient number of donated surplus embryos for
use  in  research,  there  is  no  reason  to  allow  embryos  to  be  created  solely  for  research
purposes.  However, the Council suggested that the issue be kept under review.  

cc  ––  PPoossiittiioonn  oonn  tthheerraappeeuuttiicc  cclloonniinngg

The  same  does  not  apply  to  therapeutic  cloning  or  the  creation  of  embryos  by  somatic  cell
nuclear transfer for research into the derivation of stem cells.  The Council considered that the
« creation  of  embryos  using  somatic  cell  nuclear  transfer  for  research  into  the  derivation  of
stem  cells  offers  such  significant  potential  medical  benefits  that  research  for  such  purposes
should  be  licensed ».    Thus  the  Council  recommended  that  « Schedule  2  of  the  Human
Fertilisation  and  Embryology  Act  be  amended  to  permit  research  involving  embryos  for  the
additional purpose of  developing  tissue  therapies  from  derived  embryonic  stem  cells ».   This
recommendation has also been adopted.   

22..    TThhee  HHuummaann  GGeenneettiiccss  AAddvviissoorryy  CCoommmmiitttteeee

Cloning Issues in Reproduction, Science and Medicine

In  June  1999,  the  Human  Fertilisation  and  Embryology  Authority  and  the  Human  Genetics
Advisory  Committee  issued  a  report  entitled  Cloning  Issues  in  Reproduction,  Science  and
Medicine.  The report drew a distinction between reproductive cloning and therapeutic cloning,
and was clearly influenced by the potential therapeutic benefits of human embryonic stem cells.
Consequently,  the  report  recommended  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  Health  that  two  new
purposes be added to the original list of purposes for which research licences could be issued: 

- 

- 

developing methods of therapy for mitochondrial diseases, and 

developing methods of therapy for diseased or damaged tissues or organs.

Both purposes match the aims pursued by human embryonic stem cell research.  

In  response  to  this  recommendation,  the  British  Government  established  an  Expert  Group
chaired  by  the  Chief  Medical  Officer  with  the  task  of  examining  the  scientific  implications  of
somatic cell nuclear transfer in embryo research.

69

 
 
33..    TThhee  CChhiieeff  MMeeddiiccaall  OOffffiicceerr’’ss  EExxppeerrtt  GGrroouupp

Stem Cell Research: medical progress with responsibility

In  September  1999,  the  British  Government  set  up  an  Expert  Group  chaired  by  the  Chief
Medical Officer to review the potential of developments in stem cell research and cell nuclear
replacement  to  benefit  human  health,  and  to  make  proposals  in  order  to  update  the  list  of
authorised  activities  for  the  granting  of  research  licences.    The  results  of  this  review  were
published  in  a  report  dated  August  2000,  Stem  Cell  Research:  medical  progress  with
responsibility, also called the Donaldson report.

This  report  formed  the  basis  for  the  drafting  of  the  Regulations  2001.    Its  principal
recommendation was that “research using embryos (whether created by in vitro fertilisation or
cell nuclear replacement) to increase understanding about human disease and disorders and
their  cell-based  treatments  should  be  permitted,  subject  to  the  controls  in  the  Human
Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990”.

44..    TThhee  HHoouussee  ooff  LLoorrddss  SSeelleecctt  CCoommmmiitttteeee  oonn  SStteemm  CCeellll  RReesseeaarrcchh

Report on Stem Cell Research

On 7 March 2001, the Select Committee was appointed by the House of Lords to consider and
report on the issues connected with human cloning and stem cell research and on the concerns
arising from the Human Fertilisation (Research Purposes) Regulations 2001.  Indeed, concerns
were  expressed  as  to  the  unnecessary  dimension  of  these  regulations,  as  to  their  unethical
aspect and as to the fact that they represented a step toward human reproductive cloning.

In  the  conclusions  of  its  report  on  Stem  Cell  research  published  on  13  February  2002,  the
Select encourages research into embryonic stem cells and therapeutic cloning as regulated by
the  Regulations.    It  also  endorses  the  legislative  prohibition  of  human  reproductive  cloning
contained  in  the  Human  Reproductive  Cloning  Act  2001,  and  the  Department  of  Health
proposal  to  establish a  stem  cell  bank.    Any  stem cell line  derived  under  a  research  licence
should be registered in the bank, and before granting any new licence, the Human Fertilisation
and Embryology Authority should ensure that there are no existing stem cell lines in the bank
suitable for the proposed research project.

In addition, the Select Committee makes several recommendations to the Government such as,
among others: 

undertaking of a further review of scientific developments, particularly of the progress in adult
stem cell research, and of the development of a stem cell bank, in order to determine whether
embryo research is still necessary; 

keeping under review of the funding of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority; 

keeping under review of the outcomes of research licensed on a regular basis; 

- 

- 

- 

70

 
- 

- 

- 

establishing  a  body  similar  to  the  Gene  Therapy  Advisory  Committee,  which  would  oversee
clinical  studies  involving  stem  cells,  or  extending  the  role  of  the  Gene  Therapy  Advisory
Committee to achieve the same ends;

examining with the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority the drawing of guidance as
to what constitutes “serious diseases” in the Human Fertilisation and Embryology 9Research
Purposes) Regulations 2001;  

The Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority should ensure that the implications arising
from the “immortality”of stem cell lines are fully covered in obtaining informed consent from the
donors giving embryos.

In  addition,  the  following  institutions  are  also  linked  to  research  involving  human  embryonic
stem cells: the British Medical Association, the Medical Research Council, the Royal Society,
and the Welcome Trust.

C - Links

HMOS  (“Her  Majesty’s  Stationery  Office”  for  official  publications  by  the  Government):
www.hmso.gov.uk

Department of Health: www.doh.gov.uk

Nuffield Council on Bioethics: www.nuffieldfoundation.org/bioethics/

Parliament  (House  of  Lords  and  House  of  Commons):  www.parliament.the-stationery-
office.co.uk

71

72

ANNEX

A - Council of Europe 

11..  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  ffoorr  tthhee  PPrrootteeccttiioonn  ooff  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  tthhee  DDiiggnniittyy  ooff  tthhee  HHuummaann  BBeeiinngg
wwiitthh  rreeggaarrdd  ttoo  tthhee  AApppplliiccaattiioonn  ooff  BBiioollooggyy  aanndd  MMeeddiicciinnee::  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  oonn  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd
BBiioommeeddiicciinnee  ((EETTSS  nnoo..::  116644))

The Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine opened for signature in Oviedo (Spain) on
4 April 1997 and entered into force on 1 December 1999.

With regard to embryo research, the following articles are relevant:

AArrttiiccllee  1188  ––  RReesseeaarrcchh  oonn  eemmbbrryyooss  iinn  vviittrroo

1.  Where the law allows research on embryos in vitro, it shall ensure adequate protection of

the embryo. 

2.  The creation of human embryos for research purposes is prohibited. 

AArrttiiccllee  3366  ––  RReesseerrvvaattiioonnss

3.  Any  State  and  the  European  Community  may,  when  signing  this  Convention  or  when
depositing  the  instrument  of  ratification,  acceptance,  approval  or  accession,  make  a
reservation in respect of any particular provision of the Convention to the extent that any
law then in force in its territory is not in conformity with the provision. Reservations of a
general character shall not be permitted under this article. 

4.  Any reservation made under this article shall contain a brief statement of the relevant law. 
5.  Any Party which extends the application of this Convention to a territory mentioned in the
declaration  referred  to  in  Article  35,  paragraph  2,  may,  in  respect  of  the  territory
concerned,  make  a  reservation  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  preceding
paragraphs. 

6.  Any  Party  which  has  made  the  reservation  mentioned  in  this  article  may  withdraw  it  by
means of a declaration addressed to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe. The
withdrawal shall become effective on the first day of the month following the expiration of a
period of one month after the date of its receipt by the Secretary General. 

22..  AAddddiittiioonnaall  PPrroottooccooll  ttoo  tthhee  CCoonnvveennttiioonn  ffoorr  tthhee  PPrrootteeccttiioonn  ooff  HHuummaann  RRiigghhttss  aanndd  DDiiggnniittyy
ooff  tthhee  HHuummaann  BBeeiinngg  wwiitthh  rreeggaarrdd  ttoo  tthhee  AApppplliiccaattiioonn  ooff  BBiioollooggyy  aanndd  MMeeddiicciinnee,,  oonn  tthhee
PPrroohhiibbiittiioonn  ooff  CClloonniinngg  HHuummaann  BBeeiinnggss  ((EETTSS  nnoo..::  116688))

This  Additional  Protocol  opened  for  signature  in  Paris  (France)  on  12  January  1998  and
entered into force on 1 March 2001.

73

 
Its most relevant content is as follows:

The member States of the Council of Europe, the other States and the European Community
Signatories  to  this  Additional  Protocol  to  the  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights
and Dignity of the Human Being with regard to the Application of Biology and Medicine,
Noting  scientific  developments  in  the  field  of  mammal  cloning,  particularly  through  embryo
splitting and nuclear transfer;
Mindful  of  the  progress  that  some  cloning  techniques  themselves  may  bring  to  scientific
knowledge and its medical application;
Considering  that  the  cloning  of  human  beings  may  become  a 
technical  possibility;
Having  noted  that  embryo  splitting  may  occur  naturally  and  sometimes  result  in  the  birth  of
genetically identical twins;
Considering  however  that  the  instrumentalisation  of  human  beings  through  the  deliberate
creation of genetically identical human beings is contrary to human dignity and thus constitutes
a misuse of biology and medicine;
Considering also the serious difficulties of a medical, psychological and social nature that such
a deliberate biomedical practice might imply for all the individuals involved;
Considering the purpose of the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, in particular the
principle mentioned in Article 1 aiming to protect the dignity and identity of all human beings,
Have agreed as follows:

AArrttiiccllee  11  

1.  Any intervention seeking to create a human being22 genetically identical to another human

being, whether living or dead, is prohibited. 

2.  For  the  purpose  of  this  article,  the  term  human  being  "genetically  identical"  to  another
human being means a human being sharing with another the same nuclear gene set. 

33..  LLiinnkkss

Council of Europe, Steering Committee on Bioethics (CDBI):
www.coe.int/T/E/Legal_affairs/Legal_co-operation/Bioethics/

Full text of the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine:
http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/EN/Treaties/Html/164.htm

22  Cf.  Point  6  of  the  Explanatory  Report  to  the  Additional  Protocol  on  the  Prohibition  of
Cloning Human Beings: “in conformity with the approach followed in the preparation of the

Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, it was decided to leave it to domestic law to

define  the  scope  of  the  expression  "human  being"  for  the  purposes  of  the  application  of  the

present  Protocol”.  The  Explanatory  Report  is  not  an  instrument  providing  an  authoritative

interpretation of the text of the Protocol, but it facilitates the understanding of its provisions.

74

                                                          
 
Full text of the Additonal Protocol on the Prohibition of Cloning Human Beings:
http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/EN/Treaties/Html/168.htm

B  -  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New  Technologies  to  the
European Commission 

11..  OOppiinniioonnss

With regard to research on embryos and  on  human  embryonic  stem  cells,  the  most  relevant
opinions are the following:

-  Opinion 9 on the Ethical Aspects of Cloning Techniques (28 Mai 1997);

-  Opinion 12 on the Ethical Aspects of Research involving the Use of Human Embryo in the

context of the 5th Framework (23 November 1998);

-  Opinion 15 on the Ethical Aspects of Human Stem Cell Research and Use (14 November

2000);

-  Opinion 16 on the Ethical Aspects of Patenting Inventions involving Human Stem Cells (7

May 2002).

22..  LLiinnkkss

European Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New  Technologies  to  the  European  Commission:
http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm

75

76

Secretariat of the European Group on Ethics

Ms Christiane Bardoux

Tel: 32 (0) 2 295 45 47
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65
E-mail:
christiane.bardoux@cec.eu.int  

Ms Joelle Bezzan

Tel: 32 (0) 2 296 19 48
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65
E-mail: joelle.bezzan@cec.eu.int 

Ms Marie Chirol

Tel: 32 (0) 2 296 25 84
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65
E-mail: marie.chirol@cec.eu.int  

Ms Agueda Ollero Montiel

Tel: 32 (0) 2 295 71 35
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65
E-mail:
agueda.ollero-montiel@cec.eu.int 

Mail address

European Commission
Group of Policy Advisers
BREY 10/128
B – 1049 – Brussels - Belgium

Office

European Commission
Avenue d’Auderghem 45
B – 1049 – Brussels - Belgium

Web site

http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics

77

78

