The European Group on Ethics 
in Science and New Technologies
to the European Commission

Opinion on the ethical aspects of
genetic testing in the workplace

- Opinion N° 18 -

-  28 th July 2003  -

TABLE OF CONTENTS

OPINION N° 18

ENGLISH VERSION ............................................................................................................3
GERMAN VERSION ..........................................................................................................21

SUMMARIES OF STATEMENTS ON GENETIC TESTING IN THE
WORKPLACE BY NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL BODIES1

A.   DEFINITIONS  ................................................................................................. 45

B.   EU and NON-EU NATIONAL BODIES

1.  Belgium

Comité consultatif de bioéthique:

Avis n(cid:1) 20 relatif aux tests génétiques prédictifs et tests HIV
dans le cadre du travail (November 2002)  ..............................................49

2.  United Kingdom

(cid:1)  Nuffield Council on Bioethics:

Genetic Screening : Ethical Issues (December 1993)  .............................53

(cid:1)  Human Genetics Commission:

The implications of genetic testing for employment (June 1999) .............55

3.  Denmark

Danish Council of Ethics:

Genetic Screening and Genetic testing in appointments etc. ...................57

1  By  Jutta  Buyse,  a  Trainee  with  the  Secretariat  of  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New
Technologies, from March to July 2003.

i

                                                     
4.  France

National Consultative Ethics Committee:

Expert hearing of Prof Anne Cambon-Thomsen,
at the EGE meeting in Brussels (June 17th 2003) ...................................59

5.  Greece

National bioethics commission:

Recommendation on the collection and use of genetic data
(September 2002)  ...................................................................................63

6.  Italy

National commission on bioethics:

Bioethical guidelines for genetic testing. (November 1999) .....................67

7.  United States

(cid:1)  US Congress Office of Technology Assessment (OTA):

Genetic monitoring and screening in the workplace (October 1990) ........69

(cid:1)  Secretary’s Advisory Committee on Genetic Testing, National Institute

 of Health:

Preliminary recommendations on the adequacy of oversight of genetic
tests (2000)  .............................................................................................71

8.    Genetic data and confidentiality  - The Estonian experiment

Expert hearing of Prof. Ismini Kriari-Catranis at the EGE meeting in Athens
(May 27th 2003) .................................................................................................73

C.   INTERNATIONAL BODIES

1.  WHO – World Health Organisation

Proposed international guidelines on ethical issues in medical genetics
and genetic services (1998)  ....................................................................79

2    UNESCO – International Bioethics Committee

International declaration on human genetic data (revised version)
(January 2002)  ........................................................................................81

ii

3.   INTERNATIONAL LABOR ORGANISATION (ILO)
Expert hearing of Dr Brigitte Froneberg,
at the EGE meeting in Brussels (April 15th 2003) ........................................83

4.   COUNCIL of EUROPE

Expert hearing of Dr Laurence Lwoff,
at the EGE meeting in Brussels (April 15th 2003) ........................................87

APPENDIX:

THE SECRETARIAT OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS............................91

iii

iv

Opinion N° 18

ETHICAL ASPECTS OF GENETIC TESTING 
IN THE WORKPLACE

========================================

Delivered by the European Group on Ethics
in Science and New Technologies
to the European Commission

On 28th July 2003

1

2

OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS
IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES
TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION

No 18

Original in English

Final – 28th July 2003

****************************************************************************************************************************

ETHICAL ASPECTS OF GENETIC TESTING IN THE WORKPLACE

Reference: 
Rapporteurs: 

Initiative of the Group
Peter Whittaker and Nicos C. Alivizatos

*****************************************************************************************************************************

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE),

Having  regard  to  the  Treaty  on  European  Union  as  amended  by  the  Treaty  of  Nice,  and  in
particular Article 6 of the common provisions, concerning the respect for fundamental rights;

Having regard to the EC Treaty and in particular Article 137 concerning the working conditions
and health and safety at work;

Having regard to the Charter on Fundamental Rights of the European Union, approved by the
European  Council  in  Biarritz  on  October  14th  2000  and  proclaimed  solemny  in  Nice  by  the
European  Parliament,  the  Council  and  the  Commission  on  December  7th  2000,  in  particular
Article  8  on  the  "Protection  of  personal  data",  Article  15  on  the  "Freedom  to  choose  an
occupation  and  right  to  engage  in  work",  Article  21  prohibiting  discrimination  based,  among
others, on genetic features, and Article 31 on "Fair and just working conditions";

Having regard to the Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24
October  1995 on  the protection of  individuals  with  regard  to  the  processing  of  personal  data
and the free movement of such data;

Having  regard  to  the  Directive  2000/78/EC  of  the  European  Council  of  27  November  2000
establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation;

Having regard to the Directive 2002/14/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11
March  2002  establishing  a  general  framework  for  informing  and  consulting  employees  in  the
European Community;

3

    
Having regard to the Council of Europe’s Recommendation R(89)2 of 1989 on the protection of
personal data used for employment purposes;

Having regard to the Council of Europe’s Recommendation R(92)3 of 1992 on genetic testing
and screening for health care purposes and, in particular, Principles 6 and 8, allowing genetic
testing  and  screening  only  exceptionally  and  the  collection  and  processing  of  personal  data
thereof only for the purposes of healthcare, diagnosis and disease prevention;

Having regard to the Council of Europe’s Recommendation (97)5 of 1997 on the protection of
medical  data  and,  in  particular,  Principle  4.9  providing  that  the  collection  and  processing  of
genetic data should in principle only be permitted for health reasons;

Having  regard  to  the  Council  of  Europe’s  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine,
signed on 4th April 1997 in Oviedo, in particular Article 11 on "Non-Discrimination" and Article
12 on the "Predictive genetic tests";

Having  regard  to  the  International  Labor  Office  (ILO)  Code  of  Practice  on  the  Protection  of
Workers’ Personal Data (1997) and, in particular, Article 3.20 providing that “genetic screening
in  relation  to  work  is  a  disproportionate  infringement  of  individual  rights”  and  that  “current
scientific knowledge is not sufficient to warrant its use for an occupational health purpose”.

Having regard to the Round Table organised by the Group on 6th March 2000 in Brussels with
members  of  the  European  Parliament,  jurists,  philosophers,  scientists,  representatives  of
employees  and  employers, 
representatives  of  patients’
associations  and  other  groups  of  interest,  and  of  international  and  European  organisations
(UNESCO, Council of Europe,WHO, OECD);

representatives  of 

religions, 

Having  regard  to  the  hearings  of experts  in  Brussels  on  18th  March,  15th  April and  17th  June
2003, and in Athens on 27th May 2003;

Having heard the rapporteurs Peter Whittaker and Nicos C. Alivizatos;

4

WHEREAS :

DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Opinion:

(a)  “undertaking”  means  a  public  or  private  enterprise,  carrying  out  an  economic  activity,
whether or not operating for gain, which is located within the territory of a member State;

(b)  “workplace” means a unit of business defined in accordance with national law and practice,
whether in the public or in the private sector, located within the territory of a Member State,
where  an  economic  activity  is  carried  out  on  an  ongoing  basis  with  human  and  material
resources;

(c)  “employer”  means  the  natural  person  or  legal  entity,  whether  public  or  private,  party  to
employment  contracts  or  employment  relationships  with  employees,  in  accordance  with
national law and practice; moreover, the term employer comprises employment agencies,
temporary  employment  agencies,  personnel  selection  consultants  and    agencies  that
dispose of employees to other natural or legal entities (“personnel lending”).

(d)  “employee”  means  any  person  who,  in  the  Member  State  concerned,  is  protected  as  a
worker or as an employee under national law and practice; moreover, the term employee
comprises candidates for a post whatsoever, as well as former employees;

(e)  “genetic testing” in this context means the use of a scientific test to obtain information on
some aspects of the genetic status of a person, indicative of a  present or  future  medical
problem.  In the context of employment, "genetic testing" incorporates "genetic screening"
and "genetic monitoring";

(f)  “genetic screening” in this context means the use of a scientific test to determine whether a

person possesses particular variant forms of one or more genes in his/her genome;

(g)  “genetic  monitoring”  in  this  context  means  the  examination,  at  regular  intervals,  for
chromosomal abnormalities in samples of cells from a person who may be at risk, in their
employment, of exposure to agents which cause genetic damage;

(h)  “personal data” in this context refers to data, however obtained, containing information that
might give an indication of either the present health or predicted future health status of a
person.

5

SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND

1.1  Genetic Testing

1.1.1  Introduction

A person’s DNA comprises the genetic information that, within the constraints imposed by
all  the  environmental  influences  to  which  that  person  is  exposed,  governs  the  growth,
development and resulting characteristics of that person.  It is becoming increasingly easy
to obtain information regarding particular aspects of someone’s genetic status by testing for
the  presence  of  particular  variant  forms  of  genes  or  by  microscopic  examination  of  their
chromosomes.  The information obtained from such genetic tests may sometimes be used
to anticipate the onset of certain genetically determined diseases and to initiate appropriate
early therapy or other anticipatory action.  Genetic testing is also being used at the present
time,  in  the  investigation  of  crime  and  in  paternity  identification.  The  predictive  value  of
some genetic information means, however, that some insurance companies would like to
access this, in order to obtain what they believe to be a more accurate assessment of risk
for  life  and health  insurance purposes.    This  Opinion  focuses  in particular on  employers’
interest  in  genetic  testing  as  a  way  to  predict  an  employee’s  future  health  or  their
susceptibility to particular  hazards  in  the  working  environment  (genetic  screening).   They
might also wish to monitor the genetic status of an employee who is at risk of exposure to
agents known to cause genetic damage (genetic monitoring).

1.1.2. Non-DNA based Genetic Screening

The definition of genetic screening need not be restricted to tests carried out directly on an
individual’s  DNA.    Many  genes  are  coded  instructions  for  making  particular  proteins.
Others may regulate the timing or quantity of protein synthesised.  Consequently it may be
possible in some cases to access indications of genetic status by measuring the activity of
a protein or some of its products. For the purposes of this Opinion, any test that evaluates
specific  genes  or  gene  products  that  may  be  indicators  of  a  person’s  genetic  status  are
considered to be genetic tests.

1.1.3.   Family Medical Histories

Family  medical  histories  can  give  an  indication  of  possible  genetic  status  with  regard  to
susceptibility to some diseases and are routinely used by some insurance companies for
persons  applying  for  health  insurance.    In  so  far  as  family  medical  histories  can  provide
information  on  a  person’s  genetic  status,  which  may  have  a  predictive  value  for  future
health as significant as a laboratory performed genetic test, these are included within our
definition of genetic tests.

6

1.2 Applications of genetic testing in the context of employment

1.2.1.   Genetic Screening as an Indicator of future health

It is clear that a person’s genetic constitution plays a role in their susceptibility to a variety of
diseases.  That is not to say that genes are the sole determinant of disease susceptibility as
this  may  be  modulated  by  environmental,  lifestyle,  dietary  and  perhaps  other  serendipitous
factors.  Nevertheless, it is possible that investigation of an individual’s genetic constitution for
the  presence  or  absence  of  particular  gene  variants  might  provide  some  indication  of  the
likelihood of the individual contracting, in the future, a particular disease.

Employers, either current or prospective, could have an interest in the results of such genetic
screening  in  so  far  as  these  might  be  a  predictor  of  the  future  health  of  an  employee,
particularly if they were to imply possible levels of future absenteeism or low work rate which
might  impact  on  profitability.    An  employee  who  develops  heart  disease,  for  example,  would
certainly be likely to require periods of absence from work and, in certain occupations, might
not be able to sustain a normal work rate.  There is also the possibility that sudden onset of a
disease condition might result in a hazard for the employee, other employees or the public.  An
employer could use the results of such tests to exclude job applicants on the basis of predicted
future health.
This  type  of  genetic  testing,  where  there  is  no  reason  to  suspect  that  the  employee  might
possess any particular genetic constitution, is generally referred to as genetic screening.

1.2.2.     Genetic Screening as an indicator of susceptibility to occupational hazards

Employers  could  also  have  an  interest  in  whether  the  genetic  profile  of  an  employee  might
endow them with greater or lesser susceptibility to occupational hazards, such as the presence
of  toxic,  mutagenic  or  carcinogenic  materials  in  the  workplace  environment  at  levels  below
those that are recognized as acceptable.  Variants of genes that affect the metabolism of such
genotoxic  agents  can  result  in  variations  in  individual’s  ability  to  activate  or  inactivate  these.
Other genes may control the repair of genetic damage.  Occupational factors have been shown
to be associated with 10% of cases of adult asthma.  Asthma is a polygenic disease in which
many  gene-environment  interactions  are  involved.    Other  diseases  having  an  occupational
component  and  with  a  known  genetic  basis  include  beryllium  allergy  and  chronic  obstructive
pulmonary disease resulting from (cid:2)-1-antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency.

An employer might wish to use such information to deploy workers in areas appropriate to their
particular genetic make up or to exclude them from employment.  

Information from this type of genetic screening might also be of value to the employee.  Being
aware of the likely level of their own susceptibility to a particular workplace hazard would permit
them to make informed decisions with regard to the type of work they would seek for their own
long-term health and safety.

7

1.2.3.     Genetic Monitoring

Even  in  the  best  regulated  employment  environment,  it  may  not  be  possible  to  ensure  total
elimination  of  the  presence  of  all  traces  of  chemicals  or  irradiation  that  could  damage  a
person’s genetic material.  In such circumstances it is possible to monitor cells of a potentially
exposed person for genetic damage. Such tests may impact not only on the well-being of the
individual, but  also on the  next  generation.    The  results  of  genetic  monitoring  could  reveal  a
hitherto unappreciated risk to health and hence is of public health relevance.   In this Opinion
this type of genetic testing is referred to as genetic monitoring.

1.3         Genes and Disease

1.3.1      Monogenic and Polygenic Diseases

Although  there  are  many  diseases  with  a  recognized  genetic  component  resulting  from  a  defect  in  a
single gene (monogenic diseases), as a general rule the incidence of such diseases is low.  Monogenic
diseases include cystic fibrosis, sickle cell anaemia, Huntington’s Disease and haemophilia.

Cystic  fibrosis  and  sickle  cell  anaemia  are  examples  of  autosomal  recessive  diseases,  where  the
relevant  genes  are  carried  on  one  of  the  22  pairs  of  human  chromosomes  that  are  not  sex-specific.
This means that a copy of the defective gene must be inherited from both parents if the disease is to be
manifest.  A person carrying a normal copy of the gene from one parent and a defective copy from the
other are carriers of the disease gene but do not usually manifest symptoms of the disease.

Huntington’s  Disease  is an  example  of  an  autosomal  dominant  disease.    In  this  case  only  a
single copy of the defective gene coming from either parent is required for development of the
disease.
Haemophilia is an example of a disease resulting from a defect in an X-linked gene.  The sex-
specific  chromosome  pair  comprises  two  X  chromosomes  (female)  or  an  X  and  a  Y
chromosome  (male).    As  males  have  only  a  single  X  chromosome,  they  are  more  likely  to
develop such a disease than females with two X chromosomes, as the recessive gene variant
on one of the X chromosomes will not be expressed in the presence of the normal gene on the
other X chromosome.
In  contrast  to  the above  examples  of  diseases  resulting  from  defects  in  a  single  gene,  other
human  diseases  with  a  genetic  component  are  thought  to  result  from  interactions  between
several genes (polygenic diseases).  The incidence of some polygenic diseases is very high.
In  most  of  these  cases  the  genetic  basis  is  incompletely  understood  and  is  complicated  by
influences of environment, diet and lifestyle.  Examples of such polygenic diseases are heart
disease, several cancers and some allergies.

1.3.2      Factors affecting development of hereditary disease

The  possession  of  one  or  more  genetic  defects  does  not  necessarily  dictate  that  the  person
possessing the defect  will develop the disease.  For example, a woman with the BRCA1 breast
cancer  susceptibility  gene  has  an  80%  risk  of  developing  breast  cancer  by  age  65.    The
“expressivity”  of  a  genetic  defect  describes  the  different  severities  of  disease  from  which
various possessors of the defect may suffer.  Both penetrance and expressivity, as well as the
timing of disease onset, may be affected by environmental factors, life style or the presence of
a range of other genes.

8

1.4       Methodology for Genetic Testing

1.4.1      Methodology for Genetic Screening

Defective  versions  of  a  gene  may  be  altered  only  very  slightly  in  DNA  sequence  from  the
normal version of the gene.  Genetic screening aims to identify such small changes in the gene
in  question.    Only  a  very  small  amount  of  DNA  is  required  for  genetic  screening.    As  an
example,  the  DNA  region  required  is  usually  amplified  thousands  of  times  using  the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR).  A fluorescent label is then attached to the amplified DNA.
The  fluorescence-labelled  DNA  is  then  passed  through  a  filter  to  which  is  attached  a  small
length of DNA (the “probe”) containing a sequence characteristic of the version which is being
screened for.  If the version in question is present in the fluorescent amplified DNA then this will
bind  to  the  probe,  showing  up  as  fluorescence  on  the  filter.    By  attaching  several  different
probes  at  different  points  on  the  filter  it  is  possible  to  screen  for  the  presence  of  several
different versions of the gene at the same time.  Developments in DNA microarray technology
are  likely  to  make  it  possible  to  screen  for  large  numbers  of  genes  with  variant  forms
simultaneously.

Where a genetic screen involves identification of a protein altered in concentration as a result
of a particular defective gene, the strategy used varies with the protein in question.  It may be
recognised using electrophoretic identification, an  antibody  probe or  by an enzyme assay  for
example.

1.4.2      Methodology for Genetic Monitoring

In contrast to genetic screening, genetic monitoring usually involves microscopic examination
of  the  karyotypes  (chromosome  patterns)  of  white  blood  cells.    Indication  of  unacceptable
levels  of exposure  to  genotoxic  agents  comes  from  observations  of  changes  in  chromosome
structures including chromosome breakage, inversion or deletion of sections of chromosomes
or  translocation  of  a  part  of  a  chromosome  to  a  different  chromosome.    Recently  developed
technology permits the observation of quite small alterations in chromosome structures.  

1.5       Validity, Reliability and Predictability of Genetic Tests

1.5.1      Validity of Genetic Tests

At  the  present  time,  very  few  genetic  tests  are  available  that  give  information  to  either  an
employer or an employee which could validly be used in the context of decisions  concerning
employment.    It  is  likely  that  this  situation  may  change  in  the  future  although  it  is  difficult  to
predict  the  pace  of  such  change.    Where  employment  is  linked  to  health  or  life  insurance,
employers  may  come  under  pressure  from  insurance  companies  to  implement  genetic
screening to assess the level  of  risk  to  which  the  employee  might be exposed.   Validity of a
genetic test would require demonstration of 

1)  its relevance to health protection of workers,  
2)  the reliability and reproducibility of the test and
3)  the level of predictive value for the test.

9

In  some  countries,  there  are  statutory  bodies  that  may  be  asked  to  rule  on  the  validity  of
genetic tests in particular circumstances.

1.5.2  Relevance of Genetic Tests

At  the  present  time,  it  is  difficult  to  make  a  case  for  any  genetic  tests  to  be  carried  out  as
indicators  of  future  health  in  terms  of  their  relevance  to  employment.    Genetic  screening  for
susceptibility  to  workplace  environmental  hazards  clearly  has  some  precautionary  relevance
but in many cases the link between a particular genetic status and susceptibility to a particular
hazard has only a theoretical basis at present.
In  the  general  debate  there  have  been  exaggerated  beliefs  about  the  predictive  value  of
genetic tests, perhaps based on the concept of genetic determinism, which have been proved
to lack foundation. On the other hand, where there is a possible risk of genetic damage to an
employee  resulting  from  exposure  to  workplace  contaminants,  genetic  monitoring  for
chromosomal  changes  resulting  from  this  exposure  may  have  a  very  clear  relevance  for  the
health of an employee.

1.5.3      Reliability of Genetic Tests

In such a sensitive area, it is obviously extremely important that procedures for genetic testing
are as reliable as possible, as provision  of  incorrect  information  to an employer or  employee
could  have  far  reaching  consequences.    All  stages  of  a  scientifically  satisfactory  testing
procedure should have built in negative and positive controls to ensure the reliability of the test
result.    Good  laboratory  practice  would  be  observed  at  all  times,  including  detailed
documentation of procedures and results.  Even when testing procedures are optimised, false
negatives  and  false  positives  will  emerge  and  validation  procedures  for  the  tests  may  be
required.

1.5.4      Predictive value of Genetic Tests

Even  for  monogenic  diseases,  predictive  value  of  genetic  testing  may  be  limited.    There  is
always a possibility that the disease in question might not manifest itself during the working life
of the individual and it is not always possible to predict the severity of the future disease.

The situation is even more complex where diseases with a polygenic basis are concerned.  At
the  present  time  it  is  virtually  impossible  accurately  to  predict,  using  genetic  tests,  either
whether the disease will develop at all or, if it does, its timing and severity.  Even if the genetic
basis  of  such  diseases  becomes  fully  understood,  environmental  and  lifestyle  factors,  which
may themselves be unpredictable, will limit the predictability of disease development.

Testing protocols that are less than 100% accurate (most of the cases) will reduce predictive
value still further.  False negatives would result in possible exposure of a susceptible individual
to unacceptable levels of occupational  hazard  whilst  false  positives  could  result  in  unjustified
exclusion of non-susceptible individuals from employment.

10

1.6. The Practice: Employer Utilisation Of Genetic Testing

It  is  far  from  clear  what  is  the  actual  present  and  anticipated  usage  of  genetic  testing  by
employers.    There  has  been  more  interest  in  genetic  testing  in  the  United  States  than  in
Europe.  This appears to be related to the more widespread practice in the USA than in Europe
for employers to contribute to health insurance. Perhaps for this reason there have been more
studies of genetic testing in the workplace in the USA.  The results of such surveys should be
viewed with caution as some studies have shown that some of the employers surveyed did not
have a full understanding of what a genetic test was.

1.6.1      Genetic Testing in Employment in Europe

Increasing globalisation in industry and trade suggest that U.S. models for health insurance in
employment might start to apply in Europe.  In this situation it is probable that there might be
pressure to widen preemployment medical examinations to  include genetic  tests.   A  study of
genetic testing in the workplace carried out by the School of Health and Related Research at
Sheffield  University  suggests  that  the  surveys  that  have  been  carried  out  in  Europe  have
tended to ask employers whether they are carrying out genetic tests.  In a situation where the
technology  is  not  widely  available,  it  is  hardly  surprising  that  very  few  examples  of  genetic
testing  in  the  workplace  could  be  found.    It  might  have  been  preferable  to  have  asked
employers about their attitudes to genetic testing in the future.

As far as can be determined at present, there is still only the single case of genetic screening in
the workplace previously referred to in reports from the Nuffield Council on Bioethics and the
Human Genetics Advisory Committee in the United Kingdom.  This is the screening of aircrew
by the UK Ministry of Defence for sickle cell trait.  The worry has been that carriers of the sickle
cell gene might be adversely affected by low oxygen pressures in an aircraft.  This strategy has
been criticised on the basis that it is not founded on sound evidence and also that it could be
viewed as discriminatory in view of the fact that there are much greater numbers of sickle cell
allele carriers in the Afro-Caribbean population than in the general population.  The UK Ministry
of Defence is reported to have discontinued this practice. 
A survey carried out by the Institute of Directors in the UK in August 2000 recorded that 2 out of
353 directors reported that their companies routinely used genetic tests.  A further 4 directors
stated that genetic tests were used by their companies, but only if they were concerned about
specific employees.  The particular types of genetic tests used were not recorded.  The report
also sought information on directors’ attitudes to genetic screening for particular reasons.  34%
of 353 directors approved of genetic screening for the likelihood of developing heart disease as
long as the employee consented.  A further 8% would be in favour of compulsory testing if it
was  considered to be  in  the  employee’s  best  interests.    50%  approved  of  genetic  tests,  with
employee consent, to see whether employees were at risk of developing an occupation-related
disease  due  to  exposure  in  the  workplace.    A  further  16%  thought  that  this  should  be
compulsory.

11

1.6.2.     Genetic Testing In Employment In USA

In the 1970s, the US Air Force Academy did not permit sickle cell gene carriers to participate in
pilot  training.   Subsequently,  courts  have  found  that  tests  for  sickle  cell  trait disproportionally
impact  on  African-Americans  and  many  states  now  prohibit  employers  from  testing  for  the
disease.  A 1991 survey of Genetic Monitoring and Screening in the Workplace carried out by
the  US  Congress  Office  of  Technology  Assessment  examined  both  practices  and  attitudes.
Only 1% of company health officers at that time reported that their company had a formal policy
either on preemployment genetic screening or on genetic monitoring.  Despite this, a majority
of personnel and health officers suggested that their companies considered the use of genetic
screening tests for job applicants as generally acceptable  to  inform  the  latter of  their  level of
susceptibility to workplace hazards.  Well over one third of both health officers and personnel
officers felt  that  it  would  be  acceptable  to exclude  employees  with  increased  susceptibility  to
risk  situations.    Surprisingly,  a  majority  of  both  felt  that  it  would  be  unacceptable  to  monitor
chromosomal  changes  associated  with  workplace  exposure.    The  survey  showed  that  1%  of
companies  claimed  to  have  used  genetic  screening  to  identify  persons  with  increased health
risks.    12%  of  companies  reported  genetic  monitoring  or  screening  of  employees.    Most  of
these involved genetic monitoring in companies where workers might be exposed to chemicals
or ionising radiation.

With the enormously expanded knowledge of the human genome and improvements in genetic
technology  it  is  likely  that  usage  and  potential  usage  of  genetic  testing  in  the  USA  will  have
expanded significantly since that survey.  According to a 1996 poll of members of families with
perceived  genetic  risk  carried  out  by  Georgetown  University,  13%  had  been  dismissed  from
their  jobs  because  of  this  perceived  risk.    A  1998  survey  by  the  American  Management
Association  suggested 
for  genetic
predispositions to diseases and that this figure is growing.

that  10%  of  employers  routinely 

test  employees 

In 2001 the US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) settled its first court action
involving workplace genetic screening against the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway.  This
company had carried out genetic screening without the knowledge or consent of its employees.
The genetic testing had been carried out in response to claims from some employees for work-
related  injuries  based  on  carpal-tunnel  syndrome.    At  least  one  worker  had  been  threatened
with  dismissal  for  non-provision  of  a  blood  sample.    EEOC  required  that  the  company
completely and immediately stop its programme of genetic  testing and  asserted that  it  would
“respond aggressively to any evidence that employers are asking for or using genetic tests in a
manner which violates the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990”.

12

LEGAL BACKGROUND

1.7. 

Introduction

As a general rule, standing instruments at national, community and international level  do not
specifically  address  the  issue  of    genetic  testing  at    the  workplace.  While  there  exist  rules
purporting  to  forbid  such  testing  for  reasons  other  than    health  care    and    to  prohibit
discrimination  thereof,  there  are  no  binding  provisions    barring    genetic  screening  in  the
employment sector and addressing the threats that  such screening  may constitute for both the
privacy and the dignity of the weakest party involved, that is workers and employees.  On the
other hand, save some scattered regulations, there exist no special rules on the collection and
processing of genetic personal data.    The lack of adequate protection in this field may hurt
trust,  mutual  respect  and  professionalism  in  the  relationship  between  employers  and
employees,  which  could  adversely  affect  not  only  the  latter,  but  also  employers  and  the
business as a whole.

1.8.       At national level

Some Member States have enacted rules on human genetics:
- 

In  France,  a  2002  amendment  to  the  code  civil  and  to  the  code  pénal  prohibits
discrimination based on one’s genetic characteristics or on predictive genetic tests “having
as  an  object  a  disease  which  has  not  yet  manifested  or  a  genetic  predisposition  to  a
disease”.

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

In  a  similar  way,  in  Sweden,    standing  legislation    requires  that  genetic  testing  may

only take place if it has a medical aim or serves a research purpose.

In  Finland,  a  2001  law    provides  that  employers  shall  not  require  employees  to
participate in genetic testing either at the time of  recruitment or during employment , nor do
employers have the right  to obtain information as to whether  an employee has undergone
such testing.

In  Denmark  legislation  from  1996  regulates  the  Use  of  Health  Information  on  the
Labour Market.  The aim is to ensure that health checks focus on the actual/present health
conditions and that those conditions are relevant to the employee's work.
Thus the Act widely limits the employer's possibilities to ask potential employees for health
information including information based on genetic testing.
The employer is for example not allowed to collect information concerning the probability of
the  employee  suffering  from  diseases  in  the  future,  but  is  for  example  allowed  to  obtain
information about the  employee's health  if  conditions  in  the  working  environment  make  it
reasonable and desirable in relation to the employee himself or other employees.

In  Austria,  both  genetic  screening  and    the  collection,  demand,  acceptance  or  any
other  utilisation  of    genetic  data  on  the  employees  by  the  employers  are  explicitly
prohibited.

Restrictions to the collection and processing of genetic data at the workplace are also

provided in the Netherlands, in Luxembourg and in Greece.

In  Italy,  according  to  the  data  protection  law  of  1996,  genetic  data  may  only  be
processed under the circumstances referred to in an ad-hoc authorisation to be granted by
the national supervisory authority.
The genetic data expressly referred to in that authorisation may be processed with regard
to  such  information  and  operations  as  are  indispensable  to  protect  the  bodily  integrity  or
health of either the subject, a third party or the community as a whole - on the basis of the
subject's written consent.

13

Failing the subject's consent, the processing may be started and/or continued if it is aimed
at protecting the bodily integrity or health of either a third party or the community as a whole
- exclusively on the basis of a prior ad-hoc authorisation to be granted by the national data
protection supervisory authority.

1.9.       At Community level

In  June  2000,  the  Commission  published  the  Social  Policy  Agenda,  which  provided  for  a
consultation with social partners on the protection of personal data in the employment context.
The  Commission  believed  that  employees  (during  and  post  employment)  and  prospective
employees  may  not  have  sufficient  protection  of  their  fundamental  rights  and  personal  data,
processed by employers and/or transferred to third parties. More concretely, consent, which is
admitted  by  the  Data  Protection  Directive  as  a  means  for  legitimising  data  collection  and
processing,  may  not  be  really  free  in  the  employment  context,  in  which  employees  and
prospective employees are either subordinate or dependent. In other words, employees often
find  themselves  in  a  position    where  it  is  virtually  impossible  for  them  to  refuse,  withdraw  or
modify consent, due to the employer’s position and power, and to their own fear of loss of  job
offer,  promotion  and  so  on.    Since  the  Data  Protection  Directive  does  not,  in  principle,
expressly address data protection issues in the workplace, the Commission considered that it
should  be  duly  particularised  and  complemented.  Although  it  does  not  directly  address  the
relevant  issues,  Council  Directive  2000/78/EC  of  27  November  2000,  establishing  a  general
framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation, contains useful  rules,  such  as
the obligation to treat equally persons with disabilities.  Presently, the Commission considers a
specific  community  action  which  can  take  the  form  of  a  specific  Directive  providing    for  a
European  framework  on  the  protection  of  employees’  personal  data.    Based  on  the
fundamental  principles  of  the  Data  Protection  Directive,  this  framework  aspires  to  cover  all
kinds of employees’ personal data, including medical data and data deriving from genetic tests.

1.10.     At International level

A  number  of  international  instruments  in  the  field  of  data  protection  exist  which  have  some
relevance  to  the  issue  of  genetic  testing  in  the  workplace.  The  Council  of  Europe    1981
Convention  No  108  for  the  protection  of  individuals  with  regard  to  automatic  processing  of
personal  data  and  the  1997  Recommendation  (97)5  on  the  protection  of  medical  data  are
relevant,  but  neither  of  these  instruments  relate  expressly  to  employment.  The  International
Labour Office (ILO)  Code of  Practice  on  the protection of  workers’  personal  data  (1997)  is a
useful  source  of  inspiration  for  Community  action.  Both  this  instrument  and  the  1989
Recommendation No R(89)2 of the Council of Europe on the protection of personal data used
for employment purposes recognize that different traditions exist among countries in regard to
the  regulation  of  employers  and  workers.  Such  traditions,  though,  should  not  be  used  to
obstruct  enforcement of widely recognized  fundamental principles in this field.

14

ETHICAL BACKGROUND

Ethical issues can be related either to the performance of the genetic testing itself, or to the use

of the data which have been obtained by genetic testing.

1.11.     Ethical Aspects Relating to Performance of Genetic Tests

1.11.1    Autonomy of Employees or Applicants for Work

The performance of genetic tests makes available personal data of great sensitivity.  Particular
attention  must  be  given  to  the  interests  of  the  person  to  be  tested  and  to  the  question  of
whether the benefits that might accrue from the testing will warrant any personal intrusion that
the test imposes.

In particular, the autonomy of the person to be tested, whether prior to or during employment,
must be carefully balanced against the duties of employers to provide protection for members
of the work force, including the person to be tested, and third parties.

In the context of genetic testing, autonomy implies for the person to be tested, fully informed
consent to the test(s).  Full information, as well as incorporating understanding  of  the  testing
procedures,  would  also  involve  information  about  the  possible  test  outcomes  and  the
significance  of  these,  and  appropriate  counselling  when  the  test  results  are  delivered.    It  is
often the case that the position of an applicant for employment is rather weak compared with
that of an employer and that this might result in a self imposed pressure to consent to tests that
could be unnecessary.

1.11.2    Duties of Employers to Employees and Other Parties

Employers  have  a  duty  to  protect  members  of  their  workforce  and  other  parties  that  might
possibly be harmed as a result of either sudden or progressive sickness of an employee.  It is
possible that in some cases, genetic testing of an employee might be the only way of ensuring
that this duty is carried out.  Employers also have a primary duty to ensure that employees are
provided  with  a  safe  working  environment  and  are  not  exposed  to  harmful  occupational
hazards.  

1.11.3.   Employee’s Ability to Carry Out Work

Employers  have  the  right  to  expect  their  employees  to  be  capable  of  carrying  out  the  work
required.  This would normally be judged by an employer using the traditional approaches of
curriculum vitae, interview, aptitude tests and references.  An applicant’s ability to carry out the
work is sometimes also assessed during a medical examination.  Working contracts are often
subject to a probationary period – an additional safeguard for the employer.  A genetic test of
limited predictive value would add nothing to knowledge of an applicant’s ability to carry out the
work at the outset and would give very little information on how this might change in the future.

15

1.11.4    Validity of Genetic Tests

Another ethical issue is the validity of a test, its relevance, reliability and predictive value.  At
the present time very few tests would achieve a high score in all of these categories.  It would
be  manifestly  unfair  to  base  important  decisions  regarding  employment  or  promotion  on  the
results  of  tests  either  of  dubious  relevance  or  with  low  reliability  or  predictive  value.    Any
benefits emerging from such tests in terms of protection of employees or third parties could be
greatly offset by suffering resulting from false negatives and false positives.

1.12. 

Ethical Aspects Relating to Use of Genetic Information

1.12.1.   Confidentiality and the Right Not to Know

The sensitive nature of data obtained from genetic testing raises the question of confidentiality.
The data will initially become available to the health professional responsible for requesting the
test.  The question arises of whether the raw genetic data should ever be made available to an
employer or if the medical professional should merely communicate their relevant professional
opinion to the employer.  In this respect, the independence of the medical professional  is an
important  consideration.  Genetic  data  are  clearly  the  property  of  the  person  who  has  been
tested but the latter may wish to exercise their right not to know their genetic status.

Another issue with respect to confidentiality is that genetic information on one individual might
also give an indication of the genetic status of one or more of the individual’s family members.

1.12.2.   Discriminatory Use of Genetic Test Results

Data from genetic screening could be used to the disadvantage of an applicant for employment
or an employee.  It could be used to discriminate unfairly between applicants for employment or
for  promotion  within  a  company.    It  could  have  serious  implications  for  a  person’s  career
prospects.

16

2. OPINION

The  Group  focuses  in  this  Opinion  on  the  ethical  issues  related  to  genetic  testing,  with
particular reference to genetic screening.  Nevertheless, the ethical dilemmas and conflicts of
interest  to  be  considered  in  regard  to  genetic  testing  including  genetic  monitoring  can  be
viewed in the general context of medical data at the workplace.

The Group submits the following opinion:

2.1.

2.2.

2.3.

2.4.

2.5.

2.6.

2.7.

2.8.

2.9.

Employers  have  the  duty  to  protect  the  health  of  their  employees  and  to  prevent  risk  to
third parties.  On the other hand, employees and candidates for employment have a right to
privacy and to the protection of their personal data.

Employers have the duty to adapt the workplace in order to limit the risk of health damage
for the employees.

During recruitment, employers must guarantee fair treatment for all applicants and avoid
any discrimination. 

Employees have the duty to prevent risk to third parties.  

Employees or potential employees must realise that a medical examination may be part of
the assessment of aptitude for the position.

The medical examination should not be a criterion of selection .  It should take place after
the phase of selection.

Where  there  is  a  possible  risk  of  genetic  damage  to  an  employee  resulting  from  some
component  of  the  working  environment,  the  employer  must  take  every  possible  step  to
eliminate  that  risk.    If  such  a  risk  cannot  be  totally  excluded,  genetic  monitoring,  which
aims  at  evaluating  chromosomal  abnormalities  induced  by  exposure  to  agents  in  the
context of employment, may be valuable but requires properly informed consent.

Genetic screening is a type of medical testing.  It concerns the potential future health status
of the individual screened.
As  a  general  rule,    the  Group  considers  that  only  the  present  health  status  of  the
employees should be considered in the employment context.

Furthermore, there is, up until now, no proven evidence that the existing genetic tests have
relevance and reliability in the context of employment.  They still have uncertain predictive
value.  

17

2.10.

The  Group  considers  that,  in  general,  the  use  of  genetic  screening  in  the  context  of  the
medical examination, as well as the disclosure of the results of previous genetic tests, is
not  ethically  acceptable.    The  legitimate  duties  and  right  of  employers  concerning  the
protection  of  health  and  the  assessment  of  ability  can  be  fulfilled  through  medical
examination  but  without  performing  genetic  screening.    Thus,  employers  should  not  in
general perform genetic screening nor ask employees to undergo tests.

2.11.

In  exceptional  cases,  the  use  of  genetic  screening  could  be  considered  when  it  may  be
necessary to guarantee health protection of workers or protection of third parties.  

2.12.

In  these  exceptional  cases,  genetic  testing  could  be  considered  provided  that,  among
others, the following conditions are fulfilled:
(cid:1)  the  performance  of  the  test  is  necessary  for  guaranteeing  the  protection  of  the

employee’s health and safety or those of third parties,

(cid:1)  there  is  scientifically  proved  evidence  that  the  genetic  test  is  valid  and  is  the  only

method to obtain this information,

(cid:1)  the performance of the test does not prejudice the aim of improving conditions in the

workplace,

(cid:1)  the  principle  of  proportionality  is  respected  regarding  the  motivations  involved  to

perform the test,

(cid:1)  the principle of non-discrimination is not violated.

2.13.

The definition of exceptional cases for proposing and performing genetic screening at the
workplace should be explicitly regulated by law.  

2.14.

For  a  specific  application,  the  prior  assent  of  the  appropriate  labour  organisation  and  a
specific ad hoc authorization by an independent committee should be required.

2.15.

The applicant or the employee should receive full information from an independent health
professional on the testing procedure, the reasons for performing such tests, the potential
outcomes  and  their  implications  and  consequences,  as  well  as  the  conditions  of  storing
and  access  to  data.      They  should  also,  if  requested,  be  provided  with  access  to
independent legal counselling.

2.16.

The applicant or the employee should consent to the genetic test.

2.17.

When the test reveals a genetic condition which is incompatible with the protection of the
health of the employee or the applicant or with the safety of third parties, the information
given to the employers should only concern the inappropriateness of the applicant for the
specific job, without specification of the cause.

18

2.18.

The  genetic  data  as  other  medical  data  remain  confidential;  such  personal  attributable
data should only be accessible to the applicant and to the health professional, and transfer
without  consent  of  these  data  to  third  parties,  including  the  employer,  should  be  strictly
prohibited.

2.19.

Genetic screening or monitoring conducted at the workplace should not be considered as
a genetic test to be disclosed for the purpose of insurance.

2.20.

Legal measures should be taken at EU level to preserve the confidentiality of these genetic
data  also  in  case  of  transborder  movement  of  the  employees/employers,  namely  in  the
context of free circulation of workers within the EU.

19

20

STELLUNGNAHME DER EUROPÄISCHEN GRUPPE FÜR ETHIK
DER NATURWISSENSCHAFTEN UND DER NEUEN
TECHNOLOGIEN BEI DER EUROPÄISCHEN KOMMISSION

Nr. 18
Original: Englisch
*****************************************************************************************************************

Engültige Fassung– 28. Juli 2003

ETHISCHE ASPEKTE VON GENTESTS AM ARBEITSPLATZ

Bezug: 

Initiative der Gruppe

Berichterstatter:  Peter Whittaker und Nicos C. Alivizatos

*****************************************************************************************************************

gestützt auf den durch den Vertrag von Nizza geänderten Vertrag über die Europäische Union,
insbesondere  auf  Artikel 6  der  gemeinsamen  Bestimmungen  über  die  Achtung  der
Grundrechte;

gestützt  auf  den  EG-Vertrag,  insbesondere  auf  Artikel 137  über  die  Arbeitsumwelt  und  die
Gesundheit und Sicherheit am Arbeitsplatz;

gestützt  auf  die  vom  Europäischen  Rat  in  Biarritz  am  14. Oktober 2000  angenommene  und
vom  Europäischen  Parlament,  vom  Rat  und  von  der  Kommission  am  7. Dezember 2000  in
Nizza feierlich verkündete Charta der Grundrechte der Europäischen Union, insbesondere auf
Artikel 8  über  den  "Schutz  personenbezogener  Daten",  Artikel 15  über  "Berufsfreiheit  und
Recht  zu  arbeiten",  Artikel 21  über  Nichtdiskriminierung,  unter  anderem  wegen  genetischer
Merkmale, und Artikel 31 über "Gerechte und angemessene Arbeitsbedingungen";

gestützt  auf  Richtlinie 95/46/EG  des  Europäischen  Parlaments  und  des  Rates  vom
24. Oktober 1995  zum Schutz  natürlicher  Personen  bei  der  Verarbeitung personenbezogener
Daten und zum freien Datenverkehr;

gestützt  auf  Richtlinie 2000/78/EG  des  Rates  vom  27. November 2000  zur  Festlegung  eines
allgemeinen  Rahmens  für  die  Verwirklichung  der  Gleichbehandlung  in  Beschäftigung  und
Beruf;

21

gestützt  auf  Richtlinie 2002/14/EG  des  Europäischen  Parlaments  und  des  Rates  vom
11. März 2002 zur Festlegung eines allgemeinen Rahmens für die Unterrichtung und Anhörung
der Arbeitnehmer in der Europäischen Gemeinschaft;

gestützt  auf  die  Empfehlung  Nr. R(89)2  des  Europarates  von  1989  über  den  Schutz
personenbezogener Daten im Arbeitsbereich;

gestützt  auf  die  Empfehlung  Nr. R(92)3  des  Europarates  von  1992  über  Gentests  und
genetisches Screening für Zwecke der Gesundheitsfürsorge, insbesondere auf die Grundsätze
6  und  8,  nach  denen  Gentests  und  genetisches  Screening  nur  in  Ausnahmefällen  und  die
Erhebung und Verarbeitung der entsprechenden personenbezogenen  Daten  nur  zu  Zwecken
der Gesundheitsfürsorge, der Diagnose und der Krankheitsvorbeugung zulässig sind;

gestützt auf die Empfehlung Nr. R(97)5 des Europarates von 1997 zum Schutz medizinischer
Daten, insbesondere auf Grundsatz 4.9, wonach die Erhebung  und  Verarbeitung  genetischer
Daten grundsätzlich nur für Gesundheitszwecke zulässig ist;

gestützt auf das am 4. April 1997 in Oviedo unterzeichnete Übereinkommen des Europarates
über Menschenrechte und Biomedizin, insbesondere auf Artikel 11 über "Nicht-Diskriminierung"
und Artikel 12 über "Prädiktive Gentests";

gestützt auf den Verhaltenskodex der Internationalen Arbeitsorganisation (ILO) für den Schutz
von  Beschäftigtendaten,  insbesondere  auf  Artikel 3.20,  wonach  “genetisches  Screening  in
Verbindung mit dem Arbeitsplatz eine unverhältnismäßige Verletzung der Personenrechte ist”
und “der gegenwärtige Stand der Wissenschaft nicht ausreichend ist, um seine Durchführung
zu Zwecken der Gesundheit am Arbeitsplatz zu garantieren”.

gestützt auf das Rundtisch-Gespräch der Gruppe vom 6. März 2000 in Brüssel mit Mitgliedern
des  Europäischen  Parlaments,  Rechtssachverständigen,  Philosophen,  Naturwissenschaftlern,
Arbeitnehmer-  und  Arbeitgebervertretern,  Vertretern  der  Religionsgemeinschaften,  Vertretern
von  Patientenvereinigungen  und  anderen  Interessengruppen  sowie  von  internationalen  und
europäischen Organisationen (UNESCO, Europarat, WHO, OECD);

gestützt  auf  die  Sachverständigenanhörungen  in  Brüssel  vom  18. März,  15. April  und
17. Juni 2003 sowie in Athen vom 27. Mai 2003;

nach Anhörung der Berichterstatter Peter Whittaker und Nicos C. Alivizatos;

22

1.  IN ERWÄGUNG NACHSTEHENDER GRÜNDE:

DEFINITIONEN

Für den Zweck dieser Stellungnahme:

(a)  bedeutet “Unternehmen” ein staatliches oder privates Unternehmen, das, gewinnorientiert
oder  nicht,  eine  Wirtschaftstätigkeit  ausübt  und  seinen  Sitz  auf  dem  Hoheitsgebiet  eines
Mitgliedstaates hat;

(b)  bedeutet  “Arbeitsplatz”  eine  entsprechend  nationalem  Recht  und  Gebräuchen  definierte
Unternehmenseinheit im öffentlichen oder privaten Sektor, die sich auf dem Hoheitsgebiet
eines  Mitgliedstaates  befindet,  und  wo  ständig  eine  Wirtschaftstätigkeit  mit  Human-  und
Sachressourcen ausgeübt wird;

(c)  bedeutet  “Arbeitgeber”  eine  natürliche  Person  oder  Rechtspersönlichkeit  im  öffentlichen
oder  privaten  Bereich,  die  Beschäftigungsverträge  oder  Beschäftigungsverhältnisse  mit
Arbeitnehmern  entsprechend  nationalem  Recht  und  Gebräuchen  eingeht;  ferner  umfasst
der  Begriff  "Arbeitgeber"  Arbeitsvermittler,  Zeitarbeitsvermittler,  Personalberater  und
Agenturen, die Arbeitnehmer an andere natürliche Personen oder Rechtspersönlichkeiten
vermitteln (“Personalvermittlung”).

(d)  bedeutet  “Arbeitnehmer”  eine  Person,  die  in  dem  betreffenden  Mitgliedstaat  als  Arbeiter
oder Angestellter nach nationalem Recht und Gebräuchen geschützt ist; ferner umfasst der
Begriff "Arbeitnehmer" Bewerber um einen Arbeitsplatz sowie ehemalige Arbeitnehmer;

(e)  bedeuten 

in 

diesem 

“Gentests” 

eines
wissenschaftlichen  Tests,  um  Angaben  über  einige  Merkmale  der  genetischen
Veranlagung  einer  Person  zu  erhalten,  die  auf  ein  gegenwärtiges  oder  künftiges
Gesundheitsproblem  hinweist. 
Im  Zusammenhang  mit  der  Arbeitswelt  beinhalten
"Gentests" "genetisches Screening" und "genetisches Monitoring";

die  Durchführung 

Zusammenhang 

(f)  bedeutet  “genetisches  Screening”  in  diesem  Zusammenhang  die  Durchführung  eines
wissenschaftlichen  Tests,  um  zu  bestimmen,  ob  eine  Person  über  besondere  Varianten
eines oder mehrerer Gene in ihrem Genom;

(g)  bedeutet “genetisches Monitoring” in diesem Zusammenhang die regelmäßige Prüfung auf
Chromosomenabweichungen  in  Zellproben  einer  Person,  die  an  ihrem  Arbeitsplatz
genschädigenden Stoffen ausgesetzt ist.

(h)  bedeuten  “personenbezogene  Daten”  in  diesem  Zusammenhang  jegliche  Art  von  Daten,
die  entweder  auf  den  gegenwärtigen  oder  voraussichtlich  künftigen  Gesundheitszustand
einer Person schließen lassen.

23

WISSENSCHAFTLICHER HINTERGRUND

1.2  Gentests

1.2.1  Vorbemerkung

Informationen,  die  unter
Die  DNA  eines  Menschen  enthält  die  genetischen 
Berücksichtigung aller Umwelteinflüsse, denen eine Person ausgesetzt ist, das Wachstum,
die Entwicklung und die sich daraus ergebenden Merkmale dieser Person bestimmen. Es
wird  zunehmend  leichter,  Informationen  über  Einzelaspekte  des  genetischen  Zustandes
einer Person zu gewinnen, indem man das Vorhandensein bestimmter Genvarianten prüft
oder ihre Chromosomen unter dem Mikroskop untersucht. Die Ergebnisse dieser Gentests
können  zum  Teil  benutzt  werden,  um  den  Ausbruch  gewisser  genetisch  bestimmter
Krankheiten  vorherzusehen  und  geeignete  Frühtherapien  oder  andere  vorbeugende
Maßnahmen  einzuleiten.  Gentests  werden  gegenwärtig  auch  in  der  Forensik  und  bei
Vaterschaftstests  verwendet.  Die  Präzision  genetischer  Daten  führt  jedoch  dazu,  dass
Versicherungsgesellschaften  in  ihren  Besitz  gelangen  möchten,  um  die  Risiken  ihrer
Lebens- und Krankenversicherungen ihrer Meinung nach genauer abschätzen zu können.
Diese Stellungnahme konzentriert sich insbesondere auf das Interesse der Arbeitgeber an
Gentests  als  Möglichkeit,  den  künftigen  Gesundheitszustand  eines  Arbeitnehmers
vorherzusagen bzw. seine Anfälligkeit für gewisse Risiken am Arbeitsplatz ist (genetisches
Screening).  Sie  könnten  auch  ein  Interesse  daran  haben,  die  genetische  Veranlagung
eines  Arbeitnehmers  zu  überprüfen,  der  genschädigenden  Stoffen  ausgesetzt 
ist
(genetisches Monitoring).

1.1.2. Nicht-DNA-basiertes genetisches Screening

Die Definition des Begriffs "genetisches Screening" beschränkt sich nicht allein auf DNA-
Tests.  Bei  vielen  Genen  handelt  es  sich  um  kodierte  Anweisungen  zur  Herstellung
bestimmter  Proteine.  Andere  können  den  Zeitpunkt  oder  die  Menge  der  Proteinsynthese
steuern.  Es  kann  daher  in  einigen  Fällen  möglich  sein,  Anzeichen  für  einen  genetischen
Status zu erhalten indem man die Tätigkeit eines Proteins oder seiner Erzeugnisse misst.
Zum  Zwecke  dieser  Stellungnahme  werden  alle  Tests  zur  Beurteilung  bestimmter  Gene
oder  Generzeugnisse  mit  Hinweisen  auf  die  genetische  Veranlagung  einer  Person  als
Gentests angesehen.

1.1.3.   Erb- und Familienkrankheiten

Erb-  und  Familienkrankheiten  können  Hinweise  geben  auf  eine  mögliche  genetische
Veranlagung  im  Hinblick  auf  die  Anfälligkeit  für  bestimmte  Krankheiten  und  werden  von
einigen  Versicherungsgesellschaften  bei  der  Prüfung  von  Krankenversicherungsanträgen
herangezogen.  Insofern  Erb-  und  Familienkrankheiten  Hinweise  auf  die  genetische
Veranlagung  einer  Person  geben  können,  die  ebenso  aussagekräftige  Hinweise  auf  die
zukünftige  Gesundheitsentwicklung  liefern  wie  ein  im  Labor  durchgeführter  Gentest,
werden diese in unsere Gentest-Definition einbezogen.

24

1.2 Durchführung von Gentests in der Arbeitswelt

1.2.1.   Genetisches Screening als Indikator für die zukünftige Gesundheitsentwicklung

Unbestreitbar  spielt  die  genetische  Verfassung  einer  Person  eine  Rolle  im  Hinblick  auf  ihre
Anfälligkeit 
für  bestimmte  Krankheiten.  Die  heißt  nicht,  dass  Gene  allein  über  die
Krankheitsanfälligkeit bestimmen, da diese auch durch Umwelteinflüsse, Lebensstil, Ernährung
und  eventuell  durch  andere  günstige  Umstände  abgewandelt  wird.  Gleichwohl  können
Untersuchungen zum Nachweis bestimmter Genvarianten Hinweise darauf bieten, mit welcher
Wahrscheinlichkeit eine Person in Zukunft eine bestimmte Krankheit entwickelt.

für  die  Rentabilität 

Gegenwärtige oder künftige Arbeitgeber könnten ein Interesse an den Ergebnissen derartiger
genetischer Screenings haben, da sie Hinweise auf die künftige Gesundheitsentwicklung eines
relevante
insbesondere  auf  die 
Arbeitnehmers  bieten  können, 
Wahrscheinlichkeit  künftiger  Fehlzeiten  oder  niedriger  Arbeitsproduktivität.  Beispielsweise
benötigt  ein  Arbeitnehmer,  der  eine  Herzkrankheit  bekommt,  mit  großer  Wahrscheinlichkeit
Arbeitsunterbrechungen  und  ist  in  einigen  Berufen  wahrscheinlich  nicht  in  der  Lage,  eine
normale  Arbeitsproduktivität  zu  erbringen.  Es  ist  ebenfalls  möglich,  dass  das  plötzliche
Ausbrechen einer Krankheit zu Gefahren für den Arbeitnehmer, andere Arbeitnehmer oder die
Öffentlichkeit  führt.  Arbeitgeber  könnten  diese  Testergebnisse  verwenden,  um  Bewerber
aufgrund ihres erwarteten zukünftigen Gesundheitszustands abzulehnen.
Diese  Art  von  Gentest,  bei  der  kein  Grund  für  die  Annahme  vorliegt,  dass  der  Arbeitnehmer
über  eine  bestimmte  genetische  Verfassung  verfügt,  wird  allgemein  genetisches  Screening
genannt.

1.2.2.     Genetisches  Screening  als  Indikator  im  Hinblick  auf  die  Anfälligkeit  für

Berufskrankheiten

Arbeitgeber  können  ebenfalls  ein  Interesse  daran  haben,  herauszufinden,  ob  Arbeitnehmer
aufgrund ihres genetischen Profils anfällig sind für berufliche Risiken  wie  das  Vorhandensein
von  giftigen,  mutagenen  oder  karzinogenen  Stoffen  am  Arbeitsplatz  unter  den  allgemein
zulässigen  Werten.  Genvarianten,  die  den  Stoffwechsel  derartiger  genotoxischer  Stoffe
beeinflussen,  können  die  Fähigkeit  einer  Person  zu  ihrer  Aktivierung  bzw.  Inaktivierung
für  die  Behebung  genetischer  Schäden  sorgen.
verändern.  Andere  Gene  können 
Berufsbedingte Faktoren sind in 10 % aller Fälle verantwortlich für Asthma bei Erwachsenen.
Asthma ist eine polygenetische Erkrankung, an der viele Wechselwirkungen zwischen Genen
und  Umwelt  beteiligt  sind.  Zu  den  anderen  Erkrankungen,  die  ebenfalls  berufsbezogen  sind,
und bei denen eine genetische Grundlage bekannt ist, gehören die Beryllium-Allergie und eine
chronisch obstruktive Lungenerkrankung aufgrund eines (cid:2)-1-Antitrypsin (AAT)-Mangels.

Informationen  zu  nutzen,  um
interessiert  sein,  diese 
Ein  Arbeitgeber  könnte  daran 
Arbeitnehmer  in  Bereichen  einzusetzen,  die  ihrer  besonderen  genetischen  Verfassung
entsprechen, oder sie von einer Beschäftigung auszuschliessen.

25

Informationen dieser Form  eines  genetischen Screenings  können auch  für den  Arbeitnehmer
von Wert sein. Kennt er seine Anfälligkeit für ein bestimmtes Berufsrisiko, kann er im Hinblick
auf seine Gesundheit und Sicherheit bewusste berufliche Entscheidungen treffen.

1.2.3.     Genetisches Monitoring

Selbst  in  einer  wohlregulierten  Arbeitsumgebung  dürfte  es  nicht  möglich  sein,  alle  Spuren
chemischer Stoffe oder Strahlungen auszuschalten, die das Erbgut eines Menschen schädigen
können. Es ist in  solchen  Zusammenhängen  möglich,  die  Zellen  einer  potenziell gefährdeten
Person  im  Hinblick  auf  Genschäden  zu  überwachen.  Solche  Tests  haben  nicht  nur
Auswirkungen  auf  die  Gesundheit  der  betreffenden  Person,  sondern  auch  auf  die
Folgegeneration.  Die  Ergebnisse  des  genetischen  Monitorings  könnten  auf  ein  bisher  nicht
erkanntes  Gesundheitsrisiko  aufmerksam  machen  und  sind  somit  von  Bedeutung  für  die
öffentliche  Gesundheit.  In  dieser  Stellungnahme  wird  diese  Art  von  Gentest  genetisches
Monitoring genannt.

1.3         Gene und Krankheit

1.3.1      Monogenetische und polygenetische Krankheiten

Obwohl  es  zahlreiche  anerkannte  Erbkrankheiten  gibt,  die  auf  einen  Defekt  in  einem  einzelnen  Gen
zurückzuführen  sind  (monogenetische  Krankheiten),  so  kommen  solche  Krankheiten  doch  im
Allgemeinen selten vor. Monogenetische Krankheiten sind etwa zystische Fibrose, Sichelzellenanämie,
die Huntington-Krankheit und Hämophilie.

Zystische Fibrose und Sichelzellenanämie sind Beispiele autosomal-rezessiv vererbter Krankheiten, bei
denen  sich  die  relevanten  Gene  auf  einem  der  22  nicht  geschlechtsgebundenen  menschlichen
Chromosomenpaare befinden. Dies bedeutet, dass die Krankheit nur ausbricht, wenn das defekte Gen
von  beiden  Elternteilen  geerbt  wurde.  Ein  Mensch,  der  von  einem  Elternteil  eine  normale  Kopie  des
Gens  und  vom  anderen  eine  defekte  Kopie  geerbt  hat,  ist  Träger  des  Krankheitsgens,  zeigt  aber
normalerweise keine Symptome der Krankheit.

Die  Huntington-Krankheit  ist  ein  Beispiel  einer  autosomal-dominant  vererbten  Krankheit.  In
diesem Fall ist nur eine einzige Kopie des defekten Gens von einem der Elternteile erforderlich,
damit die Krankheit ausbricht.
Hämophilie ist ein Beispiel einer Krankheit, die auf einen Defekt in einem X-gebundenen Gen
zurückzuführen  ist.  Das  Geschlechtschromosomenpaar  besteht  aus  zwei  X-Chromosomen
(weibliche Person) oder einem X- und einem Y-Chromosom (männliche Person). Da Personen
männlichen Geschlechts nur ein  einziges X-Chromosom  besitzen,  entwickeln  sie  eine  solche
Krankheit  mit  höherer  Wahrscheinlichkeit  als  Personen  weiblichen  Geschlechts  mit  zwei
X-Chromosomen, da die rezessive Genvariante auf einem der X-Chromosomen in Gegenwart
des normalen Gens auf dem anderen X-Chromosom nicht zur Expression kommt.
Im Gegensatz zu den genannten Krankheiten, deren Ursache ein einziges fehlerhaftes Gen ist,
wird bei anderen menschlichen Krankheiten mit genetischer Komponente davon ausgegangen,
dass  sie  auf  Wechselwirkungen  zwischen  mehreren  Genen  zurückzuführen  sind
(polygenetische Krankheiten). Einige polygenetische Krankheiten treten sehr häufig auf. In den
meisten dieser Fälle ist die genetische Grundlage noch nicht ganz geklärt, das Verständnis 

26

wird  außerdem  durch  mögliche  Einflüsse  der  Umwelt,  der  Ernährung  und  des  Lebensstils
erschwert.  Beispiele  für  solche  polygenetischer  Krankheiten  sind  Herzkrankheiten,  mehrere
Krebsformen und einige Allergien.

1.3.2      Faktoren, die die Entwicklung einer Erbkrankheit beeinflussen

Der Besitz eines oder mehrerer genetischer Defekte diktiert nicht notwendigerweise, dass sich
bei  der  Person,  die  diesen  Defekt besitzt  die Krankheit  entwickeln  wird. So  besteht  etwa  bei
einer  Frau  mit  dem  Brustkrebsrisikogen  BRCA1  ein  80 %iges  Risiko,  dass  sie  bis  zu  Ihrem
65. Lebensjahr  an  Brustkrebs  erkrankt.  Die  „Expressivität“  eines  genetischen  Defekts
beschreibt die unterschiedlichen Schweregrade der Erkrankung, unter der die einzelnen Träger
des Defekts leiden können. Sowohl die Penetranz und Expressivität als auch der Zeitpunkt des
Krankheitsausbruchs  können  durch  Umweltfaktoren,  den  Lebensstil  oder  die  Anwesenheit
einer Reihe anderer Gene beeinflusst werden.

1.4       Methodik für Gentests

1.4.1      Methodik für das genetische Screening

Die  DNS-Sequenz  eines  fehlerhaften  Gens  unterscheidet  sich  vielleicht  nur  sehr  wenig  von
derjenigen  der  Normalvariante  des  Gens.  Das  genetische  Screening  soll  solche  kleinen
Abweichungen  beim  fraglichen  Gen  aufdecken.  Hierfür  ist  nur  eine  sehr  geringe  Menge  an
DNS erforderlich. Beispielsweise wird der erforderliche DNS-Abschnitt normalerweise durch die
Polymerase-Kettenreaktion (PCR) mehrtausendfach vervielfältigt („amplifiziert“). Dann wird die
amplifizierte DNS fluoreszenzmarkiert. Anschließend leitet man die fluoreszenzmarkierte DNS
durch  einen  Filter,  auf  den  ein  kleines  Stück  DNS  (die  „Sonde“)  aufgebracht  ist,  das  eine
Sequenz  enthält,  die  charakteristisch  für  die  Variante  ist,  auf  die  hin  man  untersucht.  Ist  die
fragliche  Variante  in  der  fluoreszenten  amplifizierten  DNS  vorhanden,  wird  diese  sich  an  die
Sonde binden, wodurch die entsprechende Stelle des Filters fluoreszent aufscheint. Durch das
Aufbringen  mehrerer  unterschiedlicher  Sonden  an  verschiedenen  Stellen  des  Filters  ist  es
möglich,  gleichzeitig  auf  die  Anwesenheit  mehrerer  verschiedener  Varianten  des  Gens  zu
untersuchen.  Die  Entwicklung  DNS-Microarray-Technik  dürfte  künftig  die  gleichzeitige
Untersuchung auf eine große Zahl von Genvarianten hin ermöglichen.

Wenn  beim  genetischen  Screening  nach  einem  Protein  gesucht  wird,  dessen  Konzentration
aufgrund eines bestimmten fehlerhaften Gens verändert ist, so hängt die verwendete Strategie
vom  fraglichen  Protein  ab.  In  Frage  kommen  zum  Beispiel  eine  Identifizierung  durch
Elektrophorese, eine Antikörpersonde oder ein Enzymtest.

1.4.2      Methodik für das genetische Monitoring

Im Gegensatz zum genetischen Screening umfasst genetisches Monitoring normalerweise die
mikroskopische  Untersuchung  der  Karyotypen  (Chromosomenmuster)  weißer  Blutzellen.
Änderungen  der  Chromosomenstruktur  -  einschließlich  Chromosomenbruch,  Inversion  oder
Verlust von Chromosomenabschnitten oder Übertragung („Translokation“) eines 

27

Chromosomenstückchens  auf  ein  verschiedenes  Chromosom  -  bilden  einen  Hinweis  auf  die
Einwirkung  gentoxischer  Stoffe  in  unannehmbar  hoher  Konzentration.  Neu  entwickelte
Techniken erlauben die Aufspürung ziemlich kleiner Veränderungen der Chromosomstruktur.

1.5       Validität, Reliabilität und Aussagekraft von Gentests

1.5.1      Validität von Gentests

Gegenwärtig  gibt  es  nur  sehr  wenige  Gentests,  die  Informationen  für  Arbeitgeber  oder
Arbeitnehmer beinhalten und aussagekräftig sind für Entscheidungen in der Arbeitswelt. Es ist
möglich,  dass  sich  diese  Situation  in  der  Zukunft  ändert.  Allerdings  ist  es  schwierig,
vorherzusagen,  wann  diese  Veränderung  eintritt.  Besteht  ein  Zusammenhang  zwischen  dem
Arbeitsplatz 
könnten
Versicherungsgesellschaften gegenüber Arbeitgebern darauf drängen, genetische Screenings
durchzuführen, um Risiken abzuschätzen. Die Validität eines Gentests erfordert den Nachweis

Lebensversicherung, 

Kranken- 

einer 

oder 

und 

4)  seiner Relevanz für den Gesundheitsschutz der Arbeitnehmer,

5)  der Reliabilität und Reproduzierbarkeit des Tests und

6)  der Aussagekraft des Tests.

In  einigen  Ländern  gibt  es  gesetzliche  Einrichtungen,  die  unter  bestimmten  Umständen  die
Validität von Gentests kontrollieren.

1.5.2  Relevanz von Gentests

im  Hinblick  auf  die  Anfälligkeit 

Gegenwärtig  kann  man  kaum  befürworten,  dass  Gentests  als  Indikatoren  für  die  künftige
Gesundheitsentwicklung  im  Hinblick  auf  ihre  Bedeutung  für  das  Beschäftigungsverhältnis
durchgeführt  werden.  Genetisches  Screening 
für
Arbeitsplatzrisiken  ist  natürlich  relevant  für  die  Vorbeugung,  aber  in  vielen  Fällen  ist  die
Verbindung zwischen einer besonderen  genetischen Veranlagung  und  der  Anfälligkeit  für  ein
besonderes Risiko zur Zeit nur theoretisch.
In  der  allgemeinen  Debatte  wurden  übertriebene  Auffassungen  über  die  Aussagekraft  von
Gentests  geäußert,  die  wahrscheinlich  auf  dem  jeglicher  Grundlage  entbehrenden  Konzept
genetischer  Vorbestimmung  beruhen.  Unterliegt  ein  Arbeitnehmer  dem  Risiko  eines
Genschadens,  weil  er  am  Arbeitsplatz  Schadstoffen  ausgesetzt  ist,  kann  andererseits  das
genetische  Monitoring  von  Chromosomenveränderungen  aufgrund  dieser  Gefährdung  für  die
Gesundheit eines Arbeitnehmers von großer Bedeutung sein.

1.5.3      Reliabilität von Gentests

In einem derart sensiblen Bereich ist es selbstverständlich äußerst wichtig, dass die Verfahren
für Gentests so reliabel wie möglich sind, da die Bereitstellung unzutreffender Informationen an
einen Arbeitgeber oder Arbeitnehmer weitreichende Konsequenzen haben könnte. Alle Stufen
eines wissenschaftlich zufriedenstellenden Prüfverfahrens sollten eingebaute negative und 

28

positive  Kontrollen  beinhalten,  um  die  Reliabilität  der  Testergebnisse  zu  gewährleisten.
Bewährte Laborverfahren sind jederzeit zu verwenden, wozu auch die genaue Dokumentation
der  Verfahren  und  Ergebnisse  gehört.  Auch  wenn  die  Prüfverfahren  optimiert  sind,  gibt  es
falsche  Negative  und  falsche  Positive,  und  eine  Validierung  der  Prüfungen  kann  erforderlich
sein.

1.5.4      Aussagekraft von Gentests

Selbst bei monogenetischen Erkrankungen kann die Aussagekraft von Gentests begrenzt sein.
Es  ist  immer  möglich,  dass  die  betreffende  Erkrankung  während  des  Arbeitslebens  einer
Person  gar  nicht  auftritt,  und  es  ist  nicht  immer  möglich,  die  Ernsthaftigkeit  der  künftigen
Krankheit vorherzusagen.

Dieser  Sachverhalt  ist  bei  Krankheiten  mit  polygenetischer  Basis  noch  komplizierter.
Gegenwärtig  ist es  fast  unmöglich,  mit  Hilfe  genetischer  Tests genau  vorauszusagen,  ob  die
Krankheit  überhaupt  ausbricht,  oder,  falls  ja,  wann  und  wie  schwer.  Selbst  wenn  die
genetischen  Grundlagen  dieser  Erkrankungen  vollständig  erforscht  sind,  wird  die
Vorhersehbarkeit  der  Krankheitsentwicklung  durch  die  selbst  unvorhersehbaren  Umwelt-  und
Lebensstilfaktoren begrenzt.

Prüfprotokolle, deren Genauigkeit unter 100 % liegt (wie in den meisten Fällen), führen zu einer
weiter reduzierten Aussagekraft. Falsche Negative könnten möglicherweise dazu führen, dass
eine  gefährdete  Personen  einem  inakzeptablen  Gesundheitsrisiko  ausgesetzt  wird,  während
falsche  Positive  dazu  führen  könnten,  dass  nicht  anfällige  Personen  ungerechtfertigterweise
von einer Beschäftigung ausgeschlossen werden.

1.6. Die praktische Nutzung von Gentests durch die Arbeitgeber

Es ist bei Weitem nicht klar, inwieweit Gentests gegenwärtig und in Zukunft von Arbeitgebern
benutzt werden. In den Vereinigten Staaten bestand ein größeres Interesse an Gentests als in
Europa.  Dies  scheint  damit  zusammenzuhängen,  dass  die  Arbeitgeber  in  den  Vereinigten
Staaten  einen  stärkeren  Beitrag  zur  Krankenversicherung  leisten  als  in  Europa.  Dies  ist
wahrscheinlich der Grund dafür, dass es in den USA mehr Untersuchungen über Gentests am
Arbeitsplatz  gibt.  Die  Ergebnisse  dieser  Untersuchungen  sollten  mit  Vorsicht  betrachtet
werden, da sich herausgestellt hat, dass einige der untersuchten Arbeitgeber gar nicht genau
wussten, was ein Gentest ist.

1.6.1      Gentests am Arbeitsplatz in Europa

Die  zunehmende  Globalisierung  von  Industrie  und  Handel  deutet  darauf  hin,  dass  das  US-
amerikanische Vorbild bei der Krankenversicherung in Europa angewendet wird. Es ist daher
wahrscheinlich,  dass  Druck  ausgeübt  wird,  damit  die  ärztlichen  Untersuchungen  vor
Beschäftigungsaufnahme  auch  Gentests  beinhalten.  Eine  von  der  School  of  Health  and
Related Research der Universität Sheffield durchgeführte Studie über Gentests am Arbeitsplatz 

29

deutet  an,  dass  bei  den  in  Europa  durchgeführten  Untersuchungen  die  Arbeitgeber  gefragt
wurden,  ob  sie  Gentests  durchführen.  Angesichts  der  Tatsache,  dass  die  Technik  nicht
vollständig  zur  Verfügung  steht,  überrascht  es  kaum,  dass  es  nur  sehr  wenige  Beispiele  für
Gentests  am  Arbeitsplatz  gab.  Es  wäre  besser  gewesen,  wenn  die  Arbeitgeber  über  ihre
Einstellung gegenüber Gentests in der Zukunft befragt worden wären.

Gegenwärtig kann lediglich festgestellt werden, dass es bis jetzt nur den einzelnen bekannten
Fall eines genetischen Screenings am Arbeitsplatz gibt, auf den sich die Berichte des Nuffield
Council on Bioethics und des Human Genetics Advisory Committee im Vereinigten Königreich
beziehen.  Hierbei  handelt  es  sich  um  das  Screening  von  Flugzeugbesatzungen  durch  das
britische  Verteidigungsministerium  auf  Sichelzellen.  Es  bestand  die  Sorge,  dass  jemand,  der
über  das  Sichelzellen-Gen  verfügt,  durch  den  niedrigen  Sauerstoffdruck  in  einem  Flugzeug
Schaden nimmt. Die Strategie wurde deshalb kritisiert, weil sie sich nicht auf solide Tatsachen
gründet, sondern als diskriminierend angesehen werden konnte, da es in der afro-karibischen
Bevölkerung viel mehr Sichelzellen-Allelträger gibt als in der Gesamtbevölkerung. Das britische
Verteidigungsministerium hatte dieses Verfahren nicht weiter angewendet.
Eine  vom  Institute  of  Directors  im  Vereinigten  Königreich  im  August 2000  durchgeführte
Untersuchung  ergab,  dass  zwei  von  353  Direktoren  berichteten,  dass  ihre  Unternehmen
routinemäßig  Gentests  verwendeten.  Weitere  vier  Direktoren  gaben  an,  dass  Gentests  von
ihren  Unternehmen  verwendet  werden,  aber  nur,  wenn  sie  Bedenken  im  Hinblick  auf
bestimmte  Arbeitnehmer  haben.  Welche  besonderen  Arten  von  Gentests  verwendet  wurden,
wurde nicht angegeben. In dem Bericht ging es auch um Informationen über die Einstellung der
Direktoren  zu  genetischen  Screenings  aus  bestimmten  Gründen.  34 %  der  353  Direktoren
waren  für  ein  genetisches  Screening,  um  die  Wahrscheinlichkeit  späterer  Herzkrankheiten
festzustellen,  solange  der  Arbeitnehmer  einverstanden  war.  Weitere  8 %  befürworteten
Pflichtuntersuchungen,  wenn  dies  im  Interesse  des  Arbeitnehmers  war.  50 %  waren  für
Gentests  mit  Zustimmung  des  Arbeitnehmers,  um  das  Risiko  der  Angestellten,  eine
berufsbezogene  Erkrankung  aufgrund  einer  Gefährdung  am  Arbeitsplatz  zu  entwickeln,  zu
ermitteln. Weitere 16 % glaubten, dass diese Untersuchung Pflicht sein sollte.

1.6.2.     Gentests am Arbeitsplatz in den USA

In  der  Folge  stellten  die  Gerichte 

In den 70er Jahren untersagte die US Air Force Academy Trägern des Sichelzellen-Gens die
fest,  dass
Teilnahme  an  der  Pilotenausbildung. 
in  vielen
Sichelzellenträgertests  Afroamerikaner  unverhältnismäßig  benachteiligten,  und 
Staaten ist es den Arbeitgebern mittlerweile untersagt, Tests im Hinblick auf diese Erkrankung
durchzuführen.  In  einer  vom  Office  of  Technology  Assessment  des  US-Kongresses  1991
durchgeführten  Untersuchung  des  genetischen  Monitorings  und  des  genetischen  Screenings
am  Arbeitsplatz  wurden  sowohl  Verfahren  als  auch  Einstellungen  überprüft.  Nur  1 %  der
Gesundheitsbeauftragten  der  Unternehmen  gaben  damals  an,  dass  ihre  Unternehmen  ein
routinemäßiges  genetisches  Screening  bzw.  ein  genetisches  Monitoring  vor  Aufnahme  des
Beschäftigungsverhältnisses  durchführen.  Dennoch  gab  die  Mehrheit  der  Personal-  und
Gesundheitsbeauftragten  an,  dass 
ihre  Unternehmen  die  Durchführung  genetischer
Screenings  für  Bewerber  für  allgemein  akzeptabel  halten,  um  letztere  über  den  Grad  ihrer
Anfälligkeit  für  Arbeitsplatzrisiken  zu  informieren.  Gut  ein  Drittel  der  Gesundheits-  und
Personalbeauftragten hielt es  für  akzeptabel, Arbeitnehmer  mit einer  erhöhten  Anfälligkeit  für
Risikosituationen abzulehnen. Überraschenderweise hielt eine Mehrheit beider Gruppen es für 

30

inakzeptabel,  genetisches  Monitoring  für  Chromosomenveränderungen  in  Verbindung  mit
Gefahren  am  Arbeitsplatz  vorzunehmen.  Aus  der  Untersuchung  ging  hervor,  dass  1 %  der
Unternehmen angab, genetische Screenings verwendet zu haben, um Personen mit erhöhten
Krankheitsrisiken zu identifizieren, obwohl 12 % über genetisches Monitoring oder Screenings
von Arbeitnehmern berichteten. Bei den  meisten  von  ihnen handelte  es  sich  um genetisches
Monitoring  in  Unternehmen,  in  denen  Arbeitnehmer  möglicherweise  chemischen  oder
ionisierenden Strahlungen ausgesetzt sind.

Aufgrund  des  enorm  fortgeschrittenen  Wissens  über  das  menschliche  Genom  und  den
Verbesserungen  der  Gentechnologie  dürften  Verwendung  und  potenzielle  Nutzung  von
Gentests  in  den  USA  seit  dieser  Untersuchung  beträchtlich  zugenommen  haben.  Den
Ergebnisses  einer  1996  von  der  Universität  Georgetown  durchgeführten  Umfrage  bei
Familienmitgliedern  mit  erhöhten  Genrisiken  zufolge  wurden  13 %  aufgrund  dieses  erhöhten
Risikos aus ihrem Arbeitsverhältnis entlassen. Aus einer 1998 von der American Management
Association  durchgeführten  Untersuchung  geht  hervor,  dass  10 %  aller  Arbeitgeber  ihre
Arbeitnehmer  routinemäßig  auf  eine  genetische  Veranlagung  für  Erkrankungen  testen,  und
dass diese Zahl weiter zunimmt.

Im  Jahre  2001  führte  die  Equal  Employment  Opportunity  Commission  (Kommission  für
Chancengleichheit in der Beschäftigung, EEOC) ihren ersten Rechtsstreit im Zusammenhang
mit genetischen Screenings am Arbeitsplatz gegen die Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway.
Dieses  Unternehmen  hatte  genetische  Screenings  ohne  das  Wissen  oder  die  Zustimmung
seiner  Arbeitnehmer  durchgeführt.  Die  Gentests  waren  aufgrund  von  Klagen  einiger
Arbeitnehmer  im  Hinblick  auf  arbeitsbezogene  Krankheiten  auf  der  Grundlage  des  Karpal-
Tunnel-Syndroms  durchgeführt  worden.  Mindestens  einem  Arbeitnehmer  war  wegen
Nichtabgabe  einer  Blutprobe  mit  Entlassung  gedroht  worden.  Die  EEOC  forderte,  dass  das
Unternehmen  sein  Gentestprogramm  vollständig  und  mit  sofortiger  Wirkung  einstellt  und
betonte, dass sie “aggressiv reagieren würde auf jeden Hinweis, dass Arbeitgeber Gentests auf
eine Weise verlangen oder verwenden, die gegen den Americans with Disabilities Act von 1990
verstößt”.

31

RECHTLICHER HINTERGRUND

1.7. 

Einleitung

In  der  Regel  beschäftigen  sich  die  üblichen  Instrumente  auf  nationaler,  Gemeinschafts-  und
internationaler Ebene nicht ausdrücklich mit Fragen von Gentests am Arbeitsplatz. Während es
Vorschriften gibt, die solche Tests aus Gründen außerhalb der Gesundheitsfürsorge und eine
Diskriminierung auf deren Grundlage untersagen, gibt es keine verbindlichen Vorschriften, die
ein  genetisches  Screening  am  Arbeitsplatz  verbieten  und  sich  mit  den  Bedrohungen
auseinandersetzen,  die  ein  solches  Screening  sowohl  für  die  Privatsphäre  als  auch  für  die
Würde  der  Schwächsten,  d.h.  der  Arbeitnehmer,  darstellt.  Andererseits  gibt  es  außer
verstreuten  Verordnungen  keine besonderen Vorschriften  für  die  Erhebung  und  Verarbeitung
persönlicher  Gendaten.  Das  Fehlen  eines  angemessenen  Schutzes  in  diesem  Bereich  kann
das  Vertrauen,  den  gegenseitigen  Respekt  und  die  Professionalität  in  den  Beziehungen
zwischen  Arbeitgebern  und  Arbeitnehmern  erschüttern  und  nicht  nur  für  die  Arbeitnehmer,
sondern auch für die Arbeitgeber und die Geschäftswelt insgesamt von Nachteil sein.

1.8.       Auf nationaler Ebene

In einigen Mitgliedstaaten wurden Vorschriften im Bereich Humangenetik erlassen: 

-

-

-

-

-

In  Frankreich  verbietet  eine  Änderung  von  2002  des  code  civil  und  des  code  pénal  eine
Diskriminierung  im  Hinblick  auf  die  genetischen  Merkmale  einer  Person  oder  aufgrund
prädiktiver  Gentests,  “die  eine  Krankheit,  die  noch  nicht  ausgebrochen  ist,  oder  eine
genetische Veranlagung für eine Krankheit zum Gegenstand haben”. 
Ähnlich  verlangt  das  ständige  Recht  in  Schweden,  dass  Gentests  nur  zu  medizinischen
oder Forschungszwecken durchgeführt werden dürfen. 
In  Finnland  sieht  ein  Gesetz  von  2001  vor,  dass  Arbeitgeber  von  Arbeitnehmern  vor
Aufnahme  oder  während  des  Beschäftigungsverhältnisses  weder  Gentests  verlangen
dürfen noch das Recht haben, Informationen darüber zu erlangen, ob ein Arbeitnehmer an
einem derartigen Test teilgenommen hat. 
reguliert  die  Gesetzgebung  von  1996  die  Verwendung  von
In  Dänemark 
ist  zu  sichern,  dass
Gesunheitsinformation  auf  dem  Arbeitsmarkt.  Das  Ziel 
Gesundheitsuntersuchungen  sich  auf  den 
tatsächlichen/heutige  Gesundheitszustand
konzentrieren  und  dass  dieser  Gesundheitszustand  relevant  ist  für  die  Arbeit  des
Beschäftigten.  Der  Arbeitgeber  ist  nicht  berechtigt,  Informationen  zu  erheben  die  die
Wahrscheinlichkeit  betreffen,  dass  der  Arbeitnehmer  in  Zukunft  von  einer  Krankhheit
betroffen  sein  wird.  Er  ist  jedoch  berechtigt,  Informationen  über  die  Gesundheit  des
Arbeitnehmers  zu erhalten  wenn es  aufgrund der  Arbeitsbedingungen  es  wünschenswert
und redlich ist in Hinblick auf den Beschäftigten oder andere Beschäftigte.
In  Österreich  sind  sowohl  genetisches  Screening  als  auch  die  Erhebung,  Beantragung,
Entgegennahme  oder  sonstige  Verwendung  genetischer  Daten  von  Arbeitnehmern  durch
den Arbeitgeber ausdrücklich verboten. 

- Die  Erhebung  und  Verarbeitung  genetischer  Daten  am  Arbeitsplatz  ist  auch  in  den

-

Niederlanden, in Luxemburg und in Griechenland eingeschränkt.
In Italien dürfen Gendaten laut Datenschutzgesetz von 1996 nur verarbeitet werden unter
den  Umständen  die 
in  einer  ad-hoc  Genehmigung  die  von  der  nationalen
Überwachungsinstanz beschrieben werden. 
Die Gendaten auf die sich diese Genehmigung explizit bezieht dürfen verarbeitet werden 

32

im  Hinblick  auf  Information  und  Unternehmungen  die  unerlässlich  sind  zur  Beschützung
von körperlicher Integrität und Gesundheit der Person, um deren Gendaten es sich handelt,
eines  Dritten  oder  der  Gemeinschaft  als  Ganzes  –  auf  Grundlage  der  Zustimmung  der
Person, um deren Gendaten es sich handelt.
Sollte die Person, deren Daten verarbeitet werden, nicht zustimmen, darf die Verarbeitung
nur  begonnen  oder  weitergeführt  werden  wenn  sie  dem  Ziel  der  Beschützung  der
körperlichen Integrität und der Gesundheit eines Dritten oder der Gemeinschaft als Ganzer
dient  –  allerdings  ausschliesslich  auf  Grundlage  einer  vorhergehenden  ad-hoc
Genehmigung die von der nationalen Datenschutzbehörde erlassen werden muss. 

1.9.       Auf Gemeinschaftsebene

Im Juni 2000 hat die Kommission die Sozialpolitische Agenda veröffentlicht, die unter anderem
eine  Konsultation  mit  den  Sozialpartnern  über  den  Schutz  personenbezogener  Daten  im
Arbeitsbereich  vorsah.  Die  Kommission  war  der  Ansicht,  dass  Arbeitnehmer  (während  und
nach Beendigung des Beschäftigungsverhältnisses) und zukünftige Arbeitnehmer über keinen
ausreichenden Schutz ihrer Grundrechte und personenbezogenen Daten, die von Arbeitgebern
bearbeitet und/oder an Dritte weitergegeben werden, verfügen. Konkret bedeutet dies, dass die
in der Datenschutzrichtlinie als Mittel zur Legitimierung der Datenerhebung und -verarbeitung
verlangte  Zustimmung  bei  einem  Arbeitsverhältnis,  in  dem  Arbeitnehmer  und  künftige
Arbeitnehmer  entweder  in  einer  untergeordneten  oder  abhängigen  Position  sind,  nicht
unbedingt freiwillig zustande kommt. Arbeitnehmer befinden sich mit anderen Worten häufig in
einer  Position,  in  der  es  für  sie  praktisch  unmöglich  ist,  aufgrund  der  Position  und
Machtbefugnisse des Arbeitgebers und aufgrund ihrer eigenen Angst, auf ein Stellenangebot,
eine Beförderung usw. verzichten zu müssen, ihre Zustimmung zu verweigern, zurückzuziehen
oder  abzuändern.  Da  sich  die  Datenschutzrichtlinie  im  Prinzip  nicht  ausdrücklich  mit
Datenschutzfragen am Arbeitsplatz beschäftigt, war die Kommission der Auffassung, dass sie
entsprechend präzisiert und ergänzt werden sollte. Obwohl sie sich nicht  unmittelbar  mit  den
einschlägigen  Fragen  befasst,  enthält  die  Richtlinie  2000/78/EG  des  Rates  vom
27. November 2000  zur  Festlegung  eines  allgemeinen  Rahmens  für  die  Verwirklichung  der
Gleichbehandlung in Beschäftigung und Beruf nützliche Vorschriften wie die Verpflichtung zur
Gleichbehandlung  von  Behinderten.  Gegenwärtig  prüft  die  Kommission  eine  besondere
Gemeinschaftsmaßnahme,  die  die  Form  einer  besonderen  Richtlinie  zur  Schaffung  eines
europäischen Rahmens zum Schutz personenbezogener Daten von Arbeitnehmern annehmen
kann. Auf der Grundlage der Prinzipien der Datenschutzrichtlinie soll dieser Rahmen alle Arten
personenbezogener Daten von Arbeitnehmern, einschließlich medizinischer und Daten, die aus
Gentests stammen, umfassen.

1.10.     Auf internationaler Ebene

Es gibt eine Reihe internationaler Instrumente im Bereich des Datenschutzes, die eine gewisse
Bedeutung für die Frage  von  Gentests  am  Arbeitsplatz haben.  Einschlägige  Dokumente  sind
das  Übereinkommen  Nr. 108  des  Europarates  zum  Schutz  des  Menschen  bei  der
automatischen Verarbeitung personenbezogener Daten und die Empfehlung des Europarates
Nr. R(97)5 zum Schutz medizinischer  Daten,  sie  befassen  sich  jedoch nicht  ausdrücklich  mit
der  Arbeitswelt.  Der  Verhaltenskodex  der  Internationalen  Arbeitsorganisation  (ILO)  für  den
Schutz von Beschäftigtendaten (1997) bildet eine wertvolle Inspirationsquelle für Maßnahmen 

33

der  Gemeinschaft.  Sowohl  dieses  Instrument  als  auch  die  Empfehlung  Nr.  R(89)2  des
Europarates  von  1989  über  den  Schutz  personenbezogener  Daten  im  Arbeitsbereich
verweisen  auf  die  verschiedenen  Traditionen  der  einzelnen  Länder  hinsichtlich  des
Verhältnisses  zwischen  Arbeitgebern  und  Arbeitnehmern.  Diese  Traditionen  sollten  jedoch
nicht benutzt werden, um die Durchsetzung weitgehend anerkannter Grundprinzipien in diesem
Bereich zu behindern.

34

ETHISCHER HINTERGRUND

Ethische  Fragen  können  sich  entweder  auf  die  Durchführung  von  Gentests  selbst  oder  die

Nutzung der durch Gentests erzielten genetischen Daten beziehen.

1.11.     Ethische Aspekte im Zusammenhang mit der Durchführung von Gentests

1.11.1    Autonomie von Arbeitnehmern oder Stellenbewerbern

Die  Durchführung  von  Gentests  führt  zur  Erhebung  sehr  sensibler  persönlicher  Daten.  Ein
besonderes Augenmerk ist zu richten auf die Interessen der zu testenden Person und auf die
Frage, ob die Vorteile, die sich durch den Test ergeben, den persönlichen Eingriff, den dieser
Test darstellt, rechtfertigen.

Insbesondere muss die Autonomie der zu testenden Person vor Aufnahme oder während des
Beschäftigungsverhältnisses  sorgfältig  gegenüber  den  Pflichten  des  Arbeitgebers,  seine
Mitarbeiter,  einschließlich  der  zu  testenden  Person,  und  Dritte  zu  schützen,  abgewogen
werden.

Im  Zusammenhang  mit  Gentests  bedeutet  Autonomie  für  die  zu  testende  Person,  dass  sie
vollständig  aufgeklärt  wurde  und  dem  Test  zustimmt.  Zu  einer  vollständigen  Aufklärung
gehören neben dem Verstehen der Testverfahren auch eine Unterrichtung über die möglichen
Testergebnisse  und  deren  Bedeutung  sowie  eine  angemessene  Beratung  bei  Vorlage  der
Testergebnisse.  Häufig  befinden  sich  Stellenbewerber  gegenüber  dem  Arbeitgeber  in  einer
eher  schwachen  Position,  was  dazu  führen  kann,  dass  sie  unter  selbst  auferlegtem  Druck
möglicherweise unnötigen Tests zustimmen.

1.11.2    Pflichten des Arbeitgebers gegenüber Arbeitnehmern und anderen Parteien

Arbeitgeber  sind  verpflichtet, 
ihre  Mitarbeiter  und  Dritte  vor  ausbrechenden  oder
fortschreitenden  Erkrankungen  eines  Arbeitnehmers  zu  schützen.  In  einigen  Fällen  ist  ein
Gentest unter  Umständen  die  einzige  Möglichkeit, dieser  Pflicht  nachzukommen. Arbeitgeber
sind  auch  vorrangig  verpflichtet,  den  Arbeitnehmern  ein  sicheres  Arbeitsumfeld  zu
gewährleisten und sie keinen Gesundheitsrisiken am Arbeitsplatz auszusetzen.

1.11.3.   Eignung von Arbeitnehmern zur Durchführung von Arbeiten

Arbeitgeber haben das Recht von ihren Arbeitnehmern zu erwarten, dass sie in der Lage sind,
die verlangte Arbeit auszuführen. Dies wird normalerweise von einem Arbeitgeber anhand der
üblichen Mittel wie Lebenslauf, Einstellungsgespräch, Eignungstest und Referenzen überprüft.
Die Eignung eines Bewerbers für die Durchführung einer Arbeit wird manchmal auch anhand
einer  ärztlichen  Untersuchung  beurteilt.  Arbeitsverträge  enthalten  häufig  Klauseln  über  eine
Probezeit  -  eine  zusätzliche  Absicherung  für  den  Arbeitgeber.  Ein  Gentest  mit  begrenzter
Aussagekraft  erhöht  keineswegs  das  Wissen  über  die  Fähigkeiten  des  Bewerbers  zur
Durchführung der Arbeit zu Beginn des Beschäftigungsverhältnisses und vermittelt nur wenig
Informationen über künftige Entwicklungen.

35

1.11.4    Validität von Gentests

Eine weitere ethische Frage betrifft  die  Validität  eines  Tests,  seine  Relevanz,  Reliabilität  und
Aussagekraft. Derzeit würden sehr wenige Tests alle diese Kriterien in großem Maße erfüllen.
Es wäre offensichtlich ungerecht, wichtige Entscheidungen im Hinblick auf Beschäftigung oder
Beförderung  auf  der  Grundlage  von  Testergebnissen  zu  treffen,  deren  Relevanz  zweifelhaft
und  deren  Reliabilität  bzw.  Aussagekraft  gering  ist.  Sämtliche  Vorteile,  die  solche  Tests  im
Hinblick  auf  den  Schutz  von  Arbeitnehmern  oder  Dritten  bieten,  würden  dem  Schaden,  der
durch falsche Negative und falsche Positive entsteht, die Waage halten.

1.12. 

Ethische  Aspekte  im  Zusammenhang  mit  der  Verwendung  genetischer
Informationen

1.12.1.   Vertraulichkeit und das Recht auf Nichtwissen

Die Sensibilität der auf der Grundlage von Gentests erhaltenen Daten führt zu der Frage der
Vertraulichkeit.  Zunächst  stehen  die  Daten  dem  medizinischen  Mitarbeiter,  der  den  Test
beantragt  hat,  zur  Verfügung.  Es  stellt  sich  die  Frage,  ob  die  genetischen  Rohdaten  dem
Arbeitgeber  überhaupt  zur  Verfügung  gestellt  werden  sollten,  oder  ob  der  medizinische
Mitarbeiter ihm nur seine einschlägige professionelle Stellungnahme übermitteln soll. In diesem
Zusammenhang ist die Unabhängigkeit des medizinischen Mitarbeiters von großer Bedeutung.
Gendaten  sind  eindeutig  das  Eigentum  der  Person,  die  getestet  wurde,  aber  vielleicht  von
ihrem Recht Gebrauch machen möchte, nichts über ihre genetische Verfassung zu erfahren.

Ein  weiteres  Problem  im  Hinblick  auf  die  Vertraulichkeit  besteht  darin,  dass  genetische
Informationen  über  ein  Individuum  auch  Hinweise  auf  die  genetische  Verfassung  eines  oder
mehrerer Familienmitglieder dieses Individuums geben könnten.

1.12.2.   Diskriminierender Umgang mit Gentestergebnissen

Genetische Screeningdaten könnten zum Nachteil von  Stellenbewerbern oder  Arbeitnehmern
verwendet  werden.  Sie  könnten  zur  unzulässigen  Diskriminierung  von  Bewerbern  um  einen
Stelle  oder  eine  Beförderung  innerhalb  eines  Unternehmens  führen.  Dies  könnte  ernsthafte
Folgen für die zukünftigen beruflichen Chancen einer Person haben.

36

2. STELLUNGNAHME

Die Gruppe konzentriert sich in dieser Stellungnahme auf ethische Fragen im Zusammenhang
mit  Gentests  unter  besonderer  Berücksichtigung  genetischer  Screenings.  Gleichwohl  können
die ethischen Dilemmas und Interessenskonflikte, die im Hinblick auf Gentests, einschließlich
eines  genetischen  Monitorings,  zu  untersuchen  sind,  im  allgemeinen  Zusammenhang
medizinischer Daten am Arbeitsplatz gesehen werden.

Die Gruppe gibt folgende Stellungnahme ab:

2.1.

2.2.

2.3.

2.4.

2.5.

2.6.

Arbeitgeber sind verpflichtet, die Gesundheit ihrer Mitarbeiter zu schützen und Risiken für
Dritte vorzubeugen. Andererseits haben Arbeitnehmer und Stellenbewerber ein Recht auf
eine Privatsphäre und den Schutz ihrer persönlichen Daten.

Arbeitgeber  sind  verpflichtet,  den  Arbeitsplatz  so  zu  gestalten,  dass  die  Gefahr  von
Gesundheitsschäden für die Arbeitnehmer begrenzt wird.

Während des Einstellungsverfahrens muss der Arbeitgeber eine gerechte Behandlung für
alle Bewerber gewährleisten und jegliche Diskriminierung vermeiden.

Auch Arbeitnehmer sind verpflichtet, Risiken für Dritte vorzubeugen.

Arbeitnehmer  oder  künftige  Arbeitnehmer  müssen  wissen,  dass  eine  ärztliche
Untersuchung Teil der Eignungsprüfung für die Stelle sein kann.

Die ärztliche Untersuchung darf kein Auswahlkriterium sein. Sie sollte nach Abschluss des
Auswahlverfahrens stattfinden.

37

Besteht  das  Risiko  einer  genetischen  Schädigung  eines  Arbeitnehmers  aufgrund  eines
Bestandteils  des  Arbeitsumfelds,  muss  der  Arbeitgeber  alles  in  seiner  Macht  Stehende
tun,  um  dieses  Risiko  zu  beseitigen.  Kann  ein  solches  Risiko  nicht  vollständig
ausgeschlossen  werden, 
kann  genetisches  Monitoring,  das  darauf  abzielt,
Chromosomenanomalien aufgrund von Stoffen, denen der Arbeitnehmer im Arbeitsumfeld
ausgesetzt  ist,  zu  evaluieren,  sinnvoll  sein,  eine  ordnungsgemäße  Unterrichtung  und
Zustimmung ist jedoch vorausgesetzt.

Ein  genetisches  Screening  ist  eine  Form  medizinischer  Untersuchung.  Es  steht  im
Zusammenhang mit der möglichen künftigen gesundheitlichen Verfassung der Person, an
der dieses Screening vorgenommen wird.

ist  die  Gruppe  der  Ansicht,  dass 

Grundsätzlich 
Beschäftigungsfragen  nur 
Arbeitnehmern zu berücksichtigen ist.

die  gegenwärtige 

im  Zusammenhang  mit
von

gesundheitliche  Verfassung 

2.7.

2.8.

2.9.

Darüber  hinaus  gibt  es  bislang  keinerlei  Beweise  für  die  Relevanz  und  Reliabilität  der
bestehenden Gentests im Zusammenhang mit Beschäftigungsfragen. Ihre Aussagekraft ist
nach wie vor zweifelhaft.

2.10.

Die  Gruppe  ist  grundsätzlich  der  Ansicht,  dass  die  Durchführung  von  genetischen
Screenings  im  Rahmen  der  medizinischen  Untersuchung  sowie  die  Freigabe  der
Ergebnisse  vorausgegangener  Gentests  aus  ethischer  Sicht  inakzeptabel  sind.  Der
Arbeitgeber kann seinen legitimen Pflichten und dem Recht im Hinblick auf den Schutz der
Gesundheit  und  die  Beurteilung  der  Eignung  durch  eine  medizinische  Untersuchung
genügen, bei der allerdings kein genetisches Screening durchgeführt wird.
Arbeitgeber  sollten  daher  grundsätzlich  weder  genetische  Screenings  durchführen  noch
ihre Mitarbeiter zur Teilnahme an Tests auffordern.

2.11.

In außergewöhnlichen Fällen könnte die Durchführung genetischer Screenings in Betracht
gezogen werden wenn sie notwendig sind, um dem Gesundheitsschutz von Arbeitnehmern
oder den Schutz Dritter zu gewährleisten.

2.12.

In  diesen  Ausnahmefällen  können  Gentests  angemessen  sein,  sofern  die  folgenden
grundlegenden Bedingungen erfüllt sind:
(cid:1)  die  Durchführung  des  Tests  ist  notwendig,  um  den  Schutz  der  Gesundheit  und  der

Sicherheit des Arbeitnehmers oder Dritter zu gewährleisten,

(cid:1)  es ist wissenschaftlich erwiesen, dass der Gentest valide und die einzige Methode ist,

um diese Informationen zu erhalten,

38

(cid:1)  die  Durchführung  des  Tests  gefährdet  nicht  das  Ziel  einer  Verbesserung  der

Bedingungen am Arbeitsplatz,

(cid:1)  der  Grundsatz  der  Verhältnismäßigkeit  wird  im  Hinblick  auf  die  Motivation  zur

Durchführung des Tests gewahrt,

(cid:1)  der Grundsatz der Nichtdiskriminierung wird nicht verletzt.

2.13.

Die  außergewöhnlichen  Fälle, 
vorgeschlagen und durchgeführt werden dürfen, sind ausdrücklich gesetzlich festzulegen.

in  denen  genetische  Screenings  am  Arbeitsplatz

2.14.

Bei  besonderen  Anwendungen 
ist  die  vorherige  Zustimmung  der  einschlägigen
Arbeitsorganisation  und  eine  besondere  Ad-hoc-Genehmigung  eines  unabhängigen
Ausschusses notwendig.

2.15.

Der  Stellenbewerber  bzw.  der  Arbeitnehmer  ist  von  einem  unabhängigen  medizinischen
Mitarbeiter  umfassend  über  das  Testverfahren,  die  Gründe  für  die  Durchführung  solcher
Tests,  die  möglichen  Ergebnisse  und  ihre  Auswirkungen  und  Folgen  sowie  über  die
Bedingungen  hinsichtlich  der  Aufbewahrung  und  des  Zugangs  zu  den  Daten  zu
informieren. Ihm ist ebenfalls eine unabhängige Rechtsberatung zu gewähren.
Er sollte auch, wenn er es ersucht, unabhängige juristische Hilfe erhalten. 

2.16.

Der Stellenbewerber oder der Arbeitnehmer muss dem Gentest zustimmen.

2.17.

Ergibt  der  Test  eine  genetische  Kondition,  die  unvereinbar  ist  mit  dem  Schutz  der
Gesundheit  des  Auftragnehmers  bzw.  Stellenbewerbers  oder  mit  der  Sicherheit  Dritter,
dürfen  die  dem  Arbeitgeber  bereitgestellten  Informationen  nur  enthalten,  dass  der
Bewerber für die spezielle Stelle ungeeignet ist, ohne dass hierfür ein Grund angegeben
wird.

2.18.

Die  Gendaten  bleiben  wie  andere  medizinische  Daten  vertraulich;  solche
personengebundenen  Daten  dürfen  nur  dem  Bewerber  und  dem  medizinischen
Mitarbeiter  zugänglich  sein,  und  ihre  Weitergabe  ohne  Zustimmung  des  Betroffenen  an
Dritte, einschließlich des Arbeitgebers, muss streng verboten sein.

39

2.19.

Am  Arbeitsplatz  durchgeführtes  genetisches  Screening  oder  Monitoring  darf  nicht  als
Gentest betrachtet werden, der zu Versicherungszwecken freigegeben werden kann.

2.20.

Auf EU-Ebene  müssen  gesetzliche  Maßnahmen  getroffen  werden,  um  die  Vertraulichkeit
von
dieser  Gendaten 
Arbeitnehmern/Arbeitgebern,  namentlich  im  Zusammenhang  mit  der  Freizügigkeit  der
Arbeitnehmer innerhalb der EU, zu wahren.

grenzüberschreitender  Mobilität 

Fällen 

auch 

in 

Die Europäische Gruppe für Ethik in Naturwissenschaften und neuen Technologien

Der Vorsitzende: Göran Hermerén

Die Mitglieder:

Nicos C. Alivizatos

Inez de Beaufort

Rafael Capurro

Yvon Englert

Catherine Labrusse-Riou 

Anne McLaren

Linda Nielsen 

Pere Puigdomenech Rosell

Stefano Rodota

Günter Virt 

Peter Whittaker

40

SUMMARIES OF STATEMENTS

ON GENETIC TESTING IN THE WORKPLACE 

BY NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL BODIES2 

========================================

2  By  Jutta  Buyse,  a  Trainee  with  the  Secretariat  of  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New
Technologies, from March to July 2003.

41

                                                     
42

A. DEFINITIONS

==========================

43

44

Definitions

Most of the opinions summarised hereafter use very similar definitions for the key terms in the
field  of  genetic  testing.  Nevertheless,  some  differences  exist.    In  the  summaries  of  opinions
hereafter,  the  technical  terms  were  kept  in  the  sense  that  they  were  used  in  the  original
documents.  For  complete  reference  on  the  definitions,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  original
documents. This brief information sheet merely alerts to existing differences and serves as a
guide to interpretation. 

In the European Group on Ethics’ opinion, genetic testing is defined as ‘the use of a scientific
test to determine whether a person possesses particular variant forms of one or more genes in
their genetic complement’.

For purposes of the EGE opinion, the term ‘genetic testing’ includes both genetic screening and
genetic  monitoring.  Many  of  the  other  opinions  summarised  here  do  not  make  specific
reference  to  genetic  monitoring  and  do  not  specify  whether  it  is  included  in  the  term  genetic
testing.  This  is  the  case  for  example  for  the  Greek  opinion.  The  American  SACGT  however
specifies that biological  monitoring  is  not  included  in  the  scope  of  its  opinion.  Other  opinions
choose  to  discuss  genetic  monitoring  as  a  different  category  and  hence,  when  stating  a
principle related to genetic monitoring, use the term explicitly. 

The EGE opinion furthermore specifies that its  definition of  genetic  testing  for  opinion  no.  18
includes  the  analysis  of  gene  products,  insofar  as  they  reveal  characteristics  of  a  person’s
genetic disposition. For example, non-DNA based genetic screening is also considered a form
of genetic testing. 

This procedure is not followed by all opinions. For example, the Italian opinion limits the scope
of ‘genetic tests’ strictly to DNA-based tests.

The EGE’s opinion also views the analysis of family history as a genetic test, again insofar as it
reveals characteristics of an individual’s genetic disposition. Some opinions choose to treat it
as a different category. Others choose other solutions. For example, the Greek opinion extends
its scope to genetic data which is ‘any information collected or resulting from genetic tests or
analysis  of  the  genetic  material  of  one  or  more  persons’.  The  majority  of  the  opinions
summarised here do not specify whether the analysis of family history and gene products are
part of their definition of genetic tests. Therefore,  in  the  summaries  that  follow,  it  is  specified
when an opinion includes family history or gene products in its definition of genetic testing. 

45

testing  encompasses  presymptomatic  and  susceptibility 

Genetic 
testing.  Whereas
presymptomatic tests identify a mutation in a gene that is guaranteed to cause a disease at one
point in the life of person (e.g. Huntingdon’s disease), susceptibility tests identify mutations that
imply  a  strong  risk,  but  not  a  certainty,  that  a  disease  will  develop.  These  terms  are  not
explicitly  defined  in  the  EGE’s  opinion,  as  the  EGE  makes  no  distinction  between  these  two
issues
its 
types 
recommendations specific to either one of these categories.

recommendations.  The  WHO-document  however 

the  scope  of 

in 

Presymptomatic  tests  are  associated  with  monogenic  diseases,  and  susceptibility  tests  with
polygenic or multifactorial diseases. In addition to the term polygenic diseases  defined  in  the
EGE  opinion,  some  opinions  use  the  term  multifactorial  diseases.  It  designates  diseases
caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors and is often used synonymously
with the term polygenic diseases, as they share the main characteristics.. 

In addition, the term penetrance is used in some of the existing opinions on the topic. It refers
to  the  proportion  of  true  false  versus  true  negatives  in  diagnosis,  i.e.  the  proportion  of  those
who are diagnosed with a defect gene whose gene is not actually defective versus those who
have a detective gene but were erroneously not diagnosed as such. Penetrance is distinct from
predictability,  which  refers  to  the  likelihood  that  a  person  who  was  correctly  diagnosed  as
having a defective gene will actually develop the associated disease in the future.

46

B.

EU   and   NON-EU  NATIONAL  BODIES

==================================================

47

48

BELGIUM

Advisory Committee on Bioethics 

Overview of the Committee

The Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics was established in January 1993. Its duties are
twofold. First,it provides advice on the problems raised by research and research applications
in the fields of biology, medicine and health care; these problems are studied from the ethical,
social  and  legal  points  of  view,  particularly  from  the  angle  of  the  respect  for  human  right.
Second, it informs the public and the authorities about these problems.
The  interdisciplinary  Committee  is  composed  of  43  members,  out  of  which  there  are  26
ordinary members with the right to vote. It is required to give its opinion at the request of the
chairs  of  the  various  parliaments  or  of  any  member  of  their  governments,  as  well  as  at  the
request  of  a  research  institute,  a  hospital,  a  higher-education  establishment  and  of  the  local
ethical committee of either a hospital or a university or an ethical committee approved by any of
the Communities. The Committee may also give advice on its own initiative.

Context and scope of the Committee’s opinion

The  Belgian  Senate  requested  an  opinion  from  the  Advisory  Committee  on  Bioethics  in  the
context of a legal proposal on medical examinations within work relations and a legal proposal
on  medical  examination  within  recruitment  that  both  aim  at  prohibiting  the  application  of
predictive  genetic  and  HIV-tests,  but  allowing  some  exceptions.  The  Committee  issued  its
‘Opinion  n(cid:1)  20  on  predictive  genetic  tests  and  HIV-tests  in  work  relations’  on  18th
November  2002.  3      Its  conclusions  apply  to  predictive  genetic  tests  and  HIV-tests  (their
commonality  being  that  they  all  predict  future  health  status).  Excluded  from  this  opinion  are
genotoxicity  tests,  i.e.  tests  that  diagnose  genetic  mutations  that  are  not  of  hereditary
character, but acquired.

Recommendations of the Committee

The  Committee  stresses  the  role  of  the  occupational  health  physician  who  is  to  assist  the
employee  and  the  currently  low  statistical  predictive  power  of  the  existing  tests.  It  underlines
that to its knowledge, there are no tests known to be currently available which could be suited
for testing in the workplace. Furthermore, it stresses that the question of workers’ consent is a
complicated one in light of the unequal relationship between workers and employers. 

There is a need for specific legislation in this field.

3 The text is available at www.health.fgov.be/bioeth/

49

                                                     
Given the validity and penetrance of currently available tests, genetic tests during recruitment
and during employment should not be allowed. 

The committee does not adopt a unanimous opinion on whether exceptions should be made to
this general rule in the future. Committee  members’  opinions  can be divided  into  two distinct
positions.  However,  not  all  members  agree  with  the  entirety  of  either  one  of  the  positions
summarized below.

(cid:3)  Position one : no exceptions 

Supporters of the opinion not to make any exceptions stress that since the nature of these tests
is that they are predictive, they do not say anything about the current capacity of the worker to
fulfil his functions – and so, even if a test reveals such a genetic condition that there is a 100%
occurrence of the disease, the tests could never be the cause of a declaration of aptitude or
inaptitude  since  the  timing  of  the  appearance  of  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  remains
uncertain. The risk of excluding workers who may well be able to fulfil their obligations for the
next  ten  years  to  come  exists,  as  do  the  risk  of  discrimination  (particularly  in  light  of  the
debated link between some genetic disorders and the belonging to certain ethnic groups) and a
move towards a selective medicine, aimed only at the most productive workers.

Genetic and HIV-testing is a flagrant intrusion into workers’ personal life, and in contradiction
with the 1989 resolution of the European Parliament that individuals have a ‘right not to know’
their  genetic  makeup.  This  type  of  testing  is  furthermore  unacceptable  because  it    provides
information  about  the  tested  person’s  relatives.      For  the  same  reason,  supporters  of  this
opinion also find that it is not legitimate to ask questions about family history. 

Instead,  members  stress  the  importance  of  the  currently  existing  approach  of  protective
occupational medicine. Workers must be protected collectively, i.e. risk factors in the workplace
must be avoided in general and for all workers. The right approach is the construction of the
workplace to fit the worker, not the inverse. 

(cid:3)  Position two : possible exceptions in the future

The  other  part  of  the  members  does  not  want  to  exclude  the  possibility  that  exceptions  be
made  to  the  general  rule  of  prohibition  in  the  future  under  well-defined  conditions,  and  if
predictability of the tests improves. 

These  conditions  would  include  a  high  statistical  pertinence  and  a  careful  risk  analysis  with
regard  to  the  implication  of  the  results.  Risk  analysis  must  take  into  account  the  risk  of
appearance  of  a  disease,  the  risk  of  an  accident  after  the  apparition  of  a  disease  and  the
amplitude of the consequences of the accident after the disease. 

50

Exceptions  are  acceptable  if  they  are  in  the  worker’s  benefit,  as  defined  by  the  following
criteria :  an  irrefutably  strong  risk,  a  high  test  reliability,  clinical  pertinence  in  the  work  field
considered, 
to  possible  negative
consequences of such a test result, the respect of privacy, and the absence of other means of
sanitary  surveillance.  Some  members  also  want  to  include  the  additional  condition  that
prevention or treatment of the disease exists. 

the  advantage  of  prevention/protection  compared 

If these conditions could be met, predictive genetic tests could be compulsory for the entirety
of  the  concerned  workers  in  order  to  preserve  the  principal  of  collective  solidarity.  To  only
obtain  one  worker’s  consent  could  give  rise  to  a  discriminatory  policy  founded  on  workers’
economic potential or intellectual abilities.

Furthermore,  with  regard  to  the  application  of  such  test,  some  members  also  consider  the
possible risk posed to third parties.

51

52

UNITED KINGDOM

1

Nuffield Council on Bioethics

Overview of the consultative body

The Nuffield Council on Bioethics was established in 1991 to identify, examine and report on
the  ethical  questions  raised  by  recent  advances  in  biological  and  medical  research.  The
Council  is  funded  jointly  by  the  Nuffield  Foundation,  the  Medical  Research  Council  and  the
Wellcome Trust.
Members  of  the  Council  include  clinicians,  lawyers,  scientists,  philosophers,  anthropologists,
journalists, political scientists and theologians. Once the Council has identified a major ethical
issue  for  consideration,  it  establishes  a  multidisciplinary  Working  Party  with  the  relevant
expertise  to  examine  and  report  on  ethical,  social,  legal  and  practical  issues.  Each  Working
Party produces a Report, which, once approved by the Council, becomes a publication of the
Council. 

Context and scope

The extensive and widely-cited ‘Genetic screening. Ethical issues’ is the first report by the
Nuffield  Council,  issued  in  December  1993.  4      It  includes  a  specific  section  and
recommendations on genetic testing in the workplace, and deals with the question of genetic
screening in a variety of contexts, issuing general as well as specific recommendations. 

Nuffield recommendations

The Council acknowledges the possible interests of the three parties involved, i.e. employers,
employees and the public. It notes the possibility of a restriction of job opportunities to those
who, with few employment prospects, or for personal reasons, were  prepared  to assume  the
risk of health. It also notes the risk that available testing could provide a convenient excuse for
employers to refuse either to take the reasonable steps necessary to  accommodate  those at
higher  risk  or  to  employ  certain  categories  of  people  able  to  work  normally  for  an  indefinite
period. It stresses the responsibility of the employer to provide a safe workplace – no genetic
screening  programme  may  serve as  an  excuse  for  failing  to  do  so.  There  would  be  a  public
interest in employees’ test results only if the individual concerned were at risk for a condition
with a sudden and unpredictable onset as well as being in an occupation that puts third parties
at risk. The danger of discrimination based on irrational grounds against those with a genetic
disease poses a particular concern.

4 The text is available at www.nuffieldbioethics.org/publications/index.asp

53

                                                     
Based on these considerations, and following the principle that people should be excluded from
employment  opportunities  only  where  this  is  shown  to  be  absolutely  necessary,  the  Council
concludes  that employers  should  only  require  individuals  to undergo  genetic  screening  when
the illness or condition will present a serious danger  to  third parties.  Should a  worker  not be
able to be employed as a consequence of the results of a screening programme, official steps
have to be taken to ensure fair treatment and make available procedures to assist and facilitate
employment in other areas. By the same token, the onset of a genetically conditioned disease
should not be used for dismissing an employee; instead a transfer to another position should
take place. When only individual employees’ health is at stake, they themselves should make
the decision whether to participate in the screening programme.

Existing genetic information should not be used to exclude people from employment unless the
genetically determined condition has already onset and can affect performance on the job. The
Council is concerned that discrimination could occur if genetic information had to be disclosed
on job applications or on medical reports that are made available to employers.

The Nuffield Council issues a series of general recommendations on genetic screening. With
regard  to  confidentiality,  it  recommends  that  the  accepted  standards  of  the  confidentiality  of
medical  information  should  be  followed  as  far  as  possible.  Effective  arrangements  for  the
preservation of confidentiality, particularly in relation to genetic registers, should be considered.
Individuals should be fully informed of the results of genetic screening and the implications of
these results for the family.

Adequately  informed  and  voluntary  consent  (preferably  in  written  and  oral  form)  should  be  a
requirement for all genetic screening programmes, and genetic counselling should be available
for those being genetically screened or tested. 
Detailed  criteria  for  introducing  genetic  screening  programmes  should  be  stipulated,  and
programs  should  be  adequately  reviewed  and  monitored.  Relevant  criteria  include:  the  aims
and  purposes  of  the  entire  programme;  the  predictive  power  and  level  of  accuracy  of  the
particular  screening  test;  the  value  to  those  being  screened  of  the  knowledge  gained;  the
availability  of  therapy  for  the  particular  condition  (lack  of  treatment  should  however  not
necessarily  mean  that  screening  is  not  worthwhile);  the  potential  social  implications,  and  the
resource costs.

Despite extensive enquiries, the Working Party was unable to identify any employer in the UK
making  use  of  genetic  screening  with  the  exception  of  the  Royal  Air  Forces.  The  Ministry  of
Defence  has  implemented  programs  screening  for  sickle  cell  disease  and  sickle  cell  trait  for
those  who  apply  to  join  occupational  categories  of  the  Forces  which  involve  exposure  to
atypical atmospheric conditions (for example aviation). 

54

2

Human Genetics Advisory Commission

Overview of the consultative body

The  Human  Genetics  Advisory  Commission  (HGAC)  was  operational  from  December  1996
until December 1999, after which it was subsumed into the newly launched Human Genetics
Commission (HGC). Commissioned by the British Government,  it  offered  independent advice
on  issues  arising  from  developments  in  human  genetics,  including  genetic  testing  and
insurance, cloning, and genetic testing  and employment.  Its  governmental  mandate  specified
that  it  was  to  keep  under  review  scientific  progress  at  the  frontiers  of  human  genetics  and
related fields; to report on issues arising from new developments in human genetics that can be
expected to have wider social, ethical and/or economic consequences and to advise on ways
to build public confidence in, and understanding of, the new genetics. Answering to a request
from  the  Government,  the  Human  Genetics  Advisory  Commission  issued  its  report  ‘The
implication of genetic testing for employment’ in June 1999 5. 

HGAC recommendations

The  HCAC-conclusions  are  to  a  large  extent  in  accordance  with  the  Nuffield  Council  on
Bioethics  recommendations:  The  Commission  concludes  that  the  use  of  genetic  testing  in
employment  should  be  restricted  to  specific  circumstances.  Any  genetic  test  used  for
employment purposes must be subject to assured levels of accuracy and reliability, reflecting
best practice.  Furthermore,  it  should  be  evidence-based  and  consensual.  The  results  should
always be communicated to the person tested and professional advice should be available. As
for the treatment of results, the HGAC recommends that they be treated in accordance with the
existing data protection principles and carefully interpreted, taking into account how they might
be affected by existing working conditions. It should not be used to provide information about a
condition or predisposition to a condition that might lead to an increase in levels of absence for
sickness. It is not acceptable that genetic tests be used for employee selection, on the grounds
that they have a predisposition to future ill health. 

Again  paralleling  the  Nuffield  Council’s  conclusions,  the  HGAC  assesses  that  individuals
cannot be required to take a test for employment purposes, their ‘right not to know’ their genetic
condition must be upheld. Similarly, previous test results cannot be required  to  be  disclosed,
unless there is clear evidence that the information it provides is needed to assess either current
ability to perform a job safely or susceptibility to harm from doing a certain job. 

5 The text is available at www.doh.gov.uk/hgac/papers/paperg1.htm

55

                                                     
Like  the  Nuffield  Council,  the  HGAC  pays  great  attention  to  the  risk  possibly  posed  to  third
parties.  The  HGAC  goes  further  than  the  Nuffield  Council  in  stating  that  where  questions  of
public safety arise, an employer should be able to refuse to employ a person who refuses to
take a relevant genetic test.

The  HGAC encourages  genetic  testing  in employment  contexts  under  one  specific  condition:
Employers  should  offer  a  genetic  test  (where  available)  if  it  is  known  that  a  specific  working
environment  or  practice,  while  meeting  health  and  safety  requirements,  might  pose  specific
risks to individuals with particular genetic variations.

Currently, employers do not use genetic tests because most tests currently available are used
to confirm diagnosis of current conditions, which are already recorded in medical records. It will
take  major  developments  before  genetic  testing  becomes  a  serious  issue  for  employment
practice.  The  introduction  of  DNA  chip  technology  will  raise  wider  ethical  issues,  as  it  might
render possible easy genetic testing for multiple disease susceptibility: consent for multi-tests,
collection  of  irrelevant  information,  access  to  third  parties,  and  testing  for  characteristics  or
predispositions without medical significance. Like the Nuffield Council, the HGAC finds that no
UK-employer other than the Ministry of Defence is using genetic testing or screening methods.

56

DENMARK

The Danish Council of Ethics

Overview of the Council

The Danish Council of Ethics was established in 1988 to provide the Danish Parliament, official
authorities and the public with ongoing advice and information about ethical problems raised by
developments within the national health service and the field of biomedicine. It is the successor
to a committee set up in 1984 by the Danish Minister for Interior Affairs to examine the ethical
problems  arising  in  areas  such  as  genetic  engineering,  assisted  reproduction  and  foetal
examination.  The  Council  submits  reports  and  statements  in  specified  areas  and  promotes
public  discussion  by  e.g.  public  enquiries  and  debate  days,  publishing  of  debate  books,
anthologies, videos and teaching material, and extensive lecturing activities. The Council’s 17
members are appointed because of their interest of bioethical dilemmas. 9 of the members are
appointed directly by the Minister of Health, and 8 are appointed by a committee designated by
the  national  parliament.  This  committee  may  also  place  requests  for  specific  topics  for  the
Council to work on.

Recommendations from the Danish Council of Ethics

Two texts from the Danish Council of Ethics are relevant to the topic of genetic testing in the
workplace: 
‘Genetic  screening’  and  ‘Genetic  testing  in  appointments  etc.’  (1993)6.  The  latter  is  a
response to the Danish Minister of labour’s November 1991 bill to prohibit the use of genetic
testing in appointments and in underwriting pensions and insurance. The Council supports the
initiative for legal action in this field and shares the fear of possible discrimination or differential
treatment of citizens in recruitment and placement (or pension and insurance schemes) on the
grounds of hereditary traits.

The Council stresses the need to counter discrimination on the labour market and in insurance
matters. DNA-analysis should not be allowed to have any influence on individuals’ employment,
pension and insurance status. These considerations are particularly important in contemporary
societies with a large amount of social segregation and high unemployment.

However,  prohibiting  DNA  analysis  is  not  sufficient  to  guarantee  respect  of  the  principle  of
equality  before  the  law.  It  has  been  possible  for  a  long  time  to  predict  certain  elements  of
individuals’ future health, including genetic predispositions, by means other than DNA-analysis.
Possibilities range from tissue-type analysis and analysis for the serum protein (cid:4)1-antitrypsin to
analysis of a more or less specific nature such as determination of cholesterol level. Therefore,
genetic test data and other health-related information should be treated as one with regard to
the  goal  of  protecting  individuals  against  the  detrimental  use  of  data  regarding  personal
biological characteristics on the labour market or in society at large. 

6 Both texts are extracts from Ethics and the Mapping of the Human Genome (1993), pp. 43-76 and 79-
87.  They are available at www.etiskraad.dk

57

                                                     
The Council recommends absolute confidentiality regarding information on genetic  conditions
towards employers, insurance companies and pension funds. This implies an extended form of
that  should  be  applied  not  only  by  doctors  and  other
professional  discretion 
practitioners/therapists but also by other personnel groups or private companies conducting the
same analysis and having access to individuals’ genetic and similar health-related information.
An  upholding  and  intensification  of  confidentiality  is  particularly  necessary  in  light  of  the
constantly mounting exchange of data among personnel groups in the modern hospital and the
recording of medical records on social administration services.

As  a  direct  comment  on  the  proposed  Danish  bill,  the  Council  states  that  it  considers  the
modalities to prevent employees of presenting employers with their genetic data on their own
initiative potentially dubious. This precludes those employees who have a certain susceptibility
confirmed by a DNA-analysis from attempting to influence their work situation themselves.

Regarding genetic screening programs in general, the Council recommends that each project
be assessed individually and contain a pilot project which should be evaluated thoroughly. 

Equality before the law regardless of sex, race and religion, is a fundamental principle in the
Danish  legal  system.  The  Danish  welfare  system  is  organised  around  the  concept  that  the
communality – the societal community – is obliged to redress geographical, social and health-
related  inequalities  that  present  an  obstacle  to  equal  access  to  education  and  training,  work
and well-being. 
The  Council  of Ethics  regards these  principles  as a  high  ethical  standard,  which  should  also
encompass  the  compensation  of  the  individual  for  any  possible  negative  consequences  of
naturally  occurring  biological  differences  between  individuals.  It  supports  any  step  in  the
direction of acceptance of this concept.

Genes are on the one hand a fundamental element of a person’s biology, and on the other a
‘public  domain’  shared  with  relatives  and  other  fellow  citizens.  In  connection  with  genetic
diseases, the individual can be said to be in an exposed situation, and public authorities have a
‘duty  to  help’.  At  the  same  time,  genes  are  part  of  the  personal  sphere  which  must  be
respected,  and  personal  autonomy  must  remain.  A  balance  must  be  found  between  the
utilitarian  approach  of  seeking  benefit  that  is  greater  than  possible  harm  for  all  population
members and the respect for personal autonomy. In contrast to the procedures involved when
an individual requests specific medical advice about a condition, screening is an initiative of the
public health system. 

The Council also emphasises the possibilities of the enhancement of personal autonomy as a
consequence  of  increased  knowledge  about  one’s  personal  genetic  constitution,  which  can
lead to increased options for life choices.

58

FRANCE

National Consultative Ethics Committee

Expert hearing of Prof. Anne Cambon-Thomsen

June 17th 2003, Brussels

Anne Cambon-Thomsen is Director of Research at the CNRS, the French national institute for
scientific research, member of the Inserm unit 558 for Epidemiology and public health. She has
been  a  member  of  the  French  National  Consultative  Ethics  Committee  since  2002.    The
hearing took place at the EGE meeting on June 17th 2003 in  Brussels. In this hearing, Prof.
Cambon  presented  principles  and  recommendations  agreed  at 
the  French  National
Consultative Ethics Committee relevant to the topic of genetic testing at the workplace and also
in her personal capacity as an expert in the field. A discussion followed the presentation.7

Overview of the Committee 

The  National  Consultative  Ethics  Committee  for  Health  and  Life  Sciences  (CCNE)  was
established  by  a  Presidential  decree  in  February  1983.  The  Committee's  mission  is  to  issue
opinions on ethical problems raised by progress in the fields of biology, medicine, and health,
and  publish  recommendations  on  this  subject  .  It  is  an  independent  and  purely  consultative
body linked to the Ministries of Research and Health.

The Committee is composed of the President, nominated by the President of the Republic, an
Honorary  President,  and  39  members.    5  of  these  members  are  drawn  from  the  main
philosophies  and  religious  faiths  and  are  designated  by  the  President  of  the  Republic,  19
members are chosen because of their qualifications, competence, and their interest in ethical
issues, and 15 members are engaged in scientific research. 

Next  to  the  Plenary  Committee,  on  which  all  members  sit,  cases  are  investigated  by  the
Technical Section which is composed of 12 of the committee members.  Working groups are
also set up to document given subjects and prepare draft of opinions.

Requests  to  the  Committee  may  be  made  by  Presidents  of  Parliamentary  Assemblies,
members of the Government, an establishment for higher education, a public institution, or an
officially recognised foundation whose main activity is research, technological development, or
the promotion and protection of health. The Committee may also take on matters upon its own
initiative.

7 This summary was prepared by Jutta Buyse, a Trainee with the Secretariat of the EGE from March to July 2003
on the basis of a presentation submitted by Prof. Anne Cambon-Thomsen as well as the discussion that followed
it.

59

                                                     
Recommendations from the CCNE

The  key  ethical  questions  raised  by  genetic  testing  in  the  workplace  relate  to  the  use  of  the
results of these tests – whether they are used for an informed choice by the worker, or whether
there is a risk of discrimination by the employer – who prescribes the test, who counsels the
tested employee/applicant, and who makes the decision on the professional consequences and
implications of the test results for the employees or applicants.

The CCNE has addressed these questions specifically in two opinions: opinion n(cid:1)25 on ‘The
application  of  genetic  tests  to  individual  studies,  family  and  population  studies
(Problems  of  DNA  banks,  cell  banks  and  electronic  data  processing)’,  issued  in  June
1991, and opinion n(cid:1)46 on ‘Genetics and medicine : from prediction to prevention’, issued
in  October  1995.  These  opinions  are  complementary  and  in  agreement  on  a  variety  of
statements.8

The  CCNE  acknowledges  that  ethical  issues  of  selection  and  discrimination  are  of  central
the  risk  of
importance  to  society.  Genetic 
stigmatisation  based on a  trait  or  susceptibility  to  a disease,  there  is a  risk  of  anticipatory  or
prospective discrimination. 

issues.  Besides 

intensifies 

testing 

these 

In  the  field  of  employment,  employers  may  have  an  interest  in  using  genetic  testing  for
selecting applicants or considering existing employees’ career prospects. They could hope to
lower absenteeism or prevent lowered productivity by eliminating at-risk individuals. In such a
context,  testing  would  be  no  more  than  a  further  means  of  selection  made  available  to
employers.  Though  genetic  testing  results  may  in  fact  not  be  very  useful  to  predict  the
productivity  of  employees  (due  to  possible  erroneous  interpretation  of  test  results  or  bias  or
misunderstandings or unreliable analyses), the risk that employers may turn to them does exist,
given that employers use even more questionable methods on occasions. 

The  possible benefits  for  employers  stand  in  stark  contrast  to  workers’  fundamental  rights  to
non-discrimination for health reasons and to the protection of their privacy. An employer may
only  ask  an  applicant  or  an  employee  for  information  that  is  directly  connected  to  and
necessary  for  the  post  or  for  an  evaluation  of  vocational  abilities.  Few  genetic  tests,  if  any,
would  meet  such  conditions.  The  evaluation  of  aptitude  at  a  medical  examination  before
recruitment and during further periodic examinations concerns only the aptitude at the time the
test is taken and not the evaluation of future risks. As long as a disease has not broken out,
there  is  no  inaptitude  for  work  and  a  decision  based  on  such  a  diagnosis  would  be
discriminatory. However, when a workplace-related risk is particularly high for individuals with a
particular genetic disposition and the risk factor cannot be eliminated by other measures, it may
be acceptable for the occupational health physician to suggest a test to detect susceptibility to
a disease. The Committee acknowledges that the ‘right not to know’ is difficult to respect in the
context of a test result that indicates a strong risk for an employee in his current workplace.

8 These texts are available at: www.ccne-ethique.fr

60

                                                     
Extracting  DNA  for  analysis  must  remain  a  medical  undertaking  and  only  examine  medically
recognised  indications.  Use  of  the  results  of  a  study  of  genetic  characteristics  for  purposes
other than medical or scientific, i.e. employment and insurance, is prohibited, even if the tests
may  have  been  requested  by  the  concerned  applicants/workers  or  if  they  have  given  their
consent. No result on the characteristics of an individual’s genome is to be communicated to
his  relatives,  to  third  parties    or  to  any  public  or  private  party  without  the  individual’s    prior
consent. The communication of results as part of a medical diagnosis has to take place with the
intermediary of a medical professional able to give all the information on their significance.

By the same token, it should be prohibited for any third party, notably employers or insurance
companies,  to  have  access  to  the  information  contained  in  a  register,  as  well  as  to  ask  the
concerned party to provide the information concerning them in the register.

Any  determination  of  an  individual’s  genome’s  characteristics  should  be  undertaken  only
having  made  sure  of  his  or  her  complete  understanding  of  the  possible  implications  of
knowledge  of  the  results,  with  a  delay  for  reflection.  The  CCNE  stresses  the  importance  of
genetic counselling. Consent is given for specific analyses.  The extension of the investigation
to a characteristic of the genome other than the one for which consent has been given will have
to be the object of new information and new consent. Every individual, in principle, has to be
informed of the possible results of the investigation and  their  significance,  the  right  not  to  be
informed must however exist as well. 

With regard to data processing, the Committee stresses that registers must be reserved to a
limited number of centres that are agreed upon by a public authority and that present  all  the
necessary scientific and ethical guarantees. Any interested person must give an agreement to
this  transmission  of  data  and  must  be  previously  informed  about  their  right  not  to  have  to
consent.  The  person  must  also  have  access  at  all  times  by  the  intermediary  of  a  chosen
medical professional to the registered information and must be aware of their right to ask for
the deletion the information concerning him or her.

Future debates are likely to concentrate on the challenge of balancing individual rights and the
common good, the right to choose to be tested or not to be tested, the question of who initiated
the  tests  and  who  gets  their  results,  and  how  genetic  data  obtained  in  the  context  of
employment can be protected from further use in a different context.

61

62

GREECE

National bioethics commission

Overview of the organisation

The National Bioethics Commission is an independent advisory body of experts, established in
1998. Its mission is to explore the ethical, social and legal impact of the possible applications of
biological  sciences.  Specifically,  the  Commission  investigates  the  ethical,  social  and  legal
aspects that arise from scientific advances in biology, biotechnology, medicine and genetics. It
outlines proposals of general policy and provides specific recommendations on related issues.
The  Commission  collaborates  with  international  organisations  and  related  bodies  and
represents  Greece  to  international  forums.  It  also  informs  the  public  on  issues  related  to
biotechnological advances and the impact of their applications. Finally, it co-ordinates related
governmental advisory bodies in the field of bioethics.
The Commission is composed of nine members, all academic personalities, appointed by the
Prime Minister for a term of five years.

Recommendations from the National Bioethics Commission

The  jointly  published  ‘Recommendation  on  the  collection  and  use  of  genetic  data’  and
‘Report  on  the  collection  and  use  of  genetic  data’  (September  2002)  contain
recommendations on genetic testing and screening in general that are applicable to questions
regarding genetic testing in the workplace as well as recommendations specific to the question
of genetic testing in the workplace.9 

Concerning genetic information in a general context, the Commission states that every person
has the right to determine whether their genetic information should be disclosed to third parties,
and if so, at which time, and with which specific content.
In the context of labour relations however, the disclosure of genetic information to employers is
unacceptable, even  with  the  consent  of  employees  or  applicants.  This  is  due  to  the  unequal
position of employees and employers.

Two  exceptions  are  granted  to  this  principle.  Should  specific  working  conditions  trigger  the
development  of  genetic  disease,  employers  may  be  allowed  access  to  related  genetic
information  with  the  consent  of  employees  or  applicants  provided  there  are  no  alternative
protective measures. Or, should a third person be put at risk in a given occupation, employers
may ask for a genetic test and the communication of its results in order to guarantee the safety
of the third parties involved.

9 The texts are available at www.bioethics.gr

63

                                                     
The  Commission  recommends  the  adoption  of  specific  legislation  on  disclosure  of  genetic
information  in  the  context  of  labour  relations  establishing  the  principle  of  prohibition  and
specifying possible exceptions.

The Commission stresses that genetic data is of a special nature as it characterises identifiable
person and the undesirable social consequences, in particular discrimination, which may arise
from  the  current  technological  capacity  for  rapid  collection  and  extensive  diffusion  of  genetic
data.

The disclosure of genetic data is a main area of ethical concern. Genetic data are ‘sensitive’
data. They reveal the genetic profile of a person and as such constitute a framework of basic
specifications on whose basis people may plan their lives. They also reveal in part the genetic
identity  of  third  persons.  These  characteristics  raise  the  question  of  whether  and  in  which
specific situations information resulting from genetic tests may or should be transmitted to other
parties and whether the tested person should have the right not to know their own test results.
A  specific  question  is  whether  particular  circumstances  exist  where  a  test  result  should  be
transmitted to third persons, for example with the goal of preventing the onset of a disease; and
whether  organisations  such  as  insurance  companies,  employers  and  foundations  should  be
informed of the test results. 

Where the testing of population groups is concerned, the consent of each individual member is
required. A collective consent may be sought in a first step, but every member should have the
right not to participate in such a program. Accordingly, any hierarchical orders or pressures by
supervising authorities to ensure participation in population research should be ruled out.

The  National  Bioethics  Commission  recognises  both  the  ‘right  to  know’  and  the  ‘right  not  to
know’.  When  the  results  of  genetic  tests  involve  the  health  of  third  persons,  any  person
exercising their right to know must also assume responsibility for informing any third persons
involved. 

Next to disclosure, consent – and specifically free and informed consent – is one of the main
ethical issues with regard to genetic tests. It is strongly linked to the principal ethical principle of
autonomy. It is of crucial importance that those tested are able to make independent and free
decisions. The Committee distinguishes between ‘formal’ and ‘substantive’ informed consent –
only  the  latter  can  be  regarded  as  truly  autonomous.  Free  and  informed  consent  is  to  be
obtained  from  any  person  on  whose  sample  a  test  is  to  be  performed.  If  possible,  consent
should  be  obtained  before  the  taking of  the  sample  in  order  to  ensure  genuine  conditions  of
free  will.  Consent  must  be  written,  specific  and  revocable  at  any  time  before  the  onset  of
sample or data processing. The use of confidential samples or genetic data in future research
unrelated to the object for which the initial consent was given requires a new consent.

64

The  question  of  consent  as  far  as  population  genetic  tests  are  concerned  is  complex.
Arguments for and against are located around the question of whether a population as an entity
can ever truly consent, what the authority over the group (and its interests) over the individual
is, and the risk of social discrimination of a specific group.

The National Bioethics Commission stresses that the fact of being able to obtain very precise
information  on  individuals’  DNA  does  not  mean  that  diseases  can  be  predicted  just  as
accurately.  Confusion  at  this  level  is  the  main  cause  of  the  overestimation  of  genetic
information. The idea of genetic determinism is associated with the risk of a neglect of social
solidarity  and  equity  measures  and  principles  since  intervention  in  the  socio-economic
environment becomes neglected. 

Genetic  testing  in  the  workplace  creates  the  risk  of  adverse  categorisation  of  employees  or
applicants.  On  the  other  hand,  the  issue  remains  open  with  regard  to  professions  that  may
contribute as environmental factors to manifestation of genetic disease that could be avoided if
the  genetic  data  of  the  employee  were  known  in  time.  The  disclosure  of  genetic  data  of
employees  or  applicants  seems  particularly  justified  when  a  possible  manifestation  of  the
genetically based disease could directly affect third persons. 

65

66

ITALY

National Bioethics Committee

Overview of the Committee

The National Bioethics Committee was established by a decree signed by the President of the
Council  of  Ministers  on  March  28th  1990.  The  Committee’s  mandate  includes  the  issuing  of
opinions  and  suggestion  of  solutions  that  address  the  ethical  and  legal  problems  which  may
emerge as a result of the progress of research and the emergence of possible new applications
of clinical interest.
Furthermore,  the  Committee  is  responsible  for  proposing  solutions  for  control  over  both  the
safeguarding of human and environmental security in the production of biological material and
the protection from all risk of all patients treated with products produced by genetic engineering
or  who  are  subjected  to  gene  therapy.  The  Committee  promotes  the  drafting  of  codes  of
conduct  for  practitioners  in  the  various  fields  concerned  and  awareness-raising  initiatives  to
keep  the  public  properly  informed  It  is  also  expected  to  produce  an  outline  summary  of  the
programmes,  objectives  and  results  of  research  and  experimentation  in  the  field  of  the  life
sciences and human health.
Members  of  the  Government,  the  Parliament  and  other  institutions  may  consult  the  National
Bioethics Committee and ask it to issue an opinion on a specific topic. Associations, research
centres, local ethics committees, scholars and single individuals can address themselves to the
Committee for information regarding Bioethics.

Recommendations from the Committee

The opinion on ‘Bioethical Guidelines for Genetic Testing’, adopted in November 1999, is
the result of the current bioethics committee and its predecessor, as the work spanned over a
period of two years.10
The opinion addresses the question of workplace screening for susceptibility to types of cancer
in  combination  with  the  possible  exposure  to  carcinogenic  substances  in  the  workplace.  The
Committee states that genetic screening intended to identify any predisposition to illness in the
workplace  is  ethically  permissible  only  if  aimed  at  protecting  the  worker’s  health  and  if  it
satisfies the ethical criteria of autonomy of decision, benefits accruing, and justice. Autonomy of
decision implies the freedom to decide whether or not to take the test, and freedom to choose a
compatible  job  after  complete  information  has  been  obtained  concerning  the  nature  of  the
potentially cancer-causing exposure and the limitations of the test. Benefits  accruing    implies
the moral obligation of the employer to avoid using carcinogenic substances in the workplace –
the employee would obtain greater benefits from not being exposed to the hazard in the first
place. 
The Committee specifies ethical criteria for the identification of genetic tests that safeguard the
workers’ rights: an achievable aim must be guaranteed, the active participation of the workforce
to  be  tested  must  take  place,  equal  opportunity  of  access  and  effective  executive  protocols
have  to  be  guaranteed.  Access  to  information,  counselling  and  follow-up  services  must  be
provided.  Individuals must have a right to confidentiality of their test results.

10The texts are available at www.palazzochigi.it/bioetica/eng/opinions.html

67

                                                     
Any form of genetic discrimination should be prohibited. Confidentiality of genetic data is to be
guaranteed and any genetic testing requires prior free and informed consent. 

The  Committee  makes  a  series  of  recommendations  regarding  genetic  screening  in  general,
i.e. not only in the workplace: The ‘principle of equality’ is to be respected at all times in access
to  screening.  The  distribution  of  possible  ‘benefits’  from  screening  investigations  must  be
guaranteed at least for every group and each population selected. This implies their active and
informed participation. No screenings should be proposed on which the international scientific
community has not expressed sufficiently broad and converging conclusions on reliability. Test
specificity and test sensitivity, i.e. the percentage of false positives and false negatives, have to
be indicated. Correct information must be guaranteed, so that informed consent can be given.
In  addition,  the  consent  for  screening  should  be  free  and  independent  of  the  choices  the
individual  may  want  or  decide  to  make  after  being  informed  of  the  results.  A  cost-benefit
analysis must take place. 

The  authors  emphasise  the  need  for  sound  scientific  research  and  the  rigorous  control  of
genetic testing. Counselling must always be provided before indicating any genetic tests in a
continuous dialogue between potential beneficiary and consultant. The Committee stresses the
need for well-trained genetic counsellors. 

The Committee stresses that the growth in knowledge of the human genome will bring with it
an extension and acceleration of genetic research. The determination of ‘genetic predisposition’
to  polygenic  or  multifactorial  pathologies  will  increasingly  be  possible;  hand  in  hand  with  the
identification of genetic predisposition to the action of pathogens present in the home or in the
workplace for late onset diseases. 
DNA-analysis of late onset genetic diseases, i.e. diseases where the clinical signs will appear
at the adult age, raises a series of serious problems. When a suitable therapy is available or
when  it  is  possible  to  modify  the  course  of  the  disease  to  reduce  any  complications,  the
prescription of genetic test at a pre-symptomatic stage is perfectly appropriate. However, when
these conditions are not fulfilled, it is dubious to undertake such tests. The ‘right not to know’ is
particularly  important  in  those  cases  where  a  prior  knowledge  of  the  disease  would  only
anticipate suffering without any concrete advantage in therapeutic terms. 

The prognoses that may be inferred from genetic investigations are quite different from those
offered by other diagnostic tests, as they identify a risk,  as  opposed  to  a  disease  in  its  early
stages. A large psychological and social cost can be associated with the knowledge of such a
predisposition.  The  individual  may  be  discriminated  against  in  the  various  arenas  of  his
everyday life, including the workplace, but also insurance companies, or even by his/her own
partner on the basis of a mere probability (as opposed to a certainty). Correct and widespread
information must be given  to the public in order to counteract the risk of genetic determinism
associated with the implementation of screening programs. 

68

UNITED STATES

1

US Congress, Office of Technology Assessment

Overview of the consultative body

The  Office  of  Technology  Assessment  (OTA),  installed  by  the  US  Congress,  operated  from
1972-1995. The non-partisan analytical agency’s mandate consisted of assisting Congress with
anticipating,  understanding,  and  considering  existing  and  emerging  national  problems  which
arise as a consequence of technological applications – giving early indications of their probable
beneficial and adverse impacts. It was to secure competent, unbiased information concerning
the physical, biological, economic, social, and political effects of such applications.
The basic function of the Office was to provide early indications of the probable beneficial and
adverse impacts of the applications of technology and to develop and co-ordinate information
to assist Congress.11 

Highlights from the OTA-report

‘Genetic  monitoring  and  screening  in  the  workplace’  was  published  in  October  1990,  after  a
number of Senate and House Committees had requested a recent report on the topic, following
up on OTA’s 1983 report on the application of genetic tests to the workplace. 

The OTA identifies three main ethical issues with regard to the application of genetic tests for
employment:  the  implementation  of  monitoring  and  screening  tests  in  the  workplace  and  the
use of the information they generate; the dissemination and storage of information gained from
genetic monitoring and screening, and the role of genetic counselling for both employers and
employees in genetic monitoring and screening programmes. 

The  OTA  states  that  these  issues  vary  according  to  whether  the  test  performed  is  genetic
monitoring  for  chromosomal  damage,  genetic  screening  for  susceptibilities  to  occupational
illness,  or  genetic  screening  for  inherited  conditions  or  traits  that  are  unrelated  to  the
workplace. Whereas genetic screening at the workplace for conditions that are not workplace-
related  seems  hardly  justifiable,  a  series  of  cases  can  be  made  for  and  against  genetic
screening for susceptibilities to occupational illness. One of the main ethical problems for this
type of screening is that it is invasive to workers’ or applicants’ privacy, because genes provide
much of the basis of human individuality.

11 The texts are available at www.wws.princeton.edu/~ota/.

69

                                                     
Genetic  screening  appears  to  be  more  controversial  than  genetic  monitoring,  because
monitoring is more closely related to the observation of genetic damage that has already been
caused by workplace or other exposure. The OTA however points out that it is not correct to
classify  only  genetic  screening  as  predictive.  Genetic  monitoring  is  of  a  predictive  nature  as
well  –  even  though  monitoring  observes  changes  in  the  genetic  material  that  have  actually
taken place, these changes nevertheless remain predictors of adverse health effects that could
occur in the future. 

Results  obtained  from  screening  or  monitoring  must  be  accompanied  by  appropriate
interpretation. They furthermore need to be placed in context, because unless their significance
is properly communicated, there is much room for misunderstanding. 

Employers’ and applicants’ respective rights to autonomy stand in opposition to each other with
regard to the application of genetic tests. The autonomy of job applicants and employees will
be  limited  if  employers  are  free  to  implement  and  enforce  genetic  monitoring  or  screening
policies. Giving the applicant or employee complete freedom to protect his or her own interests
would restrict the freedom of the employer and possibly present a risk to co-workers or family. 

Based on these and other considerations, OTA stipulates a series of guidelines for screening
and monitoring in the workplace: 
Employers  should demonstrate  the  need  for  a  genetic  monitoring  or  screening  program.  The
purposes for monitoring or screening should be clearly stated in advance and be realistic. Any
workplace  screening  should  have  the  goal  of  reducing  the  burden  of  occupational  illness  to
workers,  employers,  and  society.  The  tests  used  must  be  scientifically  valid,  and  they  must
provide relevant health information for protecting employee health. Workers should decide for
themselves  whether  they  want  to  participate  in  a  program.  At  the  same  time,  participation  in
programs must be equally possible for all workers. Workers and applicants must give informed
consent  prior  to  any  screening  or  monitoring.  They  should  also  have  access  to  results.
Professional interpretation of genetic monitoring and screening results should be provided for
both workers and employers. All results should be confidential. Ideally, employers would only
have  access  to  them  with  the  worker’s  explicit  consent,  or  if  results  have  previously  been
anonymised. 

The  report  addresses  the  question  whether  employees  who  are  found  to  be  genetically
susceptible to workplace exposure should be allowed to accept or remain in jobs that increase
the  risk  of  disease.  It  notes  that  the  possibility  of  making  such  a  choice  can  be  considered
being  a  part  of  personal  autonomy,  as  it  can  be  argued  that  susceptible  workers  are
responsible  for  their  own  health  as  long  as  they  are  informed  of  risks,  even  if  alternative
employment is available. 

In  1989,  OTA  commissioned  a  US-national  survey  that  was  targeted  at  the  500  largest  US-
industries. Results indicate that only a small minority of US-companies use genetic screening
or monitoring. 

According to the OTA, the available policy options at the government level relate to two central
issues:  the  appropriate  role  of  the  Federal  Government  in  the  regulation,  oversight,  or
promotion of genetic tests (which includes both monitoring and screening), and the adequacy
of federally sponsored research on the relationships between genes and the environment.

70

2

Secretary’s Advisory Committee on Genetic Testing, 
National Institutes of Health

Overview of the consultative body

The mandate of the Secretary's Advisory Committee on Genetic Testing (SACGT), chartered in
1998, consisted of advising the government about all aspects of the development and use of
genetic tests, including the complex medical, ethical, legal, and social issues raised by genetic
testing. Part of the National Institutes of Health, the SACGT’s recommendations were made to
the  US  Secretary  of  for  Health.  SACGT’s  charter  recently  expired  and  a  new  Secretary's
Advisory Committee on Genetics, Health, and Society has been created.

SACGT recommendations

The SACGT was asked in June 1999 to assess the adequacy of oversight of genetic tests and,
if necessary, make recommendations for additional oversight and for ensuring public access to
quality genetic tests. A public consultation process was part of this assessment. The resulting
‘Preliminary recommendations on the adequacy of oversight of genetic tests’ were published in
2000. 12 

The document addresses the question of genetic testing at the workplace directly. It states the
need  for  federal  legislation  to  prohibit  discrimination  in  employment  and  insurance  based  on
genetic information. It furthermore states that additional federal legislation is needed to protect
the privacy of genetic information in medical records.

Potential exclusion from health insurance and employment is one of the potential risk resulting
from a positive genetic test result. Many of the comments received from the public during the
consultation process relate to the fear that the inappropriate disclosure of genetic test results
could lead to stigma and discrimination in a series of settings, for example in employment. 

The SACGT issues a series statements aimed at the oversight of genetic testing in general (i.e.
also  outside  the  workplace)  that  are  also  applicable  to  policy  questions  regarding  workplace
genetic testing: Informed consent must be obtained and documented prior to genetic testing. 

12 The texts are available at www4.od.nih.gov/oba/sacgt.htm

71

                                                     
Education of the public as well as health providers is necessary in light of the importance of the
appropriate  use,  interpretation,  and  understanding  of  genetic  test  results.  Genetic  education
and  counselling  should  be  required  for  any  genetic  test  that  is  predictive  (as  opposed  to
diagnostic), that has a low penetrance (i.e. predictive value) and where little or no treatment is
available. The major criteria for assessment of the benefits and the risk of a genetic test should
be analytical validity, clinical utility, and social consequences.

Privacy and confidentiality are issues of major concern in the question of adequate oversight of
genetic  testing.  This  also  applies  to  DNA-samples  and  test  results  collected  as  part  of  a
research  process.  Here  also,  the  fear  of  possible  later  discrimination  should  privacy  not  be
safeguarded applies.

The  SACGT  furthermore  stresses  that  genetic  test  results  have  psychological  and  emotional
risks, and predictive testing in particular, can have important psychological and social impacts. 

72

GENETIC DATA AND CONFIDENTIALITY

The Estonian Experiment

Expert hearing of Prof. Ismini Kriari-Catranis

May 27th 2003, Athens

In  the  context  of  the  Greek  presidency  of  the  European  Union  during  the  preparation  of  this
opinion, the EGE held its May meeting in Athens. During this visit, the EGE was also invited to
a  joint  meeting  with  the  Greek  National  Committee  on  Bioethics.  The  Greek  National
Committee on Bioethics had asked Prof. Ismini Kriari-Catranis to speak about the results of her
research  on  the  Estonian  gene  bank  to  assist  the  EGE  in  its  general  deliberations  for  this
opinion. 
Prof. Kriari-Catranis is an Associate Professor at the Panteion University of Social and Political
Sciences in Athens.  13

Estonia is the first state that founded a gene bank  by collecting the genetic material and health
data of its entire population in order to make it available to the scientific community for genetic
research. Iceland has undertaken a similar initiative, but Estonia is the first country in which this
bank operates under public control.
Examining  how  confidentiality  of  genetic  data  is  assured  in  the  Estonian  case  is  thus  of
particular interest. 

The  respect  of  confidentiality  –  a  vital  principle  in  European  legal  systems  –  expresses  the
general  due  respect  for  patients’  privacy  and  autonomy.  This  right  to  informational  self-
determination  guarantees  every  individual  the  freedom  of  decision  as  to  what  medical  and
genetic data will be given to whom, at what time and under which conditions. It is also crucial
for  preserving  patients’  confidence  in  the  medical  profession  and  in  the  health  services  in
general. 

Guaranteeing  confidentiality  of  data  is  all  the  more  pertinent  when  it  comes  to  genetic  data.
First, individuals must be protected from genetic discrimination, which is based on risk potential
and  not  on  the  factual  appearance  of  a  disease,  resulting  in  unfitness  for  a  particular
occupation or job. Genetic discrimination does not operate by assessing who one is, but rather
by estimating who one is likely to be in the future, given their DNA and external conditions (i.e.
environmental exposure, life style etc). Second, genetic data is of particular interest to third 

13 This summary was prepared by Jutta Buyse, a Trainee with the Secretariat of the European Group on Ethics in
Science and New Technologies from March to July 2003 on the basis of a presentation submitted by Prof. Kriari-
Catranis.

73

                                                     
parties  such  as  employers,  insurers,  research  institutions  and  state  agencies  for  a  variety  of
reasons. Third, genetic information reveals the genetic pattern not only of the person tested but
also of his/her entire family and (future) descendants. 

As a response to these genetic challenges, Estonia has established specific provisions about
gene  data  protection.  It  is  one  of  the  few  countries  that  have  already  drafted  specific
regulations  concerning  the  protection  of  the  individual  in  the  workplace.  The  January  2001
Human  Genes  Research  Act  states  in  its  paragraph  26  on  “discrimination  in  employment
relationships” that employers are prohibited from collecting genetic data on employees or job
applicants,  as  well  as  requiring  employees  or  job  applicants  to  provide  tissue  samples  or
descriptions  of  DNA.  Employers  are  prohibited  from  imposing  discriminatory  working  and
wages conditions on people with different genetic risks.  14

This  general  prohibition  does  not  exclude  a  differentiated  approach  in  cases  where  working
conditions  could  be  harmful  to  those  with  a  certain  predisposition.  The  European  Court  of
Human  Rights  has  made  it  clear  that  not  every  distinction  or  difference  in  treatment  can  be
regarded as discrimination: “A difference of treatment is discriminatory" if “it has  no objective
and reasonable justification”, that is “if it does not pursue a legitimate aim or if there is not a
reasonable relationship of proportionality between the means employed and the aim sought to
be realised” (Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v. United Kingdom of 1985). Exceptions from
the  general  rule  could  thus  be  tolerated,  if  they  are  intended  to  serve  the  health  of  the
individuals concerned (e.g. in the case of a toxic working environment that would have adverse
consequences on an employer with asthma predisposition) or the health of third persons (e.g.
in the case of pilots).

The  creation  of  a  Gene  bank  is  motivated  by  a  series  of  expectations  by  the  Estonian
population.  Estonians  expect  a  better  organised  health  care  system,  based  on  the  results
obtained from genetic research, in terms of better electronic databases and genetic information
in  diagnostics,  in  the  treatment  and  prevention  of  diseases,  and  an  improvement  in  the
individualisation of medical care.
Finally, they want to attract biotechnology and gene technology firms: The Gene Bank may only
be  used  for  scientific  research,  research  for  and  treatment  of  gene  donors,  public  health
research and statistical purposes. 

The creation of a gene data bank for research purposes is governed  by  two  main  principles.
First, its creation is based on the idea that the human genome is a national resource, echoing
the recognition enshrined in the 1997 UNESCO Universal Declaration on the Human Genome
and Human Rights that the human genome is in a symbolic sense “the heritage of humanity”.
Second,  it  is  governed  by  the  idea  of  ‘genetic  altruism’.  The  latter  is  hoped  to  encourage  of
wide  population  participation  motivated  by  the  contribution  to  the  improvement  of  diagnostic
and therapeutic medicine brought about by the storage and processing of genetic material. 

14 The law also includes a section on genetic testing and insurance, a question closely related to genetic testing
and  employment.  It  prohibits  insurers  from  collecting  genetic  data  on  insured  persons  or  persons  applying  for
insurance  and  from  requiring  insured  persons  or  persons  applying  for  insurance  to  provide  tissue  samples  or
descriptions  of  DNA.  Insurers  are  prohibited  from  establishing  different  insurance  conditions  for  people  with
different genetic risks and from establishing preferential tariff rates and determining insured events restrictively.

74

                                                     
The  Estonian  solution  to  the  question  of  data  protection  was  to  establish  an  entity  that  is
positioned  between  the  donors  and  research/business  community.  The  chief  processor,  i.e.
The Gene Data Bank, entrusted with the collection, storage and processing of the material is
funded by the Estonian State. 

Research entities can rely on the anonymous tissue and obtained from the chief processor. No
private  arrangements  are  allowed  between  individuals  and  genetic  laboratories  in  order  to
avoid competition between fact – interested entities or individual agreements that could lead to
different legal protection.

A specially created body, the Supervisory board of chief processor of Gene Bank, supervises
the  Bank.  It  establishes  an  Ethics  Committee,  which  is  entrusted  with  the  elaboration  of
opinions  about  the  processing  procedures  of  the  gene  bank.  The  Ethics  Committee  acts
according to generally recognised ethical rules and international conventions.
Supervision  over  the  collection  and  processing  of  descriptions  of  state  of  health  and
genealogical  data,  the  coding  and  decoding  of  tissue  samples,  and  descriptions  of  DNA,  is
exercised  by  the  data  protection  supervision  authority.  The  chief  processor  obtains  the
approval of the data protection supervision authority for the method of generating the codes for
the tissue samples, descriptions of DNA etc. 

The  Estonian  Human  Genes  Research  Act  confirms  widely  acknowledged  basic  ethical  and
legal  principles  relating  d  to  human  rights.  Use  of  an  individual’s  tissue  and  health  data  for
genetic  research  is  voluntary  and  previous  informed  consent  is  required.  The  Act  prohibits
advocating  or  influencing  an  individual  to  become  a  gene  donor.  The  gene  donor  remains
anonymous, he has a ‘right to know’ his gene data maintained in the Gene bank, just as he has
the ‘right not to know’. He furthermore has the  right  to  allow  disclosure  of  his or  her  identity.
Whether a person is a gene donor or not remains classified. 
After the collection of their data, the gene donors still control the data: they have the right to
personally access their data stored in Gene bank, the right to submit additional information as
well  as  the  right  to  prohibit  the  supplementation,  renewal  and  verification  of  descriptions  of
state  of  health  stored  in  the  Gene  Bank.  Gene  donors  have  the  right  to  apply  to  the  chief
processor to destroy all coding information, so that their material can never be identified again.

In the case of unlawful disclosure of genetic and medical data by health care professionals or
other persons that have had access to this data by way of their their professional activity, the
law foresees fines, deprivation of the right of employment in a particular position or operation in
a particular area of activity and penal sanctions.

Gene  data  banks  are  based  on  the  combination  of  two  powerful  technologies:  Genetics  and
Informatics.  Comprising  an  enormous  potential  for  the  advancement  of  science,  the
development  of  new  technologies  and  the  improvement  of  medical  care,  their  management
raises issues with regard to the ethically responsible treatment of genetic data. It seems that
every  effort  has  been  undertaken  in  the  Estonian  case  to  safeguard  informational  autonomy
and  self  -  determination,  to  provide  for  institutional  safeguards  and  to  endorse  social
acceptance and social sensitivity in this field. 

75

76

C.  INTERNATIONAL BODIES

=====================================

77

78

THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANISATION

Human Genetics Programme

Overview of the Organisation

The World Health Organisation (WHO) –  the  United  Nations’  specialised  agency  for  health  –
was established in 1948. Its objective is the attainment by all peoples of the highest possible
level  of  health,  in  the  sense  of  a  complete  physical,  mental  and  social  well  being  and  not
merely the absence of disease or infirmity. WHO is governed by 192 Member States through
the  World  Health  Assembly,  which  is  composed  of  representatives  from  WHO's  Member
States. 

The WHO Human Genetics Programme (HGN) aims to develop genetic approaches to control
the most common hereditary diseases and those having a genetic predisposition. In addition, it
seeks to provide a response for WHO's direction and support to the many questions posed by
current  genetic  challenges.  Working  together  with  with  various  non-governmental  and
international  organisations,  the  WHO  Human  Genetics  Programme  covers  areas  of  medical
genetics,  as  well  as  community  genetic  service  delivery;  the  monitoring  of  human  genome
research and the ethical, legal and social aspects of its application to practice; education and
training aimed at communities and health professionals.

Recommendations from the WHO 

The  ‘Proposed  international  guidelines  on  ethical  issues  in  medical  genetics  and  genetic
services’ were adopted in December 1997 by a group of experts commissioned by the Human
Genetics Programme.15 The resulting document integrates the previous ‘Guidelines on Ethical
Issues  in  Medical  Genetics  and  the  Provision  of  Genetics  Services’  issued  by  the  Human
Genetic Programme, and the comments received from all Regions and WHO staff in response
to a consultation process on the previous document. 

15 The text is available at www.who.int/ncd/hgn/hgnethic.htm

79

                                                     
The  Proposed  Guidelines  state  specifically  that  unfair  discrimination  or  favouritism  in
employment, in insurance or in schooling based on genetic information must be prevented. 

‘Informed  consent’  must  be  obtained  before  any  genetic  testing.  Informed  consent  is  only
guaranteed  by  genetic  counselling.  Generally,  counselling  is  to  provide  accurate,  full  and
unbiased  information,  and  takes  place  in  an  understanding,  emphatic  relationship.  In
counselling,  privacy  of  the  individuals  and  families  from  unjustified  intrusions  by  employers,
insurers, and schools must be maintained. Information about possible misuse of the information
by  employers,  insurers,  and  schools  must  be  provided.  As  far  as  this  is  possible,  unbiased
presentation of information must be provided. A non-directive approach is recommended. 

Susceptibility  testing  should  be  voluntary,  preceded  by  adequate  information  and  based  on
informed consent. Presymptomatic testing should be available for adults at risk, who request it
after proper counselling and informed consent, even in the absence of treatment. 

Proposed  ethical  guidelines  concerning  disclosure  and  confidentiality  of  genetic  test  results,
include the respect of the ‘right not to know’, the communication of all relevant test results, with
the exception of information that could cause great psychological or social harm, which may be
temporarily withheld. Test results not directly related to health may be withheld as well.

Results of carrier tests, presymptomatic test, susceptibility tests and prenatal tests should be
kept  confidential  from  employers,  health  insurers,  schools  and  government  agencies,  as
individuals should neither be able to be penalised for characteristics of their genome. 

80

UNESCO

(The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation)

International Bioethics Committee

Overview of the Organisation and the Committee

The  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural  Organisation  (UNESCO)  aims  to
stimulate  co-operation  among  its  188  Member  States  to  promote  the  human  rights  and
freedoms that are affirmed by the Charter of the United Nations.
The International Bioethics Committee (IBC) of UNESCO was created in 1993.
It  drafted  the  ‘Universal  Declaration  on  the  Human  Genome  and  Human  Rights’,  which  the
United  Nations  Assembly  adopted  in  November  1997.  The  IBC  is  a  body  of  36  independent
experts that follows progress in the life sciences and its applications in order to ensure respect
for human dignity and freedom. Its members are chosen from a variety of disciplines appointed
for a four-year term. Through its sessions and working groups, the Committee produces advice
and  recommendations  on  specific  issues  that  are  adopted  by  consensus  and  are  widely
disseminated and submitted to the Director-General for transmission to the Member States, the
Executive Board and the General Conference.

In  2002,  the  UNESCO  General  Conference  organisation’s  Executive  Board  declared  that  an
International Declaration on Human Genetic Data that has due regard for the implications for
human dignity, human rights and freedoms should be prepared.

Recommendations from the IBC

The  IBC  issued  a  ‘Revised  Outline  of  the  International  Declaration  on  Human  Genetic
Data’  in  November  2002  for  a  consultation  process  and  examination  by  a  committee  of
governmental experts.16 Revisions to the first draft are the results of the examination by whole
group  of  the  original  draft  produced  by  the  working  group.  The  final  result  will  be  a  draft
Declaration presented for adoption at the UNESCO General Conference in October 2003. The
Declaration  contains a  series  of  statements  on  genetic  testing  policy  that  are  relevant  to  the
question of genetic testing in the workplace. 

16 The text is available at www.unesco.org/ibc

81

                                                     
The  Declaration  upholds  the  principles  of  non-discrimination  and  non-stigmatisation:  human
genetic data shall not be used for discriminatory purposes, nor shall it be used in a way that
may lead to stigmatisation of an individual, a family or a group.

For  the  collection  of human  genetic  data, prior  free and  informed  consent  must  be  obtained,
which may at all times be withdrawn. The declaration stresses the individual’s right do decide
whether  or  not  to  be  Informed.  Genetic  counselling  has  to  be  available  at  all  times,  though
participation in counselling should not be mandatory.

Everyone should have access at any stage of the process to their genetic data. Confidentiality
of genetic data linked to an identifiable person has to be guaranteed. 

Genetic data  shall  not  be  disclosed  or be accessible  to third  parties,  in  particular  employers,
insurance  companies  or  educational  institutions,  ‘except  in  cases  provided  for  by  national
legislation  or  regulations  and  subject  to  the  consent  of  the  person  concerned,  and  in
compliance  with  international  human  rights  law’.  Human  genetic  data  collected  for  a  specific
purpose shall not be used for a different purpose.

With regard to the characteristics of the genetic tests, the IBC states that accuracy, reliability,
quality and  security  must  be ensured.  The  relevant  professional  bodies  shall  exercise  rigour,
caution, intellectual honesty and integrity in the processing and the interpretation of results from
genetic data.

The International Declaration applies not only to human genetic data, but also to data that is or
might be derived from it, e.g. proteomic data.

82

THE INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANISATION

(ILO)

Expert hearing of Brigitte Froneberg, MD

April 15th 2003, Brussels

Dr.  Brigitte  Froneberg  is  a  Senior  Occupational  Safety  Officer  and  Environmental  Health
Specialist for the InFocus Programme SafeWork with the International Labour Organisation in
Geneva.
The EGE invited Dr. Froneberg to speak about ILO’s position and activities related to genetic
testing in the workplace, as well as report on the current use of genetic tests by employers in
the United States. The hearing took place at the EGE meeting on April 15th 2003 in Brussels.
During this hearing, Dr. Froneberg was also free to speak in her personal capacity as an expert
in the field. A discussion followed the presentation.17 

Overview of the organisation 

The  International  Labour  Organisation,  founded  in  1919,  is  a  supranational  organisation  that
became  a  specialised  agency  of  the  United  Nations  in  1946.  The  ILO  currently  has  175
member  states.  It  formulates  international  labour  standards  mainly  through  three  types  of
instruments:  Conventions,  Recommendations  and  Codes  of  Practice  that  set  minimum
standards of basic labour rights. It also provides technical assistance in several fields, primarily
related to training, employment, and social security. Within the United Nations system, the ILO
has  a  unique  tripartite  structure  composed  of  representatives  of  workers’  and  employers’
organisations and governments. 18 

The 1944 Philadelphia Declaration states the fundamental objectives of the ILO. With reference
to this Declaration, the following strategic objectives have been formulated to promote decent
work: the promotion and realisation of standards and fundamental principles and rights at work,
the  creation  of  greater  opportunities  for  women  and  men  to  secure  decent  employment  and
income, the enhancement of the coverage and effectiveness of social protection for all and the
strengthening of tripartism and social dialogue. 

17 This summary was prepared by Jutta Buyse, a Trainee with the Secretariat of the EGE from March to July 2003,
on basis of a presentation submitted by Dr. Froneberg, as well as the discussion that followed it.
18 The text is available at www.ilo.org

83

                                                     
Recommendations from the ILO

The ILO has not issued any separate statement on genetic testing in the workplace. However,
previously stated principles from the Philadelphia Declaration, the Fundamental Human Rights
Convention and other Conventions represent the position of the organisation on this topic.
The Philadelphia Declaration affirms that ‘all human beings, irrespective of race, creed or sex,
have  the  right  to  pursue  both  their  material  well-being  and  their  spiritual  development  in
conditions  of  freedom  and  dignity,  of  economic  security  and  equal  opportunity’.  The
Philadelphia  Declaration  also  advocates  full  employment  under  safe  and  decent  working
conditions and the use of measures to ensure employability. 

ILO’s philosophy has consistently focussed on non-discrimination and autonomy, as expressed
in several Fundamental Human Rights Conventions.

Discrimination  includes  ‘any  distinction,  exclusion  or  preference  made  on  the  basis  of  race,
colour, sex, religion, political opinion, national extraction or social origin, which has the effect of
nullifying or impairing equality of opportunity or treatment in employment or occupation’ (C111
Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention).

The  ILO  stresses  employers’  obligation of providing  a  safe  and  healthy  working  environment
that will facilitate optimal physical and mental health in relation to work, and the need for the
adaptation  of  work  to  the  capabilities  of  workers.  It  also  emphasises  the  need  for  fully
professional independent personnel of an occupational health service. The latter has the task
of ‘surveillance of worker’s health in relation to work’. All workers must furthermore be informed
of  health  hazards  involved  in  their  work  (C161  Occupational  Health  Services  Convention,
1985).
Governments  are  to  do  everything  possible  to  prevent  any  discrimination  between  workers
(C169 Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989).

The  Code  of  Practice  on  Protection  of  workers’  personal  data  (1997)  and  the  Chapter  on
‘Biological tests and other investigations’ of the Technical and Ethical Guidelines for workers’
health surveillance (1989) contain specific references to genetic testing. 
The  Code  of  Practice  on  Protection  of  workers’  personal  data  states  that  ‘workers  and  their
representatives  should  be  kept  informed  of  any  data  collection  process’,  and  that  the
‘processing  of  data  should  not  have  the  effect  of  unlawfully  discriminating  in  employment  or
occupation’.  Workers  may  not  waive  their  privacy  rights.  Medical  personal  data  may  only  be
collected as needed, i.e. to determine whether the worker is fit for a particular employment, to
fulfil the requirements of occupational health and safety, and to determine entitlements to, and
grant,  social  benefits.  Specifically, genetic  screening  should  be  prohibited  or  limited  to  cases
explicitly  authorised  by  national  legislation.  The  ILO  comments  this  statement  stressing  that
though  genetic  screening  may  appear  to  be  inherently  in  the  interest  of  workers  in  order  to
prevent  dangers  arising  from  their  genetic  constitution,  it  discloses  highly  personal  data  with
far-reaching  implications  for  a  worker’s  future.  Hence,  the  subjection  of  workers  to  such  an
examination may not be left to employers’ discretion. 

84

The  Technical  and  Ethical  Guidelines  for  workers’  health  surveillance  further  state  that  any
detection should take place at a time when intervention is beneficial to individuals’ health. The
medical  professional  undertaking  the  test  may  help  with  the  placement  of  a  worker  in  an
appropriate position that takes into account his capacity for a particular work, and prevent the
total exclusion of any worker from employment. Medical examinations should be regarded as a
baseline for future health surveillance. Again, any examination should be conducted bearing in
mind the possibility of improving the working conditions. 

Biological tests and other medical investigations must  be  carried  out  with due  regard to their
sensitivity,  specificity  and  predictive  value.  Biological  monitoring  is  judged  useful,  but  should
not be regarded as a substitute for the surveillance of the working environment. Priority should
be given to environmental (environmental exposure limits) over biological (biological exposure
limits)  criteria.  Given  the  present  state  of  scientific  knowledge  in  this  specific  field,  genetic
screening at the workplace is ‘a disproportionate infringement of individual rights’. 

The ILO recognises the limits of the individual worker’s autonomy with regard to the protection
of  third  parties  or  when  the  elimination  of  exposure  is  impossible.  In  the  case  of  possible
danger to third parties, the management must be informed and take the necessary measures to
safeguard other persons. When elimination of exposure is impossible, the only solution may be
the removal from exposure or a particular work situation. 

Current techniques for monitoring are not exposure-specific, and thus not able  to  identify  the
true  cause  of  changes  in  genetic  material.  In  occupational  settings,  they  may  be  effectively
used  to  identify  recent  exposure  to  a  common  hazard  in  groups.  They  may  therefore  be
regarded as a method of health surveillance. 

Employers  could  use  test  results  for  several  reasons:  to  lower  exposure  levels  or  to  ensure
appropriate  worksite  placement  of  susceptible  employees,  but  also  in  order  to  exclude
employees who are likely to develop an occupational or non-occupational disease later in life.

Most diseases are multifactorial. More than one genetic factor usually contributes to a particular
trait,  and  genetic  factors  often  interact  with  environmental  factors,  which  in  turn  also  often
interact with each other. Furthermore, genetic predisposition does not have a continuous effect
during the life course, as genetics influence differently at different points in time. The number of
currently available genetic tests is limited – approximately 50 tests for increased susceptibility
for  occurrence  of  an  occupational  disease  are  available  –  as  is  their  predictive  value.  The
limited  sensitivity  and  specificity  of  most  tests  will  lead  to  misclassification,  in  particular  for
genetic disorders with low prevalence. 

Employers  could  have  an  interest  in  knowing  their  employees’  predisposition  to  certain
behaviours  and  abilities,  in  extension  of  psychological  assessment.  There  appears  to  be
presently more concern about genetic screening at work than there is evidence for such tests
actually being performed on a routine basis. 

85

The use of genetic testing in the workplace touches on areas of basic concern to most people:
opportunity  for  employment,  job  security,  health,  self-esteem,  and  privacy.  The  key  ethical
principles  involved  are  autonomy,  nonmaleficence  and  beneficence,  and  justice.  Justice,
strongly  related  to  equality  and  fairness,  becomes  an  issue  with  regard  to  the  carrier  of  the
cost.  Nonmaleficence  and  beneficence  translate  into  a  number  of  employer  duties  in  the
workplace setting: not to knowingly subject workers to conditions that are likely to cause injury
or diseases, remove harmful substances, and take actions in order to improve worker’s health.
Further ethical questions relate to information, counselling, record keeping, and privacy.

Survey results indicate little current use of genetic testing in the workplace in the United States.
Similar to the results of the OTA survey (see -section 7: United States- in this publication), in
the AMA – American Management Association 2001 survey on medical testing, only 2 out of 1
627 respondent firms that use genetic testing. 

Further evidence on the use of genetic testing in employment is anecdotal. In 1997 a group of
employees  at Lawrence  Berkeley  laboratories  sued  their  employer  for  testing  them  for  sickle
cell, syphilis, and pregnancy. The plaintiffs were found to be right by the Court of appeals on
privacy  and  civil  rights  claims,  but  not  on  infringement  of  the  Americans  with  Disabilities  Act
because  the  testing  took  place  post-hire  and  pre-placement,  hereby  falling  into  a  statutory
window for testing which allows the employers great latitude.

Recently,  the  Burlington  Northern  Santa  Fe  Railroad  case  has  received  much  publicity.
Burlington had required thirty-six employees to provide blood samples for a genetic DNA test
for chromosome 17 deletion, which is claimed to predict some forms of carpal tunnel syndrome.
These  employees  had  previously  submitted  claims  of  work-related  carpal  tunnel  syndrome.
They were neither informed nor asked for their consent. This case was settled out of court in
May 2002 – Burlington paid the damaged employees 2.2 Million USD, settling the case mainly
to avoid bad publicity. There is limited federal prohibition with regard to genetic testing in the
workplace,  and  since  Burlington  did  not  fire  an  employee  on  the  grounds  of  test  results,  the
company  did  not  violate  the  Americans  with  Disabilities  Act.  Relevant  Federal  American
legislation  with  regard  to  genetic  testing  includes:  The  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Act
(OSHA)  of  1970,  the  1990  Americans  with  Disabilities  Act  (ADA),  the  Fourth  Amendment’s
constitutional prohibition on illegal searches and seizures, Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act.
State legislation has developed from early statutes to prevent discrimination on specific genetic
conditions to statutes that broadened coverage of ‘genetic testing’ for all conditions to statutes
against genetic discrimination for all conditions no matter how the information is obtained.

No  state  law  exists  which  prevents  employers  from  collecting  non-job-related  genetic
information about job applicants. The most promising approach is contained in The Minnesota
Human  Rights  Acts.  It  requires  that  all  medical  exams,  including  pre-placement  exams,  be
strictly  limited  to  measuring  the  ability  to  perform  job-related  functions.  In  February  2000,
President  Clinton  signed  Executive  Order  13145  prohibiting  discrimination  on  the  basis  of
protected  genetic  information  in  the  Executive  branch.  Applicants  and  employees  are  to  be
judged on their current ability to perform the jobs they seek or hold, and not on the possibility
that they might in the future develop a disease or condition. The Executive Order accordingly
places stringent limits on the collection, use, and disclosure of protected genetic information. 

86

THE COUNCIL OF EUROPE

Expert hearing of Dr Laurence Lwoff

April 15th 2003, Brussels

Laurence Lwoff is an Administrative Officer/Secretary of the Working Party on Human Genetics
and of the Working Party on the Protection of the Human Embryo and Foetus. Dr. Lwoff was
invited by the EGE to speak about principles and recommendations agreed at the Council of
Europe  relevant  to  the  topic  of  genetic  testing  at  the  workplace,  as  well  as  ongoing
deliberations. The hearing took place at the EGE meeting on April 15th 2003 in Brussels. During
this hearing, Dr. Lwoff was also free to speak in her personal capacity as an expert in the field.
A discussion followed the presentation.19

Overview of the Organisation

The  Council  of  Europe  (CoE)  is  an  intergovernmental  organisation  that  aims  to  promote  the
protection of human rights and democracy in Europe. Its field of activities includes health and
education. Created in 1949, the CoE is composed today of 45 states, including the 15 member
states of the European Union, the 10 accession countries and the applicant countries Croatia,
Turkey, Bulgaria and Romania. All CoE-member states are legally bound to the Convention of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms drafted in 1950.

The  "Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and  Dignity  of  the  Human  Being  with
regard to the application of Biology and Medicine", known as the "Convention on Human Rights
and Biomedicine" or the "Oviedo Convention" was opened for signature in April 1997 in Oviedo
(Spain).  It  is  the  only  legally  binding  international  instrument  in  this  field.  On  the  basis  of  its
principles, additional protocols have been elaborated and are now opened for signature to the
signatories to the Convention: The Additional Protocol on the prohibition of cloning of human
beings  (12.01.1998)  and  the  Additional  Protocol  concerning  transplantation  of  organs  and
tissues of human origin (24.01.2002). 20

19 This summary was prepared by Jutta Buyse, a Trainee with the Secretariat of the EGE from March to July 2003, on basis of
a presentation submitted by Laurence Lwoff as well as the discussion that followed it.
20 The text is available at www.coe.int/bioethics

87

                                                     
Principles and recommendations from the Council of Europe

The  "Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and  Dignity  of  the  Human  Being  with
regard to the application of Biology and Medicine", known as the "Convention on Human Rights
and Biomedicine" or the "Oviedo Convention" was opened for signature in April 1997 in Oviedo
(Spain). It includes several Principles relevant to the field of genetic testing in the workplace. In
the  explanatory  report  that  accompanies  the  Convention,  the  issue  of  genetic  testing  in  the
workplace is addressed directly in relation to predictive genetic tests.

The  Oviedo  Convention  has  been  signed  by  all  European  Union  member  states,  except
Austria, Belgium, Germany, Ireland and the United-Kingdom. Finland, France and Luxembourg
have  signed,  but  not  yet  ratified  it.  All  accession/candidate  countries  have  signed  this
Convention; it has however not been ratified yet in Latvia, Poland and Turkey. 

A  draft  additional  Protocol  on  Human  Genetics  to  the  Oviedo  Convention  is  currently  being
elaborated  by  a  Working  Party  working  under  the  authority  of  the  Steering  committee  on
bioethics.  The  first  part  of  the  draft  Protocol  addressed  applications  of  genetics  for  health
purposes.. At the time of this hearing, the preparation of the second part of this Protocol was at
its  initial  stage.  This  second  part  will  elaborate  provisions  with  regard  to  the  application  of
human genetics for non-medical purposes. 

With  applications  of  genetic  for  non-medical  purposes,  a  third  party  might  be  involved  that
could have an interest in knowing an individuals’ health status, including their  genetic status.
Employers and insurance companies could be such a third party.

A  series  of  conditions  that  set  the  framework  for  the  future  CoE-policy  on  this  matter  to  be
elaborated in the new Protocol are established in the Oviedo Convention: 

The dignity and identity of all human beings  must  be  protected, and  respect  for  integrity  and
other rights and fundamental freedoms with regard to the application of biology and medicine
must be guaranteed (art. 1). Free and informed consent must be given prior to any intervention
(art.  5).  Private  life  must  be  respected  in  relation  to  information  about  health  (art.  10).
Discrimination on grounds of genetic heritage must be prevented (art. 11). 

Two  articles  are  of  particular  relevance  regarding  the  question  of  the  application  of  genetic
testing in the field of employment:

Predictive  tests  may  be  carried  out  only  for  health  purposes  or  scientific  research  linked  to
health or research purposes and subject to appropriate genetic counselling (art. 12).
Exceptions to this rules are possible , when prescribed by national law where necessary […] in
the interest of public safety, for the prevention of crime, for the protection of public health or for
the protection of the rights and freedoms of others (art. 26).

88

Thus, the Convention prohibits genetic testing for employment purposes when it does not serve
the health of the individual. In the explanatory report to the Convention, an exception is made
when  the  working  environment  could  have  prejudicial  consequences  to  the  health  of  an
individual, and cannot be improved in other ways – testing should not be an alternative to the
improvement of working conditions. 
Genetic tests could also be  allowed  when  the  health  condition of an employee  might  pose  a
serious risk to a third party. 

Articles  1-3  of  the  European  Social  Charter  (revised  1996)  represent  an  additional  basis  for
deliberation. They stipulate the right to work, the right to just conditions of work, and the right to
safe  and  healthy  working  conditions.  Further  relevant  instruments  from  the  CoE  include
recommendations  (92)3  on  genetic  testing  and  screening  for  health  care  purposes,  (97)5  on
the protection of  medical  data,  (89)2  on  personal  data used  for  employment  purposes of  the
Committee of Ministers.

Dr. Lwoff highlighted the main issues to be considered in the discussion of genetic testing in
the workplace. The main ethical concerns are similar to concerns raised in general by medical
examination for employment purposes: the respect for private life, the protection of integrity of
the  person  and  non-discrimination.  They  are  increased  by  the  characteristics  of  genetic
information: the predictive nature of genetic tests and the fact that genetic characteristics are
shared with family members.

A  concern  specific  to  the  use  of  genetic  tests  for  employment  purposes  is  the  risk  of
compromising  health  care  by  influencing  the  free  choice  of  using  genetic  services  or  not  for
health purposes. Individuals may hesitate to use genetic tests for health purposes if the results
of such a test could be used for other purposes, such as employment. Furthermore, there might
be a risk of compromising access to employment on the basis of genetic characteristics. 

The  objective  of  genetic  tests  in  employment  should  be  to  assess  the  applicant’s  medical
fitness for the position concerned, while at the same time protecting their health and safety at
work.  Dr.  Lwoff  stressed  that  the  question  of  ‘aptitude’  for  a  specific  occupation  is  a  very
precise  one,  answering  it  requires  a  prior  narrow  definition  of  very  exact  criteria  that  will  be
used. 

Accordingly, the information communicated should be limited to the conclusions with regard to
the  objective  of  the  examination:  the  assessment  of  medical  fitness  for  the  position,  and
information  on  specific  working  conditions  to  be  respected.  The  results  as  such  may  not  be
given to the employer. 

Occupational  doctors  must  meet  professional  obligations  and  standards  and  should  be
independent from the employer.  Medical data, and in particular genetic data, go hand in hand
with a confidentiality requirement.

89

A  further  concern  is  the  conservation of obtained  genetic  data  and  its  possible  use  for  other
purposes. This information should not be used  for other  purposes  without  the  consent  of  the
individual.  The  question  of  the  conservation  of  genetic  data  however  remains  open.  In  the
employment context, storage of the information could be useful for later genetic monitoring. 

There  appears  to  be  agreement  in  Europe  that  medical  examinations  have  the  goal  of
examining  current  health  status.  But  in  cases  where  future  health  status  could  pose  a
significant risk to others, a test could be considered.

Further considerations to  be  taken  relate  to the  quality  of genetic  tests,  i.e.  scientific  validity,
reliability and predictive value. Whether genetic testing is the best way for the assessment of
fitness is a subject for discussion;  some  argue  that genetic  or  medical  monitoring are  better-
suited  for  protecting  individuals’  health.  In  any  case,  the  quality  of  the  laboratory  must  be
assured. 

An additional issue to consider is the question of timing. Specifically, this includes the question
whether a test should take place at the pre-employment stage, or whether it should constitute a
part of monitoring when the person is already in the position. 

90

Appendix:

Secretariat of the EGE
==============================

91

92

Secretariat of the European Group on Ethics

Ms Christiane Bardoux

Tel: 32 (0) 2 295 45 47
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65
E-mail: christiane.bardoux@cec.eu.int  

Ms Joelle Bezzan

Tel: 32 (0) 2 296 19 48
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65
E-mail: joelle.bezzan@cec.eu.int 

Ms Marie Chirol

Tel: 32 (0) 2 296 25 84
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65
E-mail: marie.chirol@cec.eu.int  

Ms Patricia Mommens

Tel: 32 (0) 2 296 84 74
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65
E-mail: patricia.mommens@cec.eu.int

Mailing address

European Commission
Group of Policy Advisers
BREY 10/128
B – 1049 – Brussels - Belgium

Office

European Commission
Avenue d’Auderghem 45
B – 1049 – Brussels - Belgium

Web site

http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics

93

94

95

96

