OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS

IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES

TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION

No 17

4th February 2003

Original in English
****************************************************************************************************************************

ETHICAL ASPECTS OF CLINICAL RESEARCH IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

Reference: 
Rapporteurs: 

Request by the European Commission on 29th May 2001
Inez de Beaufort and Yvon Englert

*****************************************************************************************************************************

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE),

Having  regard  to  the  request  of  Romano  Prodi,  President  of  the  European  Commission,  to  the
EGE;

Having regard to the Treaty on European Union as amended by the Treaty of Amsterdam, and in
particular  Article  6  (formerly  Article  F)  of  the  common  provisions,  concerning  the  respect  for
fundamental rights; 

Having regard to the EC Treaty and in particular Article 152 (formerly Art. 129) on public health;

Having  regard  to  the  Charter  of  28  September  2000  on  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European
Union, approved by the European Council in Biarritz on October 14th 2000, in particular Article 1
on  “Human  dignity”,  Article  3  on  the  “Right  to  the  integrity  of  the  person”,  which  refers  to  the
principle of “free and informed consent” and Article 13 asserting freedom of research;

Having regard to the Action Plan Sciences and Society adopted by the Commission in December
2001 and Action 33 concerning the development of ethical review capacity in different regions of
the world;

Having regard to  the  Decision  1513/2002/EC  of the  European  Parliament and  of  the  Council  of
27th June 2002 concerning the sixth Framework Programme for Research and contributing to the
creation of the European Research Area (2002-2006); 

Having regard to the Council Decision of 30th September 2002 adopting a specific programme for
research: “Integrating and strengthening the European Research Area” (2002-2006);

Having regard to the Directive 2001/20/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4th
April  2001  on  good  clinical  practice  in  the  conduct  of  clinical  trials  on  medicinal  products  for
human use;

1

    
Having regard to the Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6th
November 2001 on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use;

Having  regard  to  the  Directive  95/46  EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  24
October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and
the free movement of such data;

Having regard to the Council of Europe’s Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, signed
on  4th  April  1997  in  Oviedo,  in  particular  Article  15  about  freedom  of  research  and  Articles  16
and17 about the protection of persons undergoing research;

Having regard to the Declaration of Helsinki of  the  World  Medical  Association,  adopted  in  1964
and revised in 1975, 1983, 1989, 1996 and 2000;

Having  regard  to  the  International  Ethical  Guidelines  for  biomedical  research  involving  human
subjects of the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences  (CIOMS)  adopted  in
1993 and revised in October 2002;

Having  regard  to  the  guidelines  related  to  the  conduct  of  clinical  trials  published  by  the
International Conference on Harmonisation;

Having regard to the reports and opinions expressed by national ethics instances on that issue,
namely  the  report  of  the  Nuffield  Council  on  Bioethics  (UK,  2002),  the  report  of  the  National
Bioethics Advisory Commission (USA, 2001) and the report of the National Committee on Ethics
(FR, 1993);

Having regard to the Round Table organised by the Group on 1st October 2002 in Brussels with
members  of  the  European  Parliament,  jurists,  philosophers,  scientists,  representatives  of
industries, representatives of religions, representatives of patients’ associations and other groups
of interest, and of international and European organisations (UNESCO, Council of Europe, EMEA,
WTO, WIPO, EPO);

Having regard to the hearings of experts on 19th April 2002, 4th June 2002, 3rd September 2002,
25th October 2002 and 5th November 2002;

Having  regard  to  the  studies  asked  by  the  Group  to  the  Institute  for  Prospective  Technological
Studies (Sevilla, Spain) of the Joint Research Center on “the ethical controversy over the use of
placebo in clinical trials in developing countries: impact on international research guidelines and
scientific literature” and on “Industry-funded clinical trials in developing countries” by Dr. Dolores
Ruiz Ibarreta, Dr. Karine Lheureux and Dr. Emilio Rodriguez-Cerezo;

Having heard the rapporteurs Inez de Beaufort and Yvon Englert;

2

1.  WHEREAS :

BACKGROUND

1.1         

In west European cultures, since the 19th century, clinical research has become an essential step
to  increase  knowledge  regarding  human  health  in  order  to  develop  prevention,  diagnosis  and
treatment  of  disease  and  handicap.    The  existing  codifications  by  national  laws  or  international
texts  concern  mainly  clinical  research  carried  out  for  the  development  of  new  drugs,  but  the
principles and conditions defined in these texts can also be applied to medical research regarding
all other kinds of treatments or prevention.

1.2         

Years of research are necessary before a new drug can be put on the market, with the following
steps:

(cid:1) 

(cid:1) 

the  pre-clinical  phase  which  may  include  in  vitro  studies,  for  instance  on  biochemical
characteristics, on pharmacological properties and toxicity, and the animal studies, including
the use of animal models, to test the potential therapeutic and toxic effects,

the  clinical  phase  involving  human  beings  which  takes  place  only  when  the  previous  steps
have been fulfilled.

1.3         

Clinical  trials  are  an  essential  part  of  medical  research  to  develop  new  treatments  or  new
diagnostic methods.  
Clinical trials phase I are performed with healthy volunteers to test the pharmacology and toxicity
of a new product.  
Clinical trials phase II are performed with a limited number of patients to test the potential effects
of the drug on the disease.  
Clinical trials phase III are performed on a larger number of patients to assess the efficacy and
evaluate the appropriate dosage.
Clinical  trials  phase  IV  are  performed  after  the  product  has  been  commercialised  in  order  to
identify potential rare adverse effects.

1.4         

The evaluation of the efficiency of a new drug is based on the comparison of a group of patients
receiving this new drug with a group receiving another already existing treatment. In the absence
of any existing treatment, the comparison can be carried out with a placebo.
A  new  drug  can  also  be  developed  in  order  to  be  added  to  a  standard  treatment  and  not  to
replace it.  In such a case, the group of patients receiving the new drug in addition to the standard
treatment is compared with a group who receives a placebo in addition to the standard treatment.
Such cases illustrate that to belong to a placebo group in a clinical trial does not necessarily mean
that this group does not receive any treatment.

3

In the case where another treatment already exists, the use of a placebo can also be a way to test
more quickly and with a limited number of participants if a new drug has a specific effect to treat a
disease.  But such a placebo-controlled trial will not answer the question whether this new drug is
more or less efficient than the other existing treatments.  

1.5         

The justification of clinical trials is to acquire knowledge in order to improve healthcare.  Beside
the  benefit  for  healthcare  related  to  the  development  of  new  therapies,  the  implementation  of
clinical  trials  has  also  an  impact  on  the  quality  of  healthcare  and  may  stimulate  transfer  of
technology and improve scientific and medical expertise.  It has often an important impact in the
financing of clinical institutions.
Clinical trials are set up also for commercial goals and can be done to promote marketing.

1.6           

The European Commission has stimulated scientific cooperation with developing countries since
1983, through successive framework programmes, dealing with specific research areas such as
health, agriculture and environment.  Partnerships have been developed not only bi-laterally but
also  including  a  regional  dimension  with  the  creation  of  partnerships  between  developing
countries, involving 123 countries from Asia, ACP1, Latin America and the Mediterranean region.

1.7            

The 6th Framework Programme proposes  a new  strategy,  opening the possibility  for  developing
countries to get EU funding for all the research areas defined in the Programme.  
Furthermore,  the  European  Commission  proposed  in  August  2002  to  initiate  a  long-term
partnership  between  Europe  and  developing  countries  to  join  efforts  to  combat  poverty-linked
diseases such as AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis.  The budget for this “European and Developing
Countries  Clinical  Trials  Partnership”  (EDCTP)  will  be  600  million  Euros,  a  third  provided
respectively by the European Community, the participating countries and industry.

1.8         

Developing countries differ from industrialised countries regarding economic and social contexts.
In  developing  countries,  little  or  no  infrastructure  is  available  for  the  population  at  large,
particularly concerning healthcare services.
In addition, cultural differences may also exist regarding traditions, family or community structures
and moral values.  

1.9         

In  industrialised  countries,  there  is  a  rather  homogeneous  conception  of  what  is  good  scientific
method based on a logical and rational approach, while in other cultures, other medical traditions
may exist, and our approach concerning scientific research may have no equivalent.  Research
activities  include  not  only  a  scientific  dimension  but  also  a  cultural  one  and  this  may  have
consequences especially during ethical evaluation of a clinical trial.

4

1.10       

A  clinical  trial  to  assess  the  validity  of  new  therapeutic  or  diagnostic  products  is  a  long  and
expensive process.  During the last decade, a progressive shift of clinical research occurred from
the  public  to  the  private  sector.    This  implies  that  it  also  shifted  investment  from  research  on
predominantly  tropical  and/or  poverty-related  diseases  which  are  public  health  priorities  to
research on diseases and therapy with high economic return on investment.  The contribution of
the private sector, namely the pharmaceutical industry, has been rapidly growing compared to the
contribution  of  the  public  sector.  Furthermore,  the  implementation  of  clinical  trials  is  more  and
more  often  carried  out  by  intermediary  structures  such  as  Contract  Research  Organisations  or
Site Management Organisations. 

1.11       

There  is  also  a  trend  to  transfer  clinical  trials  to  countries  where  cost  and  constraints  of
regulations  may  be  more  favourable  to  their  implementation,  and  where  the  high  number  of
patients,  and  especially  naïve  patients,  that  is  patients  who  have  never  received  a  treatment,
facilitates  the  recruitment  of  patients  to  be  involved  in  a  clinical  trial.    This  transfer  of  clinical
research to developing countries concerns mainly Phase III and IV trials.

1.12                

One can distinguish on the one hand clinical trials performed in developing countries because the
disease  addressed  by  the  research,  and  the  patient  population  who  could  benefit  from  it,  are
localised  in  these  developing  countries,  including  diseases  which  occur  only  in  developing
countries (like tropical diseases) or diseases which exist also in industrialised countries but which
have a higher morbidity or mortality in developing countries; and on the other hand clinical trials
performed in developing countries for reason of pure convenience. 

1.13       

Health problems specific to developing countries are very often  linked  to  the  social  context and
conditions  of  life  in  these  countries.    Poverty  is  in  fact  the  main  cause  of  “diseases”.    In  the
economic context of developing countries, clinical trials can help to define the best possible use of
limited means.  This cost-benefit effectiveness approach is then an essential part of the protocol,
a preoccupation which is also more and more present in developed countries. 

1.14       

The  clinical  trials  carried  out  in  developing  countries  often  contribute  to  developing  new  drugs
which will be used in industrialised countries but will remain unavailable to developing countries.
Clinical  trials  carried  out  to  develop  new  drugs  for  exclusive  use  in  developing  countries,  like
treatment for tropical diseases, are comparatively rare.

1 ACP : African, Caribbean and Pacific Region

5

                                                                                                                                                           
LEGAL BACKGROUND

(cid:1)  At national level

1.15      National regulations

Many developed countries have their own comprehensive legislative and ethical background that
should  be  taken  into  consideration  in  clinical  trials.   Lack of  similar  efforts  in  the  host  countries
may jeopardise protection of the participants in clinical trials.

(cid:1)  At Community level

1.16      Directive 2001/83/EC

The Directive 2001/83/EC on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use.
The Directive refers to the Helsinki Declaration in its annex I part 4 (B) “All clinical trials shall be
carried  out  in  accordance  with  the  ethical  principles  laid  down  in  the  current  revision  of  the
Declaration of Helsinki”.

Concerning the use of placebo, the Directive specifies: “In general clinical trials shall be done as
‘controlled  clinical  trials’  and  if  possible,  randomised;  any  other  design  shall  be  justified.    The
control  treatment  of  the  trials  vary  from  case  to  case  and  also  will  depend  on  ethical
considerations;  thus  it  may,  in  some  instances,  be  more  pertinent  to  compare  the  efficacy  of  a
new medicinal product with that of an established medicinal product of proven therapeutic value
rather that with the effect of a placebo”.

1.17      Directive 2001/20/EC

The  Directive  2001/20/EC  on  the  implementation  of  Good  Clinical  Practice  in  the  conduct  of
clinical  trials  on  medicinal  products  was  adopted  on  4  April  2001.    It  has  to  be  transposed  by
Member States in national law before May 2003 and implemented before May 2004.

Detailed guidelines for implementing the Directive have to be published by the Commission before
May 2003.  The objectives of the Directive are to define principles of protection for the subjects, to
set Good Clinical Practice for testing medicinal products (including cell and gene therapies).

The  Directive  applies to all  clinical  trials  (phase  I  to  IV)  carried  out  in  the  EU  or  third  countries
which  intend  to  assess  effects  of  medicinal  products.    It  does  not  apply  to  “non-interventional
trials”  like  epidemiological  studies.    The  Directive  applies  to  all  populations  of  patients,  but  with
special provisions regarding children and incapacitated adults unable to give their informed legal
consent.

6

1.18      European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products (EMEA)

The EMEA was established in 1993 by the EU.  The role of EMEA is to provide opinions on the
basis  of  which  the European  Commission  takes  decisions  regarding  marketing authorisation  for
medicinal products.  

When examining the file with the description of the clinical trial performed by the public or private
institution requesting a marketing authorisation  for  a  medical  product,  EMEA evaluates  not  only
the effectiveness, safety and cost of the medical product but also the respecting of Good Clinical
Practice, the granting of informed consent and of approval by ethical committees.  When problems
are identified, namely regarding ethical aspects, EMEA can advise the Commission to refuse the
marketing authorisation or can advise the withdrawal of marketing authorisation already delivered
by Member States.  That is especially important for European companies doing their research in
developing countries.  This information is also made public.  The EMEA intervention happens after
the clinical trial is finalised and presented in the file and not before or during the trial.

1.19       EU competencies

The  EU  has  no  direct  competence  on  the  regulation  of  research  at  large  which  is  a  matter  of
national competencies.  Nevertheless, the EU has competence for the marketing authorisation of
medical products related to the single market.  This authorisation is delivered by the Commission
on the basis of reports made by the EMEA and can be refused in case of non-respect of ethical
principles in the clinical trials.  Furthermore, the EU has a responsibility to guarantee respect of
ethical principles in any EU-funded research project, wherever it takes place.

(cid:1)  At international level

1.20      The International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH)

The ICH, initiated in 1990, is a joint initiative involving both regulators and industry from the EU,
Japan and the US to discuss scientific and technical aspects of product registration.  The purpose
is to maintain a forum of dialogue between all parties and to make recommendations to achieve
greater harmonisation.

Several guidelines are related to clinical trials and address the issue of placebo.  The guideline on
“the choice of control group” (E10)  says:  “Whether a  particular  placebo-controlled  trial  is  ethical
may in some cases, depend on what is believed to have been clinically demonstrated and on the
particular  circumstances  of  the  trials”.    “It  should  be  emphasised  that  use  of  a  placebo  or  no-
treatment control does not imply that the patient does not get any treatment at all”.

1.21       The declaration of Helsinki of the World Medical Association 

The World Medical Association (WMA) is an international organisation representing physicians.
The association, created in 1947, is an independent confederation of the professional associates
from about 70 countries.  Individual physicians can also join the WMA as associate members.
It aims at promoting high standards of medical ethics and provides ethical guidance to physicians
through Declarations and Statements.
The  General  Assembly  of  the  WMA,  which  meets  annually,  is  composed  of  representatives  of
national associations and the associated members. It is the decision-making body of the WMA.

7

The  Declaration  of  Helsinki,  adopted  in  1964  by  the  18th  WMA  General  Assembly,  states  the
ethical  principles  to  be  respected  by  physicians  when  carrying  out  medical  research  involving
human subjects, or human material as identifiable human data.
The Declaration of Helsinki is not legally binding, but it has a recognised moral value and is widely
accepted.
Since 1964, the Declaration has been amended several times. The last version was adopted in
October 2000 in Edinburgh; namely with amendments  relating  to the  use  of placebos  in  clinical
trials, following a huge debate on the issue.
The previous version states that the “best proven treatment” should be given to the control group,
and in the absence of proven treatment, a placebo can be used.
In  this  2000  version,  Art  29  stipulates  that  “the  best  current  treatment”  should  be  given  to  the
control  group  when  testing  a  new  method  and  that  a  placebo  can  be  used  when  no  proven
treatment is available.
One  year  later,  the  WMA  published  an  attempt  at  clarification,  which  can  be  considered  as  a
compromise modifying Art. 29 and specifying the conditions to be fulfilled for the use of placebo
controlled trials when proven treatment exists, namely:

(cid:1)  where a placebo is, for methodological reasons, necessary to determine the efficacy or safety 

of a new method, 

or
(cid:1)  where the trial investigates a minor condition without risk of serious or irreversible harm 

for the patient.

1.22       Convention of the Council of Europe

The  Council  of  Europe  (CoE)  is  an  intergovernmental  organisation  which  aims  at  promoting
human rights protection and democracy in Europe.  The CoE field of activities includes health and
education.  The CoE, created in 1949, is composed today of 44 states, including the 15 member
states of the European Union.  The CoE drafted the Convention of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in 1950, which is legally binding for the 41 members which signed and ratified it.

The “Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Beings with regard
to  the  application  of  Biology  and  Medicine”  known  as  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and
Biomedicine was opened for signature in April 1997 in Oviedo (Spain). 

An  additional  “Protocol  to  the  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine  on  Biomedical
Research”  is  in  preparation.    The  protocol  will  define  the  conditions  to  be  fulfilled  when  human
subjects  are  involved  in  a  research  project  and  address  the  issue  of  research  carried  out  in
countries not party to the Protocol.

1.23       The Council for International Organisations and Medical Sciences (CIOMS)

The Council for International Organisations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) is an international, non-
governmental, non-profit organisation established jointly by WHO and UNESCO in 1949.  CIOMS
represents  a  substantial  proportion  of  the  biomedical  scientific  community.    Its  membership  in
2001  includes  48  international  member  organisations,  representing  many  of  the  biomedical
disciplines,  and  18  national  members  mainly  representing  national  academies  of  sciences  and
medical research councils.

8

The particular contribution of CIOMS in bioethics has been the issuance of international guidelines
for  the  application  of  ethical  principles  in  various  key  areas,  namely  the  International  Ethical
Guidelines  for  Biomedical  Research  Involving  Human  Subjects  (developed  in  conjunction  with
WHO)  published  in  1993.    They  have  been  very  widely  utilised,  particularly  in  developing
countries.    They  have  been  revised  and  updated  and  the  new  version  was  issued  in  October
2002.  

ETHICAL BACKGROUND

Ethical aspects of partnership between industrialised and developing countries

1.24         

Globalisation  concerns  an  increasing  number  of  human  activities,  namely  research  activities
where  projects  involve  parties  not  only  at  national  or  international  level  but  also  at  world-wide
level.
Because  this  globalisation  occurs  in  a  very  heterogeneous  world,  because  extreme  wealth  and
poverty coexist, and injustice is a fact, the relationship between parties is not per se fair and rules
must  be  defined  to  avoid  exploitation  and  increasing  injustice.  Among  the  ethical  issues  to  be
considered, consensus exists on questions like the publication of results (even negative ones), or
the  need  to  address  orphan  diseases  and  poverty-linked  diseases  which  are  found  only  in
developing countries.  But other issues remain controversial namely:

(cid:1)  Under what conditions is the use of a placebo acceptable?
(cid:1)  When testing the efficiency of a new drug, should it be compared always with the best proven 
treatment even when this is usually not available in the country where the trial takes place, or 
should the best available treatment be used?

(cid:1)  Are there universal values and are they applicable whatever is the socio-cultural context?

1.25         

The  legitimacy  of  the  objectives  of  a  clinical  trial  is  related  to  the  analysis  of  its  relevance
regarding health priorities of the partners, the risk/benefit balance for individuals and communities,
and the potential impact on healthcare of the host country.  But the notion of community may be
understood differently (community as citizens of a country, community as members of the same
group within a country or spread between different countries, affected by the same disease, or the
same social conditions).  This may affect the definition of needs and health priority of the so-said
community.

1.26         

The positive impact of a clinical trial on healthcare is first of all the acquisition of new knowledge
but  it  includes  also  the  sharing  of  this  new  knowledge  and  know-how,  the  accessibility  to  new
treatments  and  the  capacity  building  induced  by  the  implementation  of  the  clinical  trial.    But  a
potential negative impact may also occur : the implementation of the clinical trial can disturb the
local pre-existing healthcare system.

9

1.27         

The participation in a clinical trial always implies a certain risk for the participants, either because
they receive a new drug whose potential negative effects may still be unknown or because they
receive  a  placebo  and  are  then  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  the  standard  treatment  and  from  the
potential benefit of the new drug to be tested.

Ethical aspects related to cultural diversity

1.28         

Different  cultures  may  have  different  values.    In  a  paternalistic  or  imperialistic  approach,  the
sponsor of the research tends to impose his own values on the host country.  In contrast, when
the  respect  for  local  tradition  leads  to  relativism  and  non-respect  of  values  considered  as
fundamental in Europe, this implies a risk of double standards.  

1.29         

The  way  information  is  given  to  patients  and  the  procedure  of  obtaining  consent  may  vary
according  to  the  specific  situation  of  the  country  where  a  clinical  trial  takes  place,  namely
regarding  the  level  of  literacy,  the  level  of  scientific  understanding,  the  organisation  of  the
community,  etc.  That  may  influence  the  consent  procedures  regarding  the  involvement  of
persons, in particular women, in a clinical trial.  

1.30         

Different cultures may have different views regarding privacy and personal data.  This may have
consequences  for  the  acceptability  of  certain  aspects  of  research  protocols,  namely  regarding
data collection, and the data subject’s right of access and right to object. 

1.31

The organisation of society may also differ between different parts of the world.  While European
society is characterised by the increasing value of individualism in the search of happiness, but at
the  same  time  has  a  collective  strong  solidarity  at  national  level  for  guaranteeing  access  to
healthcare for all, other societies give more importance to the local community or to the family in a
context of weak national solidarity in relation to access to health care.  

Ethical aspects related to economic differences

1.32         

In principle, the involvement in a  clinical  trial  is  a benevolent  act  and  should  not  be  induced  by
financial  or  other  recompense,  mainly  to  avoid  exploitation.    The  protection  of  participants  in
clinical  trials  in  industrialised  countries  has  been  built  up  over  decades,  according  to  a  given
socioeconomic background.  The strict transposition of such a system of protection to developing
countries, without considering their socioeconomic specificities, will not ensure the same level of

10

protection of the participants.  The protocol cannot ignore the context where the clinical trial will
take  place  and  in  a  context  of  poverty  and  absence  of  healthcare,  the  fact  of  participating  in  a
clinical trial may constitute for the patient the only opportunity to have access to healthcare.  

1.33         

The fact of  carrying out  research  in  a developing  country  implies additional  responsibility of  the
sponsor towards the patients, but also towards the local community where the trials take place.
This responsibility does not end with the end of the clinical trial.

1.34         

The  objective  of  a  clinical  trial  is  often  to  compare  a  new  treatment  to  an  already  established
treatment.    But  this  established  treatment  is  not  always  available  to  all,  and the  term  “available
treatment” can cover very different situations, according to the standard of care.
In the best case, in industrialised countries, the best proven treatment is usually available for the
patients even if expensive or requiring high technology.
In  other  cases,  the best proven  treatment  is  not  accessible  to  the  patients,  who  can  get  a  less
efficient but also less expensive alternative.  In the worst situation, no treatment at all is available
for  the  patients.    In  developing  countries,  some  placebo  trials  were  specifically  built  to  find
cheaper alternative solutions when the best proven treatment could not be available for economic
reasons.  This gave rise to the question of the legitimacy of these trials.
In addition, the trend may exist to use the placebo even when there is another existing treatment,
because the use of a placebo in a clinical trial may be the quickest, cheapest and most efficient
way to test the efficacy of a new drug.   But then it deprives the patients in the control group of the
existing proven treatment.

11

2.  OPINION

The Group submits the following opinion:

2.1.        SCOPE OF THE OPINION

The present opinion considers the ethical aspects of clinical trials carried out within the European
research  programmes  in  developing  countries.    This  gives  rise  to  ethical  questions  specifically
linked to socio-economic inequalities and poverty but also to cultural diversity.  It must be stressed
that cultural diversity is a factor that may influence the practice of clinical trials independently from
socio-economic factors.  Moreover, concepts of industrialised and of developing countries are in
themselves vague as there is continuity from very poor countries to countries with a standard of
living close to developed ones.  The EGE members would like to stress that the huge economic
inequalities of our world are the cause of most of the problems raised in this Opinion. 
This  Opinion  is  aimed  at  providing  help  to  the  Commission  in  the  exercise  of  its  responsibility
regarding  the  implementation  of  EU-funded  research  activities  in  countries  which  culturally  or
economically differ from the West European context. Some aspects of this Opinion may also be
applicable  to  research  involving  cultural  minorities  or  vulnerable  groups  within  industrialised
countries.  It  may  also  be  relevant  for  the  European  Agency  for  the  Evaluation  of  Medicinal
Products.

2.2         GENERAL APPROACH

The  implementation  of  EU  research  programmes  in  developing  countries  should  be  based  on
solidarity,  in  line  with  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  which  proclaims  in  its  preamble  that:
“The Union is founded on the indivisible and universal values of human dignity, freedom, equality
and  solidarity”.    Therefore,  research  activities  involving  human  subjects  cannot  exclusively  be
assimilated  to  an  economic  activity  subject  to  market  rules.    On  the  contrary,  in  the  context  of
solidarity, regarding health as  a public  good,  rather  than  a  commodity,  it needs  to  be  regulated
according to fundamental principles.
The general approach chosen within this Opinion is that the fundamental ethical rules applied to
clinical trials in industrialised countries are to be applicable everywhere.  Even if some difficulties
may arise in their implementation, a weakening of the standards would be in contradiction to the
fundamental principles of human rights and dignity and their universal guarantee and protection.  

The fundamental ethical principles applicable are those already recognized in former Opinions of
the EGE, and more specifically: 
(cid:1) 

the principle of respect for human dignity and the principles of non-exploitation, non-
discrimination and non-instrumentalisation,
the principle of individual autonomy (entailing the giving of free and informed consent, 
and respect for privacy and confidentiality of personal data),
the principle of justice and the principle of beneficence and non-maleficence, namely with
regard to the improvement and protection of health,
the principle of proportionality (including that research methods are necessary to the aims
pursued and that no alternative more acceptable methods are available).

(cid:1) 

(cid:1) 

(cid:1) 

12

These  fundamental  ethical  principles  underlie  the  conditions  to  be  fulfilled  when  implementing
clinical  research  as  defined  in  many  international  guidelines  or  conventions.    These  conditions
concern  the  modalities  of  both  the  ethical  and  scientific  evaluation  of  research  protocols,  the
granting of free and informed consent, the protection of the patients involved and the sharing of
the benefits of research.
These conditions are enforced by law in all EU countries.  But a legal framework does not exist in
every country where EU-funded research is carried out, or is not applicable because of the lack of
means and capacities or appropriate governance systems. 
The Opinion will be focused on the way to deal with particular aspects of research in developing
countries.

SPECIFIC ISSUES RAISED BY DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

2.3         INEQUALITY

The huge gap between industrialised countries and developing countries regarding standards of
living and especially access to healthcare is an example of the inequalities in our world.  Even if
the objectives  and  goals of  scientific  research  cannot  alone  solve  this  unfair  situation,  research
carried out in developing countries should avoid widening this gap even more; on the contrary, it
should  contribute  to  reducing  it.    The  private  or  public  investigators  who  do  their  research  in
developing countries have a moral duty to make a concrete contribution to overcome inequalities.

2.4         PARTNERSHIP

The involvement of all partners, from the funding institutions to the host countries or communities,
is essential at each phase of the research activities, from the definition of the programme and of
the research priorities, to the follow-up after the end of the trials.
The involvement of local scientists from the host country at the very early stage of the planning
and implementation of the research activities is crucial to develop a culture of collaboration which
is different from charity help. Their knowledge of local conditions and traditions is also necessary
to identify local needs.

2.5         GLOBALISATION

In  the  context  of  globalisation  of  research,  the  optimal  protection  of  the  participant  must  be  a
priority no matter where a clinical trial is performed: thus, it should only be carried out in countries
with a less adequate healthcare environment, if very strict justification can be given.    The  more
evident ones would be:

-  The trial aims at addressing specific health conditions of the countries, for instance tropical 

diseases;

-  The trial aims at addressing diseases existing also in industrialised countries but with a 

specifically high incidence in developing countries.

-  The trial aims at developing treatments having a specific interest for the country (for instance, 

a new treatment cheaper than those already existing);

13

2.6         HANDLING DISAGREEMENT

Both the values and ethical principles of the funding agencies and of the host country have to be
considered.  They are explicitly or implicitly reflected in regulatory texts or in specific customs. In
the case of conflicting views between parties, every effort should be made to negotiate solutions
but without compromising the respect of fundamental ethical principles. Human rights standards
are to be respected explicitly in all these countries.  If that does not succeed, then each party must
have the right to veto.

2.7         FREE AND INFORMED CONSENT

The  involvement  of  people  with  knowledge  of  the  local  conditions  and  traditions  and  able  to
defend the interest of those affected by the project is necessary to guarantee the most appropriate
procedures of informing of the potential participants in a clinical trial.
According to the local situation, it may be appropriate to seek agreement on the implementation of
a research project from persons representative of  or  invested  with  a  certain  authority  within  the
community, or the family. However, free and informed  consent  always has  to  be  given by  each
individual involved in a trial.

2.8         ETHICAL COMMITTEE

The  scientific  and  ethical  evaluation  of  the  research  protocol  should  be  carried  out  by  ethical
committees  from  all  countries  involved.    Host  countries  need  to  have  a  legal  and  ethical
framework in order to take part in  the  clinical  trial  evaluation effectively  and  independently.  The
Group strongly supports EU initiatives to build local ethical committees in the host  countries.    It
should be considered as a priority in terms of capacity building. When no local ethics committee
exists, then the evaluation should be done by a mixed committee involving representatives from
both EU Member States and host countries.  It is essential that the members of this committee are
independent  and  include  persons  representing  patients’interests.    If  it  is  not  possible  to  involve
such  an  independent  local  representative  in  the  evaluation,  then  no  clinical  trial  should  be
implemented in the country.

2.9         EVALUATION

In the evaluation of a research protocol, special attention should be paid to the following issues:
- 
the relevance of the research to be carried out in a developing country.  Specific attention 
should be paid when the objective of the clinical trial does not comply with health priorities of 
the host country;
the risk/benefit ratio at the individual level, as well as at the community level;
the impact of the project after its completion.  The expected benefits for the local community 
where the trial takes place should be specified, particularly regarding future access to the 
potential new treatment, technology transfer and capacity building;
the involvement of the community at various steps of the process (definition of objectives, 
elaboration of protocol and of consent modalities, etc…)

- 
- 

- 

The Group notes that wherever research is carried out, the conditions of financing a project and
the  recompense  of  the  professionals  involved  in  clinical  trials  should  be  transparent  in  order  to
avoid undue pressure or risk of bias. 

14

2.10       PLACEBO

The use of placebos should be regulated in developing countries in principle by the same rules as
in European countries.  Any exception must be justified: an obvious one is when the primary goal
of the clinical trial is to try to simplify or to decrease the costs of treatment for countries where the
standard treatment is not available for logistic reasons or inaccessible because of the cost.  It may
thus be justified to derogate from the rule of best proven treatment.  The justification of using a
placebo  must  be  clearly  demonstrated  in  the  research  protocol  submitted  to  the  ethical
committees and especially approved by the local committee.
Nevertheless, two members of the Group consider that the use of a placebo for  the  purpose of
developing  low  cost  treatment  could  mean  accepting  a  “double  standard”  for  poor  and  rich
countries.  Thus research in developing countries could lead to a vicious circle: on the one hand,
clinical  trials  in  developing  countries  contribute  to  developing  new  treatments  which  can  be
patented in rich countries and are then unaffordable for poor countries, and on the other hand the
non-availability of treatment in the poorest countries is due partly to the patent costs.

2.11       PROTECTION OF PATIENTS

The standards of insurance, liability and indemnity insurance for the participants in a clinical trial
and their families must provide the same kind of protection wherever a trial takes place.

2.12       SUPPLY OF TREATMENT DURING THE TRIALS

In industrialised countries, the reference treatment used in a clinical trial may be provided by the
health care services, while the new drug being tested is provided by the sponsor.  When a trial is
implemented  in  a  country  or  a  community  where  patients  cannot  benefit  from  the  standard
treatment because of the cost, it is then up to the sponsor to provide it.

2.13       SUPPLY OF TREATMENT AFTER THE END OF THE TRIAL

In industrialised countries, free supply of a proven beneficial new drug to all the participants of a
trial after the trial is ended is the rule as long as it is not yet available through the normal health
care  system.    In  developing  countries,  the  same  rule  must  be  applicable  even  if  this  implies
supplying the drug for a lifetime if necessary.   Moreover, there  should be an obligation  that  the
clinical trial benefits the community that contributed to the development of the drug.   This can be
e.g. to guarantee a supply of the drug at an affordable price for the community or under the form
of capacity building.  The protocol of clinical trials must specify who will benefit, how and for how
long. In order to avoid limitations due to patent rights when the research is carried out mainly with
public funding, the results produced should be regarded as falling within the public domain, or else
a system of compulsory licences for applications in developing countries should be considered, as
already stressed by the Group in its previous opinion n° 162.

2  Opinion  on  the  ethical  aspects  of  patenting  inventions  involving  human  stem  cells  published  on  7th  May  2002,
point  2.9:  “The  EGE  stresses  the  fact  that  it  is  the  responsibility  of  the  states  to  establish  legal  procedure  for  the
delivery of complulsory licence and to examine if fair access to health care justifies such a procedure.”

15

                                                     
2.14       INFORMATION OF RESULTS

Scientists, doctors and participants involved in a clinical trial should be informed of the results of
the trial. Negative results also must be published and made accessible.  More generally, the new
knowledge  acquired  by  a  research  project  in  a  developing  country  must  be  made  efficiently
accessible  to  the  scientific  community  and  to  the  general  population  of  the  country  where  the
research  took  place.  The  role  played  by  local  scientists  and  clinicians  should  be  adequately
recognized in publications and patents.

2.15       CONCLUSION

The  funding  of  research  devoted  to  solving  health  problems  that  are  specifically  acute  in
developing  countries  has  a  value  in  itself  in  terms  of  solidarity.    The  Group  welcomes  the  EU
policy of funding research in developing countries to fight against poverty-linked diseases.

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies

The Chairperson: Göran Hermerén

The Members:

Nicos C. Alivizatos

Inez de Beaufort

Rafael Capurro

Yvon Englert

Catherine Labrusse-Riou 

Anne Mc Laren

Linda Nielsen 

Pere Puigdomenech Rosell

Stefano Rodota

Günter Virt 

Peter Whittaker

16

