IP/03/273 

Brussels, 24 February 2003 

Statement  by  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in 
Science  and  New  Technologies  on  advertising 
genetic tests via the Internet 

The purpose of this statement is to alert civil society and decision-makers on 
the problems raised by advertising of genetic tests via the Internet. 

There  is  a  proliferation  of  Internet-based  offers  of  genetic  tests  aimed 
especially  at  establishing  fatherhood  as  well  as  tests  for  predisposition  to 
several  diseases  -  heart  diseases,  diabetes,  etc.    Advertising  is  getting 
increasingly  aggressive  and  pervasive,  also  in  Europe;  in  some  countries  it 
can  even  be  found  in  popular  chain  stores,  service  stations,  highway 
restaurants and television. 

Mass  marketing  of  genetic  tests  raises  several  serious  problems  in  ethical,  social 
and  legal  terms,  which  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New 
Technologies considers to require urgent attention.  The information currently being 
offered  is  likely  to  be  misleading  and  incomplete,  particularly  in  view  of  the  limited 
level  of  predictability  of  diseases  linked  to  test  results  in  the  case  of  multigenic 
characters.  Often, there are not sufficient guarantees that genetic data sent for such 
tests  have  been  collected  in  compliance  with  the  regulations  applying  to  data 
subjects'  consent  -  with  particular  regard  to  paternity  tests.    Genetic  tests  can  be 
harmful  without  proper  advice  and  counselling ,  under  Article  12  of  Council  of 
Europe's Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, lawfulness of genetic tests 
is  also  made  conditional  upon  "appropriate  genetic  counselling".    The  European 
Group on Ethics stated in its Opinion Nr 6 on ethical aspects of prenatal diagnosis 
(20th February 1996) : « Careful genetic counselling, both before and after the test is 
an integral part of the test and should not be separated from sampling and testing ».  
Databases of genetic test results could be used to discriminate against some groups 
of persons. 

Consequences of genetic testing for both individuals and society should be assessed 
carefully.    Given  the  peculiar  features  of  genetic  data,  fundamental  rights  may  be 
violated,  in  particular  equality  rights.    Both  individuals’  health  and  confidentiality  of 
health data may be jeopardised.  Advertising of genetic tests tends to convert them 
into commodities and to give rise to a demand for genetic testing which may result 
into disruption of social and personal conflicts.   

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies intends to work on 
these issues in the future.  An Opinion on the ethical aspects of genetic testing in the 
work place is in preparation. 

Further information :  
http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics 

Reijo KEMPPINEN : 
Christiane Bardoux : 

02.295 33 58 
02.296 25 84  

 
 
 
  
 
 
