OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS

IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES

TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION

No 18

Original in English

Final – 28th July 2003

****************************************************************************************************************************

ETHICAL ASPECTS OF GENETIC TESTING IN THE WORKPLACE

Reference: 

Initiative of the Group

Rapporteurs: 

Peter Whittaker and Nicos C. Alivizatos

*****************************************************************************************************************************

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE),

Having  regard  to  the  Treaty  on  European  Union  as  amended  by  the  Treaty  of  Nice,  and  in
particular Article 6 of the common provisions, concerning the respect for fundamental rights;

Having  regard  to  the  EC  Treaty  and  in  particular  Article  137  concerning  the  working  conditions
and health and safety at work;

Having  regard  to  the  Charter  on  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European  Union,  approved  by  the
European  Council  in  Biarritz  on  October  14th  2000  and  proclaimed  solemny  in  Nice  by  the
European Parliament, the Council and the Commission on December 7th 2000, in particular Article
8 on the "Protection of personal data", Article 15 on the "Freedom to choose an occupation and
right  to  engage  in  work",  Article  21  prohibiting  discrimination  based,  among  others,  on  genetic
features, and Article 31 on "Fair and just working conditions";

Having  regard  to  the  Directive  95/46/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  24
October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and
the free movement of such data;

Having  regard  to  the  Directive  2000/78/EC  of  the  European  Council  of  27  November  2000
establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation;

1

    
Having regard to the Directive 2002/14/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11
March  2002  establishing  a  general  framework  for  informing  and  consulting  employees  in  the
European Community;

Having regard to the Council of Europe’s Recommendation R(89)2 of 1989 on the protection of
personal data used for employment purposes;

Having regard to the Council of Europe’s Recommendation R(92)3 of 1992 on genetic testing and
screening for health care purposes and, in particular, Principles 6 and 8, allowing genetic testing
and screening only exceptionally and the collection and processing of personal data thereof only
for the purposes of healthcare, diagnosis and disease prevention;

Having  regard  to  the  Council  of  Europe’s  Recommendation  (97)5  of  1997  on  the  protection  of
medical  data  and,  in  particular,  Principle  4.9  providing  that  the  collection  and  processing  of
genetic data should in principle only be permitted for health reasons;

Having regard to the Council of Europe’s Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, signed
on 4th April 1997 in Oviedo, in particular Article 11 on "Non-Discrimination" and Article 12 on the
"Predictive genetic tests";

Having  regard  to  the  International  Labor  Office  (ILO)  Code  of  Practice  on  the  Protection  of
Workers’ Personal Data (1997) and, in particular, Article 3.20 providing that “genetic screening in
relation to work is a disproportionate infringement of individual rights” and that “current scientific
knowledge is not sufficient to warrant its use for an occupational health purpose”.

Having  regard  to  the  Round Table  organised  by  the  Group  on  6th  March  2000  in  Brussels  with
members  of  the  European  Parliament,  jurists,  philosophers,  scientists,  representatives  of
employees and employers, representatives of religions, representatives of patients’ associations
and other groups of interest, and of international and European organisations (UNESCO, Council
of Europe,WHO, OECD);

Having regard to the hearings of experts in Brussels on 18th March, 15th April and 17th June 2003,
and in Athens on 27th May 2003;

Having heard the rapporteurs Peter Whittaker and Nicos C. Alivizatos;

2

1.  WHEREAS :

DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Opinion:

(a)  “undertaking” means a public or private enterprise, carrying out an economic activity, whether

or not operating for gain, which is located within the territory of a member State;

(b)  “workplace” means a unit of business defined in accordance with national law and practice,
whether in the public or in the private sector, located within the territory of a Member State,
where  an  economic  activity  is  carried  out  on  an  ongoing  basis  with  human  and  material
resources;

(c)  “employer”  means  the  natural  person  or  legal  entity,  whether  public  or  private,  party  to
employment  contracts  or  employment  relationships  with  employees,  in  accordance  with
national  law  and  practice;  moreover,  the  term  employer  comprises  employment  agencies,
temporary employment agencies, personnel selection consultants and  agencies that dispose
of employees to other natural or legal entities (“personnel lending”).

(d)  “employee” means any person who, in the Member State concerned, is protected as a worker
or as an employee under national law and practice; moreover, the term employee comprises
candidates for a post whatsoever, as well as former employees;

(e)  “genetic  testing”  in  this  context  means  the  use  of  a  scientific  test  to  obtain  information  on
some  aspects  of  the  genetic  status  of  a  person,  indicative  of  a  present  or  future  medical
problem.  In the context of employment, "genetic testing" incorporates "genetic screening" and
"genetic monitoring";

(f)  “genetic screening” in this context means the use of a scientific test to determine whether a

person possesses particular variant forms of one or more genes in his/her genome;

(g)  “genetic  monitoring”  in  this  context  means  the  examination,  at  regular  intervals,  for
chromosomal  abnormalities  in  samples  of  cells  from  a  person  who  may  be  at  risk,  in  their
employment, of exposure to agents which cause genetic damage.

3

(h)  “personal  data”  in  this  context  refers  to  data,  however  obtained,  containing  information  that
might  give  an  indication  of  either  the  present  health  or  predicted  future  health  status  of  a
person.

SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND

1.1  Genetic Testing

1.1.1  Introduction

A person’s DNA comprises the genetic information that, within the constraints imposed by all
the  environmental  influences  to  which  that  person  is  exposed,  governs  the  growth,
development and resulting characteristics of that person.  It is becoming increasingly easy to
obtain information regarding particular aspects of someone’s genetic status by testing for the
presence  of  particular  variant  forms  of  genes  or  by  microscopic  examination  of  their
chromosomes.  The information obtained from such genetic tests may sometimes be used to
anticipate the onset of certain genetically determined diseases and to initiate appropriate early
therapy or other anticipatory action.  Genetic testing is also being used at the present time, in
the investigation of crime and in paternity identification. The predictive value of some genetic
information  means,  however,  that  some  insurance  companies  would  like  to  access  this,  in
order to obtain what they believe to be a more accurate assessment of risk for life and health
insurance  purposes.    This  Opinion  focuses  in  particular  on  employers’  interest  in  genetic
testing  as  a  way  to  predict  an  employee’s  future  health  or  their  susceptibility  to  particular
hazards in the working environment (genetic screening).  They might also wish to monitor the
genetic status of an employee who is at risk of exposure to agents known to cause genetic
damage (genetic monitoring).

1.1.2. Non-DNA based Genetic Screening

The definition of genetic screening need not be restricted to tests  carried  out directly  on  an
individual’s DNA.  Many genes are coded instructions for making particular proteins.  Others
may regulate the timing or quantity of protein synthesised.  Consequently it may be possible
in some cases to access indications of genetic status by measuring the activity of a protein or
some of its products. For the purposes of this Opinion, any test that evaluates specific genes
or  gene  products  that  may  be  indicators  of  a  person’s  genetic  status  are  considered  to  be
genetic tests.

1.1.3.   Family Medical Histories

Family  medical  histories  can  give  an  indication  of  possible  genetic  status  with  regard  to
susceptibility  to  some  diseases  and  are  routinely  used  by  some  insurance  companies  for
persons  applying  for  health  insurance.    In  so  far  as  family  medical  histories  can  provide
information on a person’s genetic status, which may have a predictive value for future health

4

as significant as a laboratory performed genetic test, these are included within our definition of
genetic tests.

1.2 Applications of genetic testing in the context of employment

1.2.1.   Genetic Screening as an Indicator of future health

It  is  clear  that  a  person’s  genetic  constitution  plays  a  role  in  their  susceptibility  to  a  variety  of
diseases.  That is not to say that genes are the sole determinant of disease susceptibility as this
may  be  modulated  by  environmental,  lifestyle,  dietary  and  perhaps  other  serendipitous  factors.
Nevertheless,  it  is  possible  that  investigation  of  an  individual’s  genetic  constitution  for  the
presence or absence of particular gene variants might provide some indication of the likelihood of
the individual contracting, in the future, a particular disease.

Employers,  either  current  or  prospective,  could  have  an  interest  in  the  results  of  such  genetic
screening in so far as these might be a predictor of the future health of an employee, particularly if
they were to imply possible levels of future absenteeism or low work rate which might impact on
profitability.  An employee who develops heart disease, for example, would certainly be likely to
require periods of absence from work and, in certain occupations, might not be able to sustain a
normal  work  rate.    There  is  also  the  possibility  that  sudden  onset  of  a  disease  condition  might
result in a hazard for the employee, other employees or the public.  An employer could use the
results of such tests to exclude job applicants on the basis of predicted future health.
This type of genetic testing, where there is no reason to suspect that the employee might possess
any particular genetic constitution, is generally referred to as genetic screening.

1.2.2.     Genetic Screening as an indicator of susceptibility to occupational hazards

Employers could also have an interest in whether the genetic profile of an employee might endow
them with greater or lesser susceptibility to occupational hazards, such as the presence of toxic,
mutagenic or carcinogenic materials in the workplace environment at levels below those that are
recognized as acceptable.  Variants of genes that affect the metabolism of such genotoxic agents
can  result  in  variations  in  individual’s  ability  to  activate  or  inactivate  these.    Other  genes  may
control  the  repair  of  genetic  damage.   Occupational  factors  have  been  shown  to  be  associated
with  10%  of  cases  of  adult  asthma.    Asthma  is  a  polygenic  disease  in  which  many  gene-
environment  interactions  are  involved.    Other  diseases  having  an  occupational  component  and
with a known genetic basis include beryllium allergy and chronic  obstructive pulmonary  disease
resulting from (cid:1)-1-antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency.

An employer might wish to use such information to deploy workers in areas appropriate to their
particular genetic make up or to exclude them from employment.  

Information  from  this  type  of  genetic  screening  might  also  be  of  value  to  the  employee.    Being
aware of the likely level of their own susceptibility to a particular workplace hazard would permit
them to make informed decisions with regard to the type of work they would seek for their own
long-term health and safety.

5

1.2.3.     Genetic Monitoring

Even  in  the  best  regulated  employment  environment,  it  may  not  be  possible  to  ensure  total
elimination of the presence of all traces of chemicals or irradiation that could damage a person’s
genetic  material.    In  such  circumstances  it  is  possible  to  monitor  cells  of  a  potentially  exposed
person for genetic damage. Such tests may impact not only on the well-being of the individual, but
also  on  the  next  generation.    The  results  of  genetic  monitoring  could  reveal  a  hitherto
unappreciated risk to health and hence is of public health relevance.   In this Opinion this type of
genetic testing is referred to as genetic monitoring.

1.3         Genes and Disease

1.3.1      Monogenic and Polygenic Diseases

Although there are many diseases with a recognized genetic component resulting from a defect in a single
gene (monogenic diseases), as a general rule the incidence of such diseases is low.  Monogenic diseases
include cystic fibrosis, sickle cell anaemia, Huntington’s Disease and haemophilia.

Cystic fibrosis and sickle cell anaemia are examples of autosomal recessive diseases, where the relevant
genes are carried on one of the 22 pairs of human chromosomes that are not sex-specific.  This means
that a copy of the defective gene must be inherited from both parents if the disease is to be manifest.  A
person carrying a normal copy of the gene from one parent and a defective copy from the other are carriers
of the disease gene but do not usually manifest symptoms of the disease.

Huntington’s Disease is an example of an autosomal dominant disease.  In this case only a single
copy of the defective gene coming from either parent is required for development of the disease.
Haemophilia is an example of a  disease  resulting  from  a defect  in  an X-linked gene.    The  sex-
specific chromosome pair comprises two X chromosomes (female) or an X and a Y chromosome
(male).    As  males  have  only  a  single  X  chromosome,  they  are  more  likely  to  develop  such  a
disease  than  females  with two  X  chromosomes,  as the  recessive gene  variant on one  of the  X
chromosomes  will  not  be  expressed  in  the  presence  of  the  normal  gene  on  the  other  X
chromosome.
In  contrast  to  the  above  examples  of  diseases  resulting  from  defects  in  a  single  gene,  other
human diseases with a genetic component are thought to result from interactions between several
genes (polygenic diseases).  The incidence of some polygenic diseases is very high.  In most of
these  cases  the  genetic  basis  is  incompletely  understood  and  is  complicated  by  influences  of
environment, diet and lifestyle.  Examples of such polygenic diseases are heart disease, several
cancers and some allergies.

1.3.2      Factors affecting development of hereditary disease

The  possession  of  one  or  more  genetic  defects  does  not  necessarily  dictate  that  the  person
possessing the defect  will develop the disease.  For example, a woman with the BRCA1 breast
cancer  susceptibility  gene  has  an  80%  risk  of  developing  breast  cancer  by  age  65.    The
“expressivity” of a genetic defect describes the different severities of disease from which various
possessors of the defect may suffer.  Both penetrance and expressivity, as well as the timing of
disease onset, may be affected by environmental factors, life style or the presence of a range of
other genes.

6

1.4       Methodology for Genetic Testing

1.4.1      Methodology for Genetic Screening

Defective versions of a gene may be altered only very slightly in DNA sequence from the normal
version  of  the  gene.    Genetic  screening  aims  to  identify  such  small  changes  in  the  gene  in
question.  Only a very small amount of DNA is required for genetic screening.  As an example, the
DNA region required is usually amplified thousands of times using the polymerase chain reaction
(PCR).  A fluorescent label is then attached to the amplified DNA.  The fluorescence-labelled DNA
is then passed through a filter to which is attached a small length of DNA (the “probe”) containing
a sequence characteristic of the version which is being screened for.  If the version in question is
present  in  the  fluorescent  amplified  DNA  then  this  will  bind  to  the  probe,  showing  up  as
fluorescence on the filter.  By attaching several different probes at different points on the filter it is
possible  to  screen  for  the  presence  of  several  different  versions  of  the  gene  at  the  same  time.
Developments  in  DNA  microarray  technology  are  likely  to  make  it  possible  to  screen  for  large
numbers of genes with variant forms simultaneously.

Where a genetic screen involves identification of a protein altered in concentration as a result of a
particular  defective  gene,  the  strategy  used  varies  with  the  protein  in  question.    It  may  be
recognised  using  electrophoretic  identification,  an  antibody  probe  or  by  an  enzyme  assay  for
example.

1.4.2      Methodology for Genetic Monitoring

In contrast to genetic screening, genetic monitoring usually involves microscopic examination of
the karyotypes (chromosome patterns) of white blood cells.  Indication of unacceptable levels of
exposure  to  genotoxic  agents  comes  from  observations  of  changes  in  chromosome  structures
including  chromosome  breakage, 
inversion  or  deletion  of  sections  of  chromosomes  or
translocation  of  a  part  of  a  chromosome  to  a  different  chromosome.    Recently  developed
technology permits the observation of quite small alterations in chromosome structures.  

1.5       Validity, Reliability and Predictability of Genetic Tests

1.5.1      Validity of Genetic Tests

At  the  present  time,  very  few  genetic  tests  are  available  that  give  information  to  either  an
employer  or  an  employee  which  could  validly  be  used  in  the  context  of  decisions  concerning
employment.  It is likely that this situation may change in the future although it is difficult to predict
the pace of such change.  Where employment is linked to health or life insurance, employers may
come  under  pressure  from  insurance  companies  to  implement  genetic  screening  to  assess  the
level  of  risk  to  which  the  employee  might  be  exposed.    Validity  of  a  genetic  test  would  require
demonstration of 

1)  its relevance to health protection of workers,  

2)  the reliability and reproducibility of the test and

7

3)  the level of predictive value for the test.

In some countries, there are statutory bodies that may be asked to rule on the validity of genetic
tests in particular circumstances.

1.5.2  Relevance of Genetic Tests

At  the  present  time,  it  is  difficult  to  make  a  case  for  any  genetic  tests  to  be  carried  out  as
indicators  of  future  health  in  terms  of  their  relevance  to  employment.    Genetic  screening  for
susceptibility to workplace environmental hazards clearly has some precautionary relevance but in
many cases the link between a particular genetic status and susceptibility to a particular hazard
has only a theoretical basis at present.
In the general debate there have been exaggerated beliefs about the predictive value of genetic
tests,  perhaps  based  on  the  concept  of  genetic  determinism,  which  have  been  proved  to  lack
foundation. On the other hand, where there is a possible risk of genetic damage to an employee
resulting from exposure to workplace contaminants, genetic monitoring for chromosomal changes
resulting from this exposure may have a very clear relevance for the health of an employee.

1.5.3      Reliability of Genetic Tests

In such a sensitive area, it is obviously extremely important that procedures for genetic testing are
as  reliable  as  possible,  as  provision  of  incorrect  information  to  an  employer  or  employee  could
have  far  reaching  consequences.    All  stages  of  a  scientifically  satisfactory  testing  procedure
should have built in negative and positive controls to ensure the reliability of the test result.  Good
laboratory  practice  would  be  observed  at  all  times,  including  detailed  documentation  of
procedures and results.  Even when testing procedures are optimised, false negatives and false
positives will emerge and validation procedures for the tests may be required.

1.5.4      Predictive value of Genetic Tests

Even for monogenic diseases, predictive value of genetic testing may be limited.  There is always
a  possibility  that  the  disease  in  question  might  not  manifest  itself  during  the  working  life  of  the
individual and it is not always possible to predict the severity of the future disease.

The situation is even more complex where diseases with a polygenic basis are concerned.  At the
present time it is virtually impossible accurately to predict, using genetic tests, either whether the
disease will develop at all or, if it does, its timing and severity.  Even if the genetic basis of such
diseases becomes fully understood, environmental and lifestyle factors, which may themselves be
unpredictable, will limit the predictability of disease development.

8

Testing  protocols  that  are  less  than  100%  accurate  (most  of  the  cases)  will  reduce  predictive
value still further.  False negatives would result in possible exposure of a susceptible individual to
unacceptable  levels  of  occupational  hazard  whilst  false  positives  could  result  in  unjustified
exclusion of non-susceptible individuals from employment.

1.6. The Practice: Employer Utilisation Of Genetic Testing

It  is  far  from  clear  what  is  the  actual  present  and  anticipated  usage  of  genetic  testing  by
employers.  There has been more interest in genetic testing in the United States than in Europe.
This  appears  to  be  related  to  the  more  widespread  practice  in  the  USA  than  in  Europe  for
employers  to  contribute  to  health  insurance.  Perhaps  for  this  reason  there  have  been  more
studies of  genetic  testing  in  the  workplace  in  the  USA.    The  results  of  such  surveys  should  be
viewed with caution as some studies have shown that some of the employers  surveyed did not
have a full understanding of what a genetic test was.

1.6.1      Genetic Testing in Employment in Europe

Increasing  globalisation  in  industry  and  trade  suggest  that  U.S.  models  for  health  insurance  in
employment  might  start  to  apply  in  Europe.    In  this  situation  it  is  probable  that  there  might  be
pressure  to  widen  preemployment  medical  examinations  to  include  genetic  tests.    A  study  of
genetic  testing  in  the  workplace  carried  out  by  the  School  of  Health  and  Related  Research  at
Sheffield University suggests that the surveys that have been carried out in Europe have tended
to ask employers whether they are carrying out genetic tests.  In a situation where the technology
is  not  widely  available,  it  is  hardly  surprising  that  very  few  examples  of  genetic  testing  in  the
workplace  could be  found.   It  might  have  been  preferable  to  have  asked employers  about  their
attitudes to genetic testing in the future.

As far as can be determined at present, there is still only the single case of genetic screening in
the  workplace  previously  referred  to  in  reports  from  the  Nuffield  Council  on  Bioethics  and  the
Human Genetics Advisory Committee in the United Kingdom.  This is the screening of aircrew by
the UK Ministry of Defence for sickle cell trait.  The worry has been that carriers of the sickle cell
gene might be adversely affected by low oxygen pressures in an aircraft.  This strategy has been
criticised on the basis that it is not founded on sound evidence and also that it could be viewed as
discriminatory in view of the fact that there are much greater numbers of sickle cell allele carriers
in the Afro-Caribbean population than in the general population.  The UK Ministry of Defence is
reported to have discontinued this practice. 
A survey carried out by the Institute of Directors in the UK in August 2000 recorded that 2 out of
353  directors  reported  that  their  companies  routinely  used  genetic  tests.    A  further  4  directors
stated  that  genetic  tests  were  used  by  their  companies,  but  only  if  they  were  concerned  about
specific employees.  The particular types of genetic tests used were not recorded.  The report also
sought information on directors’ attitudes to genetic screening for particular reasons.  34% of 353
directors approved of genetic screening for the likelihood of developing heart disease as long as
the  employee  consented.    A  further  8%  would  be  in  favour  of  compulsory  testing  if  it  was
considered to be in the employee’s best interests.  50% approved of genetic tests, with employee
consent, to see whether employees were at risk of developing an occupation-related disease due
to exposure in the workplace.  A further 16% thought that this should be compulsory.

9

1.6.2.     Genetic Testing In Employment In USA

In the 1970s, the US Air Force Academy did not permit sickle cell gene carriers to participate in
pilot  training.    Subsequently,  courts  have  found  that  tests  for  sickle  cell  trait  disproportionally
impact  on  African-Americans  and  many  states  now  prohibit  employers  from  testing  for  the
disease.  A 1991 survey of Genetic Monitoring and Screening in the Workplace carried out by the
US Congress Office of Technology Assessment examined both practices and attitudes.  Only 1%
of company health officers at that time reported that their company had a formal policy either on
preemployment genetic screening or on genetic monitoring.  Despite this, a majority of personnel
and health officers suggested that their companies considered the use of genetic screening tests
for  job  applicants  as  generally  acceptable  to  inform  the  latter  of  their  level  of  susceptibility  to
workplace hazards.  Well over one third of both health officers and personnel officers felt that it
would  be  acceptable  to  exclude  employees  with  increased  susceptibility  to  risk  situations.
Surprisingly, a majority of both felt that it would be unacceptable to monitor chromosomal changes
associated with workplace exposure.  The survey showed that 1% of companies claimed to have
used  genetic  screening  to  identify  persons  with  increased  health  risks.    12%  of  companies
reported genetic monitoring or screening of employees.  Most of these involved genetic monitoring
in companies where workers might be exposed to chemicals or ionising radiation.

With  the enormously  expanded  knowledge  of the  human  genome  and  improvements  in  genetic
technology  it  is  likely  that  usage  and  potential  usage  of  genetic  testing  in  the  USA  will  have
expanded  significantly  since  that  survey.   According  to  a 1996  poll  of  members  of  families  with
perceived genetic risk carried out by Georgetown University, 13% had been dismissed from their
jobs  because  of  this  perceived  risk.    A  1998  survey  by  the  American  Management  Association
suggested that 10% of employers routinely test employees for genetic predispositions to diseases
and that this figure is growing.

In 2001 the US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) settled its first court action
involving  workplace  genetic  screening  against  the  Burlington  Northern  Santa  Fe  Railway.    This
company had carried out genetic screening without the knowledge or consent of its employees.
The genetic testing had been carried out in response to claims from some employees for work-
related injuries based on carpal-tunnel syndrome.  At least one worker had been threatened with
dismissal for non-provision of a blood sample.  EEOC required that the company completely and
immediately  stop  its  programme  of  genetic  testing  and  asserted  that  it  would  “respond
aggressively  to  any  evidence  that  employers  are  asking  for  or  using  genetic  tests  in  a  manner
which violates the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990”.

10

LEGAL BACKGROUND

1.7. 

Introduction

As  a  general  rule,  standing  instruments  at  national,  community  and  international  level    do  not
specifically  address  the  issue  of    genetic  testing  at    the  workplace.  While  there  exist  rules
purporting to forbid such testing for reasons other than  health care  and  to prohibit discrimination
thereof, there are no binding provisions  barring  genetic screening in the employment sector and
addressing the threats that  such screening  may constitute  for both the privacy and the dignity of
the  weakest  party  involved,  that  is  workers  and  employees.    On  the  other  hand,  save  some
scattered  regulations,  there  exist  no  special  rules  on  the  collection  and  processing  of  genetic
personal data.    The lack of adequate protection in this field may hurt trust, mutual respect and
professionalism  in  the  relationship  between  employers  and  employees,  which  could  adversely
affect not only the latter, but also employers and the business as a whole.

1.8.       At national level

Some Member States have enacted rules on human genetics:
- 

In France, a 2002 amendment to the code civil and to the code pénal prohibits discrimination
based on one’s  genetic  characteristics  or  on  predictive  genetic  tests  “having  as  an  object  a
disease which has not yet manifested or a genetic predisposition to a disease”.
In a similar way, in Sweden,  standing legislation  requires that genetic testing may only take
place if it has a medical aim or serves a research purpose.
In Finland, a 2001 law  provides that employers shall not require employees to participate in
genetic  testing  either  at  the  time  of    recruitment  or  during  employment  ,  nor  do  employers
have the right  to obtain information as to whether  an employee has undergone such testing.
In  Denmark  legislation  from  1996  regulates  the  Use  of  Health  Information  on  the  Labour
Market.  The aim is to ensure that health checks focus on the actual/present health conditions
and that those conditions are relevant to the employee's work.
Thus  the  Act  widely  limits  the  employer's  possibilities  to  ask  potential  employees  for  health
information including information based on genetic testing.
The employer is for example not  allowed  to  collect  information  concerning  the  probability of
the  employee  suffering  from  diseases  in  the  future,  but  is  for  example  allowed  to  obtain
information  about  the  employee's  health  if  conditions  in  the  working  environment  make  it
reasonable and desirable in relation to the employee himself or other employees.
In  Austria,  both  genetic  screening  and    the  collection,  demand,  acceptance  or  any  other
utilisation of  genetic data on the employees by the employers are explicitly prohibited.

- 

- 

- 

- 

-  Restrictions  to  the  collection  and  processing  of  genetic  data  at  the  workplace  are  also

- 

provided in the Netherlands, in Luxembourg and in Greece.
In  Italy,  according  to  the  data  protection  law  of  1996,  genetic  data  may  only  be  processed
under the circumstances referred to in an ad-hoc authorisation to be granted by the national
supervisory authority.
The genetic data expressly referred to in that authorisation may be processed with regard to
such information and operations as are indispensable to protect the bodily integrity or health
of either the subject, a third party or the community as a whole - on the basis of the subject's
written consent.
Failing the subject's consent, the processing may be started and/or continued if it is aimed at
protecting the bodily integrity or health of either a third party or the community as a whole -
exclusively  on  the  basis  of  a  prior  ad-hoc  authorisation  to  be  granted  by  the  national  data
protection supervisory authority.

11

1.9.       At Community level

In  June  2000,  the  Commission  published  the  Social  Policy  Agenda,  which  provided  for  a
consultation  with  social  partners  on  the  protection  of  personal  data  in  the  employment  context.
The  Commission  believed  that  employees  (during  and  post  employment)  and  prospective
employees  may  not  have  sufficient  protection  of  their  fundamental  rights  and  personal  data,
processed  by  employers  and/or  transferred  to  third  parties.  More  concretely,  consent,  which  is
admitted  by  the  Data  Protection  Directive  as  a  means  for  legitimising  data  collection  and
processing,  may  not  be  really  free  in  the  employment  context,  in  which  employees  and
prospective employees are either subordinate or dependent. In other words, employees often find
themselves  in  a position    where  it  is  virtually  impossible  for  them  to  refuse,  withdraw  or  modify
consent,  due  to  the  employer’s  position  and  power,  and  to  their  own  fear  of  loss  of    job  offer,
promotion  and  so  on.    Since  the  Data  Protection  Directive  does  not,  in  principle,  expressly
address data protection issues in the workplace, the Commission considered that it should be duly
particularised  and  complemented.  Although  it  does  not  directly  address  the  relevant  issues,
Council Directive 2000/78/EC of 27 November 2000, establishing a general framework for equal
treatment  in  employment  and  occupation,  contains  useful  rules,  such  as  the  obligation  to  treat
equally  persons  with  disabilities.    Presently,  the  Commission  considers  a  specific  community
action which can take the form of a specific Directive providing  for a European framework on the
protection  of  employees’  personal  data.    Based  on  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  Data
Protection  Directive,  this  framework  aspires  to  cover  all  kinds  of  employees’  personal  data,
including medical data and data deriving from genetic tests.

1.10.     At International level

A  number  of  international  instruments  in  the  field  of  data  protection  exist  which  have  some
relevance  to  the  issue  of  genetic  testing  in  the  workplace.  The  Council  of  Europe    1981
Convention  No  108  for  the  protection  of  individuals  with  regard  to  automatic  processing  of
personal  data  and  the  1997  Recommendation  (97)5  on  the  protection  of  medical  data  are
relevant,  but  neither  of  these  instruments  relate  expressly  to  employment.  The  International
Labour Office (ILO) Code of Practice on the protection of workers’ personal data (1997) is a useful
source of inspiration for Community action. Both this instrument and the 1989 Recommendation
No  R(89)2  of  the  Council  of  Europe  on  the  protection  of  personal  data  used  for  employment
purposes recognize that different traditions exist among countries in regard to  the regulation of
employers and workers. Such traditions, though, should not be used to obstruct  enforcement of
widely recognized  fundamental principles in this field.

12

ETHICAL BACKGROUND

Ethical issues can be related either to the performance of the genetic testing itself, or to the use of

the data which have been obtained by genetic testing.

1.11.     Ethical Aspects Relating to Performance of Genetic Tests

1.11.1    Autonomy of Employees or Applicants for Work

The  performance  of genetic  tests  makes  available  personal  data  of  great  sensitivity.    Particular
attention must be given to the interests of the person to be tested and to the question of whether
the  benefits  that  might  accrue  from  the  testing  will  warrant  any  personal  intrusion  that  the  test
imposes.

In  particular,  the  autonomy  of  the  person  to  be  tested,  whether  prior  to  or  during  employment,
must be carefully balanced against the duties of employers to provide protection for members of
the work force, including the person to be tested, and third parties.

In  the  context  of  genetic  testing,  autonomy  implies  for  the  person  to  be  tested,  fully  informed
consent  to  the  test(s).    Full  information,  as  well  as  incorporating  understanding  of  the  testing
procedures, would also involve information about the possible test outcomes and the significance
of these, and appropriate counselling when the test results are delivered.  It is often the case that
the position of an applicant for employment is rather weak compared with that of an employer and
that this might result in a self imposed pressure to consent to tests that could be unnecessary.

1.11.2    Duties of Employers to Employees and Other Parties

Employers have a duty to protect members of their workforce and other parties that might possibly
be harmed as a result of either sudden or progressive sickness of an employee.  It is possible that
in some cases, genetic testing of an employee might be the only way of ensuring that this duty is
carried out.  Employers also have a primary duty to ensure that employees are provided with a
safe working environment and are not exposed to harmful occupational hazards.  

1.11.3.   Employee’s Ability to Carry Out Work

Employers  have  the  right  to  expect  their  employees  to  be  capable  of  carrying  out  the  work
required.    This  would  normally  be  judged  by  an  employer  using  the  traditional  approaches  of
curriculum vitae, interview, aptitude tests and references.    An  applicant’s ability  to  carry  out  the
work  is  sometimes  also  assessed  during  a  medical  examination.    Working  contracts  are  often
subject  to  a  probationary  period  –  an  additional  safeguard  for  the  employer.    A  genetic  test  of
limited predictive value would add nothing to knowledge of an applicant’s ability to carry out the
work at the outset and would give very little information on how this might change in the future.

1.11.4    Validity of Genetic Tests

Another ethical issue is the validity of a test, its relevance, reliability and predictive value.  At the
present  time  very  few  tests  would  achieve  a  high  score  in  all  of  these  categories.    It  would  be
manifestly unfair to base important decisions regarding employment or promotion on the results of
tests either of dubious relevance or with low reliability or predictive value.  Any benefits emerging

13

from  such  tests  in  terms  of  protection  of  employees  or  third  parties  could  be  greatly  offset  by
suffering resulting from false negatives and false positives.

1.12. 

Ethical Aspects Relating to Use of Genetic Information

1.12.1.   Confidentiality and the Right Not to Know

The sensitive  nature  of data  obtained from  genetic testing  raises the question  of  confidentiality.
The data  will  initially  become available  to  the  health professional  responsible  for  requesting  the
test.  The question arises of whether the raw genetic data should ever be made available to an
employer  or  if  the  medical  professional  should  merely  communicate  their  relevant  professional
opinion  to  the  employer.    In  this  respect,  the  independence  of  the  medical  professional  is  an
important consideration. Genetic data are clearly the property of the person who has been tested
but the latter may wish to exercise their right not to know their genetic status.

Another  issue  with  respect  to  confidentiality  is  that  genetic  information  on  one  individual  might
also give an indication of the genetic status of one or more of the individual’s family members.

1.12.2.   Discriminatory Use of Genetic Test Results

Data from genetic screening could be used to the disadvantage of an applicant for employment or
an employee.  It could be used to discriminate unfairly between applicants for employment or for
promotion within a company.  It could have serious implications for a person’s career prospects.

2. OPINION

The Group focuses in this Opinion on the ethical issues related to genetic testing, with particular
reference to genetic screening.  Nevertheless, the ethical dilemmas and conflicts of interest to be
considered in regard to genetic testing including genetic monitoring can be viewed in the general
context of medical data at the workplace.

The Group submits the following opinion:

2.1.

2.2.

2.3.

Employers have the duty to protect the health of their employees and to prevent risk to third
parties.  On the other hand, employees and candidates for employment have a right to privacy
and to the protection of their personal data.

Employers have the duty to adapt the workplace in order to limit the risk of health damage for
the employees.

During recruitment, employers must guarantee fair treatment for all applicants and avoid any
discrimination. 

14

Employees have the duty to prevent risk to third parties.  

Employees or potential employees must realise that a medical examination  may be  part of
the assessment of aptitude for the position.

The medical examination should not be a criterion of selection .  It should take place after the
phase of selection.

Where  there  is  a  possible  risk  of  genetic  damage  to  an  employee  resulting  from  some
component  of  the  working  environment,  the  employer  must  take  every  possible  step  to
eliminate that risk.  If such a risk cannot be totally excluded, genetic monitoring, which aims
at  evaluating  chromosomal  abnormalities  induced  by  exposure  to  agents  in  the  context  of
employment, may be valuable but requires properly informed consent.

Genetic screening is a type of medical testing.  It concerns the potential future health status of
the individual screened.
As a general rule,  the Group considers that only the present health status of the employees
should be considered in the employment context.

2.4.

2.5.

2.6.

2.7.

2.8.

2.9.

Furthermore, there is, up until now, no proven evidence that the existing genetic tests have
relevance  and  reliability  in  the  context  of  employment.    They  still  have  uncertain  predictive
value.  

2.10.

The  Group  considers  that,  in  general,  the  use  of  genetic  screening  in  the  context  of  the
medical examination, as well as the disclosure of the results of previous genetic tests, is not
ethically acceptable.  The legitimate duties and right of employers concerning the protection of
health and the assessment of ability can be fulfilled through medical examination but without
performing  genetic  screening.    Thus,  employers  should  not  in  general  perform  genetic
screening nor ask employees to undergo tests.

2.11.

In  exceptional  cases,  the  use  of  genetic  screening  could  be  considered  when  it  may  be
necessary to guarantee health protection of workers or protection of third parties.  

2.12.

In these exceptional cases, genetic testing could be considered provided that, among others,
the following conditions are fulfilled:
(cid:1)  the  performance  of  the  test  is  necessary  for  guaranteeing  the  protection  of  the

employee’s health and safety or those of third parties,

(cid:1)  there is scientifically proved evidence that the genetic test is valid and is the only method

to obtain this information,

(cid:1)  the  performance  of  the  test  does  not  prejudice  the  aim  of  improving  conditions  in  the

workplace,

15

(cid:1)  the principle of proportionality is respected regarding the motivations involved to perform

the test,

(cid:1)  the principle of non-discrimination is not violated.

2.13.

The  definition  of  exceptional  cases  for  proposing  and  performing  genetic  screening  at  the
workplace should be explicitly regulated by law.  

2.14.

For  a  specific  application,  the  prior  assent  of  the  appropriate  labour  organisation  and  a
specific ad hoc authorization by an independent committee should be required.

2.15.

The  applicant  or  the  employee  should  receive  full  information  from  an  independent  health
professional  on  the  testing  procedure,  the  reasons  for  performing  such  tests,  the  potential
outcomes and their implications and consequences, as well as the conditions of storing and
access to data.   They should also, if requested, be provided with access to independent legal
counselling.

2.16.

The applicant or the employee should consent to the genetic test.

2.17.

When  the  test  reveals  a  genetic  condition  which  is  incompatible  with  the  protection  of  the
health  of  the  employee  or  the  applicant  or  with  the  safety  of  third  parties,  the  information
given  to  the  employers  should  only  concern  the  inappropriateness  of  the  applicant  for  the
specific job, without specification of the cause.

2.18.

The genetic data as other medical data remain confidential; such personal attributable data
should only be accessible to the applicant and to the health professional, and transfer without
consent of these data to third parties, including the employer, should be strictly prohibited.

2.19.

Genetic screening or monitoring conducted at the workplace should not be considered as a
genetic test to be disclosed for the purpose of insurance.

16

2.20.

Legal measures should be taken at EU level to preserve the confidentiality of these genetic
data  also  in  case  of  transborder  movement  of  the  employees/employers,  namely  in  the
context of free circulation of workers within the EU.

17

