Table of contents 

Editorial 
by Dr Michael D Rogers, Head of the EGE Secretariat 

The European Group on Ethics in Science  
and New Technologies 

The Austrian Bioethics Commission 

The Science and Technology Ethics 
Committee (CEST), Québec, Canada 

The Steering Committee on Bioethics, 
 Council of Europe  

The German National Ethics Council 

The Hellenic National Bioethics 
Commission 

The Hungarian Medical Research Council, 
Scientific and Research Ethics Committee 

Malta’s Bioethics Consultative Committee  

The Nuffield Council on Bioethics,  
United Kingdom 

The Medical Ethics Committee of the Polish 
Supreme Medical Council 

World Health Organization (WHO) 
Ethics, Trade, Human Rights and Health Law 
(SDE/ETH) 

3

3 

5 

7

8 

9 

13 

15 

16 

19 

21 

21 

 
 
 
EDITORIAL 

THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS IN 
SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES (EGE) 

This  is  my  first  editorial  for  “Ethically  Speaking” 
following  the  departure  of  my  predecessor  Dr 
Christiane  Bardoux.  Consequently,  it  gives  me 
the  opportunity  to  both  look  forward  to  possible 
future  activities  and  to  look  back  to  previous 
achievements of the EGE. We are in the process 
of writing the EGE Activity Report for 2000-2004 
and  the  first  impression  one  receives  in  looking 
back over this period is how successful the EGE 
has been, with highly regarded Opinions ranging 
from  patenting  stem  cells  to  clinical  research  in 
developing countries. The bulk of the EGE’s work 
has  been  in  relation  to  what  might  be  generally 
described  as  bioethics  but  it  has  broadened  its 
work to cover, for example, ethical aspects of ICT 
(Opinions  13  and  20)  and  social norms  (Opinion 
14 on doping in sport). 

to 

The current EGE mandate has to be renewed in 
the  Spring  of  2005  and  this  will  give  us  the 
its  membership 
increase 
opportunity 
somewhat  (reflecting  the  expansion  of  the  EU) 
and  perhaps  through  this  new  membership  to 
examine ethical aspects of other important fields 
of  science  and  new  technologies,  such  as  in 
agriculture  or 
in  nanotechnology.  The  new 
Commission with its focus on the Lisbon Agenda 
coupled  with  the  Constitution  for  Europe,  which 
was  signed  on  29  October  2004  (with  its  Title  II 
on Fundamental Rights), will make the advice of 
the EGE even more important and the members 
will have to rise to this challenge under the EGE’s 
new  mandate.  The  efforts  of  the  EGE  will  be 
augmented  by  networking  activities  with  the 
National  Ethical  Committees 
the 
Member States. This networking will be put on a 
more formal basis through the NEC Forum which 
is  supported  by  DG  Research.  Furthermore,  this 
Newsletter  will  continue  to  act  as  a  platform  for 
sharing 
and 
developments in ethical analysis and advice. 

information 

(NEC)  of 

activities 

on 

Increasingly,  EU  laws  make  reference  to  ethical 
requirements  and  in  the  case  of  the  Directive 
concerning 
the  deliberate  release  of  GMOs 
(2001/18) the EGE is required to make an annual 
ethical  review  of  its  operation.  This  we  will  also 
have to address in 2005. 

I cannot end this editorial without paying tribute to 
Christiane  Bardoux  who  did  so  much  over  the 
years  to  ensure  that  the  Commission  receives 
good ethical advice concerning science and new 
technologies. It is a good base to build on in the 
years ahead. 

Dr Michael D Rogers, 
Adviser (Science and Ethics), 
Head of the EGE Secretariat, 
Group of Policy Advisers, European Commission 

  3

Opinion in preparation - end 2004 

Opinion  20:  Ethical  aspects  of  ICT  implants  in 
the human body 

The  EGE  is  preparing  an  Opinion  on  the  ethical 
aspects  of 
information  and  communication 
technology (ICT) implants in the human body, 
including  both  passive  and  active  implants. 
Current  and  potential  future  applications  range 
from  the  correction  of  health  problems,  to 
enhancing  human  capabilities,  to  surveillance. 
Not surprisingly, the ethical analysis is complex. 
In  this  context,  the  EGE  has  organised  (besides 
some  previous  hearings  of  experts)  a  Round 
Table  debate  on  21  December  2004 
in 
Amsterdam  (NL),  with  hearings  of  experts 
representing different fields of expertise relevant 
to  this  multifaceted  area.  We  anticipate  the 
publication  of  the  Opinion  in  the  first  quarter  of 
2005. 

EGE activities in the second semester 2004 

In  the  context  of  EU  enlargement,  the  EGE 
continued its 2003 initiative of inviting from time 
to time individual representatives of the National 
Ethics Committees of the new Member States to 
the EGE’s regular meetings in Brussels, in order 
to  understand  better  their  fields  of  activities  and 
modes  of  action  and  where  appropriate 
to 
propose ideas for future collaboration. 

On 17 and 18 November 2004, under the Dutch 
Presidency  of  the  European  Union,  the  EGE 
held its monthly meeting in The Hague. The EGE 
was  hosted  by  the  Dutch  Ministry  of  Health, 
Welfare  and  Sport  and  met  representatives  from 
its Department of Medical Ethics. The EGE also 
met  members  of  the  Dutch  Health  Council,  the 
Council for Health and Health Care, the National 
Committee for Ethics and Medical Research, thus 
providing  the  EGE  with  a  valuable  overview  of 
the situation in The Netherlands on various health 
and ethical issues: such as the growing number of 
elderly,  some  recent  facts  about  euthanasia,  and 
so  on.  The  members  also  participated  in  the 
Dutch  Presidency  meeting  “Priority  Medicines 
for  Europe”,  at  which  Professor  Hermerén  gave 
an invited presentation. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the attention of National Ethics 
Committees: 

You  are  mostly  welcome 
to  send  your 
contribution  (in  the  beginning  of  April  2005) 
for  our  next  issue  Nr  5  (June  2005)  to  the 
EGE Secretariat. 

For more information 

European Commission 
Secretariat of the European Group on Ethics 
NEW ADDRESS : 
Office BERL 10/350 
B – 1049 Brussels 

Dr Michael D Rogers, 
Adviser (Science and Ethics) 
Head of the EGE Secretariat 
Tel: +32-2- 295 06 41 
E-mail: michael.rogers@cec.eu.int 

Patricia Mommens,  
Tel. +32-2-296 84 74,  
E-mail : patricia.mommens@cec.eu.int 

Joëlle Bezzan,  
Tel. +32-2-296 19 48,  
E-mail : joelle.bezzan@cec.eu.int  

Fabienne Nsanze, 
Stagiaire, 
Tel: +32-2-296 67 03 
E-mail: fabienne.nsanze@cec.eu.int 

Fax: 00 32 2 299 45 65 
Website: 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics 

  4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE AUSTRIAN  
BIOETHICS COMMISSION 

The Austrian Bioethics Commission  

The 
(Austrian)  Bioethics  Commission  was 
established  at  the  Federal  Chancellery  by  an 
order,  issued  by  the  Federal  Chancellor,  on  29 
June  2001.  The  main  task  of  the  Bioethics 
Commission  is  to  advise  the  Federal  Chancellor 
from  an  ethical  point  of  view  on  all  social, 
natural scientific and legal issues arising from the 
scientific  developments  in  human  medicine  and 
human biology. 

Main  activities  since  Ethically  Speaking,  3rd 
issue, July 2004:  

Preimplantation  genetic  diagnosis 
Report  

(PGD)  – 

After  having  met  several  times,  either  in  the 
plenum  or 
in  working  groups,  and  having 
undertaken  hearings  with  experts,  especially 
having  debated  this  issue  very  fruitfully  with 
participants  from  other  European  countries,  the 
report  on  preimplantation  genetic  diagnosis 
(PGD)  has  been  finalized  and  published  in  July 
2004.  The  Bioethics  Commission  does  not 
consider, that it is their task to give one particular 
unanimous  answer  or  even  one  possible 
recommendation (if consensus is not achievable). 
That is why there has neither been a decision nor 
a  voting  and  why  the  Commission  points  out 
their  advising 
role:  developing,  preparing, 
displaying  and  reviewing  several  arguments  and 
– based on these considerations – pointing out – 
in this case: two – possible solutions, but leaving 
the  decisions  to  the  political  process  and  finally 
to the parliament.  

of 

the 

two 

Despite 
final 
recommendations in this report, there has been a 
considerable amount of consensus in the findings 
of the Commission: 

differing 

•  Part  I  of  the  report  –  a  summary  of  the 
medical, ethical, social and legal aspects 
of PGD – has found common consent in 
the Commission. 

•  All  members  of  the  Commission  have 
agreed,  that  the  option  of  free  and 
is  not 
unlimited  allowance  of  PGD 
recommended at all. 

•  The  Bioethics  Commission  as  a  whole 
rejects  PGD  for  the  purpose  of  positive 

  5

selection of wanted attributes (“designer-
babies”). 

•  But  also  for  all  the  members  of  the 
Bioethics  Commission  a  total  and  strict 
rejection  of  PGD  is  not  justifiable  (a 
point,  which  has  to  be  gone  into  detail 
below). 

PGD is not performed in Austria and although it 
is prevailing opinion, that the Austrian legislation 
in  this  field  is  prohibiting  PGD,  some  scientists 
argue, 
that  the  Austrian  Act  on  Medically 
Assisted  Reproduction  (FMedG)  de  lege  lata 
already  allows  the  examination  and  treatment  of 
so  called  “viable/developable  cells”  insofar,  as 
this is – in accordance with the medical standard 
and experience – essential for the procurement of 
pregnancy. Following this opinion , the Bioethics 
Commission states, that within these small sector 
of testing embryos, not being able to live because 
of a chromosomal or genetic defect – that means, 
this  defect  frustrates  nidation  or  prevents  birth 
(testing  “viable/non  viable”)  –  PGD  should  be 
justifiable even from an ethical point of view. 

Based  on  this  understanding,  the  report  presents 
and gives reason for two possible recommendations 
(in parts II and III of the report):  

•  Seven  members  of 

the  Bioethics 
Commission  advocate  the  prolongation 
of  the  current  legal  position,  which  –  as 
mentioned – would allow PGD only and 
exceptionally as regards the testing of the 
“non-viability”  of  embryos  within  the 
current 
i.e. 
infertility is the sole indication to IVF). 

legal  framework  (where 

•  Twelve members would like to go further 
and  support  allowing  PGD  in  additional 
circumstances: PGD only as an exception, 
but  when  stringent  requirements  have 
been met, i.e. in favour of couples with a 
high  risk  of  getting  a  child  with  severe 
genetically caused illness. As part of the 
suggested  regulatory  arrangements,  a 
single-case-decision based on a model of 
indications  together  with  procedural  and 
administrative  obligations  (i.e.  tests  only 
to be performed by approved organizations), 
quality-control and compulsory (general) 
reports arerecommended. As a result, this 
approach would require a revision of the 
legal framework. 

the  members  of 

Each  of 
the  Bioethics 
Commission  has  indicated  its  own  position  by 
signing the approach he or she supports.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  Report  on  PGD  is  available  on  our  website 
(http://bkacms.bka.gv.at/2004/7/19/pid-
praempantationsdiagonostik.pdf.pdf),  hopefully 
very soon in the English Version too. 

Annual Report: 

The  Bioethics  Commission  must  submit  an 
annual report to the Federal Chancellor. The (3rd ) 
Annual  Report  –  agreed  by  the  Bioethics 
Commission  and  published  in  October  2004  – 
gives  a  survey  of  the  Commission’s  activities 
from July 2003 to July 2004. 

Current and future activities: 

the 

Besides 
issues  mentioned  the  Bioethics 
Commission has resumed or started work on the 
following issues: 

• 

research  with  people,  who  are  unable  to 
consent; 

•  biobanks for research; 
• 

converging technologies. 

For more information 

Address: 
Bioethics Commission 
Federal Chancellery 
Hohenstaufengasse 3 
A-1010 Vienna 

Contact:  
Dr Robert Gmeiner 
Head of the Secretariat of the  
Bioethics Commission 

Tel: ++43/1/53115-4319 
Fax: ++43/1/53115-4307 

email: robert.gmeiner@bka.gv.at 

website: 
http://www.bundeskanzleramt.at/bioethik/ 

  6

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ETHICS 
COMMITTEE (CEST) 
QUÉBEC, CANADA 

PUBLICATION  

Position  statement  on  organ  donation  and 
transplantation: 

In  November  2004,  the  Committee  released  a 
position statement entitled “Organ Donation and 
Transplantation:  Ethical  Dilemmas  Due 
to 
Shortage.” This statement deals with vital organs 
only  (heart,  lungs,  kidneys,  pancreas,  liver)  and 
does not look at the donation and transplantation 
of  tissues  and  other  organs  or  body  parts.  It  is  a 
response to a lack of organs available to meet the 
needs  of  all  waiting  transplant  patients.  Various 
strategies  have  therefore  been  envisioned  to 
alleviate  the  organ  shortage.  The  CEST  paid 
special  attention  to  the  ethical  issues  raised  by 
these strategies. 

The concept of donation is central to the CEST’s 
analysis and is at the heart of the issues addressed 
by 
this  position  statement.  Fundamentally, 
donating is a selfless act asking nothing in return. 
In  the  case  of  organ  donation,  the  CEST  noted 
that  the  practice  is  widespread  and  subject  to 
well-established standards; it raises no objections 
from  society,  where  everyone  is  entirely  free  to 
donate  organs,  or  to  receive  organs  without 
reciprocating if their health so requires. Given the 
context  of  organ  donation  and  transplantation  in 
Québec,  the  CEST  believes  a  fair  balance  has 
been struck over the years between scientific and 
medical  progress  and  the  ethical  acceptability  of 
their  applications.  It  therefore  undertook  its 
deliberations  on  the  premise  that  organ  donation 
was ethically acceptable. 

and 

arrest) 

cardiopulmonary 

After reviewing the donation and transplantation 
status quo, the CEST examined the ethical issues 
raised by cadaveric donations (due to brain death 
living 
and 
donations,  various  consent  models  for  cadaveric 
donations,  ways  of  approaching 
families, 
selection  of  transplant  candidates,  and  organ 
the  ethics 
distribution. 
underlying  other  methods  to  alleviate  the  organ 
shortage,  such  as  raising  awareness  of  organ 
donation,  organ  commercialization,  xenotrans-
plantation, and artificial organ development.  

looked  at 

It  also 

The  CEST  has  drafted  ten  recommendations  for 
political and institutional decision makers on the 
following  aspects  of  the  issue  and  the  values  in 
need of consideration:  
•  Cadaveric donor anonymity — A question of 

confidentiality and donor recognition; 

•  Transplant  candidate  selection  criteria  —  A 

• 

question of transparency and fairness; 
Increasing living donations — A question of 
donor generosity and safety and an additional 
question of equity; 

•  Cadaveric  donors  based  on  cardiopulmonary 
arrest  criteria  —  A  question  of  transparency 
and  trust,  donor  dignity  and  respect,  and 
respect for the donor’s life and preserving the 
organs for harvest; 

•  Raising  awareness  of  organ  donation  —  A 
question  of  openness  to  organ  donation  for 
healthcare  professionals  and  a  question  of 
public solidarity; 

•  Xenotransplantation  —  A  question  of 

caution. 

The  position  statement  is  available  in  French  on 
the  CEST  website,  accompanied  by  a  summary 
with  a  list  of  recommendations  (in  French, 
English, and Spanish).  

CONSULTATION 

and 

transplantation, 

interviews  with  various 

As  part  of  its  position  statement  on  organ 
donation 
the  CEST 
organized a three-stage consultation involving 1) 
stakeholder 
group 
groups,  2)  an  online  consultation  for  the  general 
public,  and  3)  a  mini-survey.  A  consultation 
paper  and  series  of  ethical  questions  were 
prepared for stages1 and 2 of the consultation and 
are available on the CEST website at: 
www.ethique.gouv.qc.ca/fr/ftp/ 
ConsultationDocumentFr.pdf 
www.ethique.gouv.qc.ca/eng/ftp/Consultation 
DocumentAn.pdf      (English). 

 (French), and    

The  consultation  and  mini-survey  results  were 
published  in  French  as  Rapport  de  consultation 
sur 
la 
les  enjeux  éthiques  du  don  et  de 
transplantation  d’organes  and  are  available  on 
the  CEST  website.  A  related  appendix is  part  of 
the  position  statement  and  was  included  in  the 
English  and  Spanish  summary,  which  are  also 
available  on  the  CEST  website.  Unfortunately, 
the online consultation did not yield the expected 
results and no significant data could be gathered.  

  7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ONGOING WORK 

CEST work is ongoing in the following areas:  

•  The  use  of  biometric  data  for  security 
purposes  —  A  study  (early  2005)  followed 
by a position statement (late 2005); 

•  Nanoscience  and  nanotechnologies  —  A 

position statement (early 2006); 

•  Neurosciences  —  A  study  followed  by  a 

position statement (mid 2006).  

CEST WEBSITE 

The CEST has added a new section to its website: 
Ethics and GMOs at www.ethique.gouv.qc.ca/OGM. 
This section is solely devoted to the ethical issues 
raised by CEST in its position statement entitled 
the  Ethical  Management  of  GMOs 
For 
the  new 
(December  2003).  It  complements 
Québec 
at 
www.ogm.gouv.qc.ca, which outlines the various 
aspects of GMOs and links to the CEST site for 
ethical issues.  

on  GMOs 

government 

site 

For more information 

Address : 
Commission de l’éthique de la science et de la 
technologie 
1200 route de l’Église, 3e étage 
Bureau 3.45 
Sainte-Foy (Québec) G1V 4Z2 

Committee Coordinator: 
Diane Duquet, Ph.D. 
Tel: +418-528 09 65 
Fax: +418-646 09 20 
E-mail: ethique@ethique.gouv.qc.ca  
Website: http://www.ethique.gouv.qc.ca 

  8

COUNCIL OF EUROPE 
THE STEERING COMMITTEE ON BIOETHICS 

Recommendation  Rec(2004)10  concerning  the 
protection  of  the  human rights  and  dignity of 
persons with mental disorder 

The  Recommendation  was  adopted  by 
the 
Committee  of  Ministers  in  September  2004  and 
is  available,  with  its  Explanatory  Memorandum, 
at www.coe.int/bioethics. 

The Recommendation is of broad scope, covering 
all  persons  with  mental  disorder.  Although 
particular human rights concerns arise concerning 
the use of involuntary placement and involuntary 
treatment,  the  vast  majority  of  persons  with 
mental  disorder  will  never  be  subjected  to  such 
measures. Nevertheless, they may still be subject 
to  discrimination  as  a  result  of  their  condition. 
Thus,  the  Recommendation  sets  out  detailed 
general provisions that may be applicable to any 
person with mental disorder as well as regulating 
in detail the use of involuntary measures and the 
use of treatments that may give rise to particular 
concern  (for  example,  irreversible  treatments 
such  as  psychosurgery).  The  Recommendation 
also contains provisions on quality assurance and 
the monitoring of standards in mental health care. 

Draft Additional Protocol on human genetics 

in  October  2004, 

The  Steering  Committee  on  Bioethics  started,  at 
its  plenary  meeting 
the 
examination of the first part of the draft Protocol 
which concerns general provisions and the health 
field, prepared by the Working Party. It agreed to 
focus the Protocol on genetic tests. Discussion on 
this part of the draft Protocol will continue at the 
level  of  the  Steering  Committee  in  2005  with  a 
view to its finalisation. 

Draft Recommendation on research on human 
biological materials 

The CDBI Plenary reviewed for the first time the 
draft  Recommendation  on  Research  on  Human 
Biological  Materials  at  its  meeting  of  October 
2004.  It  discussed  in  particular  the  scope,  the 
means  of  obtaining  biological  materials  and  the 
rules  for  collections  of  biological  materials  and 
biobanks.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  Plenary  made  suggestions  for  the  Working 
Party  on  this  subject  to  consider  at  its  next 
meeting  in  January  2005.  It  is  foreseen  that  the 
CDBI  will  review  the  draft  Recommendation  in 
view  of  adoption  at  its  next  Plenary  in  April 
2005. 

8TH European Conference of National Ethics 
Committees (COMETH)  

The  8th  COMETH  Conference  will  take  place  in 
Dubrovnik,  Croatia  on  25-26  April  2005,  on  the 
general  theme  of  “Meeting  the  challenges  of 
changing societies”. The Conference will include 
sessions on the ethical implications of an ageing 
society,  on  the  use  of  preimplantation  genetic 
diagnosis 
for  HLA  compatibility,  and  an 
assessment  of  the  impact  of  the  Convention  on 
Human Rights and Biomedicine. 

For more information 

Contact: 
Dr Carlos de Sola 
Head of the Bioethics Department Secretary of 
the Steering Committee on Bioethics (CDBI) 
Tel: +33-(0)3-88 41 24 38 
E-mail : carlos.desola@coe.int 

Dr Laurence Lwoff 
Administrative Officer / Secretary of the  
Working Party on Human Genetics and  
of the Working Party on the Protection of  
the Human Embryo and Foetus 
Tel : +33-(0)3-88 41 22 68 
E-mail : laurence.lwoff@coe.int 

  9

THE GERMAN NATIONAL ETHICS COUNCIL 

Function 

Following  the  German  Federal  Government’s 
decision  of  2  May  2001  the  National  Ethics 
Council  was  established  on  8  June  2001  as  a 
national  forum  for  dialogue  about  ethical  issues 
in  the  life  sciences.  It  provides  an  umbrella  for 
interdisciplinary  discourse  relating  to  science, 
medicine,  theology,  philosophy  and  the  social 
and  legal  sciences,  expressing  its  views  on  both 
the  ethical  aspects  of  new  developments  in  the 
life sciences and their impact on individuals and 
society  as  a  whole.  The  National  Ethics  Council 
consists of up to 25 Members who represent the 
fields of science, medicine, theology, philosophy, 
society,  law,  ecology  and  economy,  and  are 
appointed by the Federal Chancellor for a period 
of  four  years.  The  Members  generally  convene 
once a month in Berlin. 

The  National  Ethics  Council  is  an  independent 
body,  bound only by  its  purpose  as  stipulated  in 
the  Government  decision  that  established  it.  It 
determines the scope and organisation of its work 
independently. 

The  Ethics  Council  puts  great  emphasis  on  its 
work  with 
its 
opinions, recommendations and reports public. 

the  community  and  makes 

The  National  Ethics  Council  cooperates  with 
other  ethics  bodies  in  Germany  as  well  as  with 
comparable  institutions  of  other  countries  and 
international organisations. 

The  General  Secretariat  of  the  National  Ethics 
Council  is  located  on  the  premises  of  the  Berlin 
and 
Brandenburg  Academy 
Humanities.  The  Council  and 
its  General 
Secretariat  are  funded  by  the  German  Federal 
Government. 

of  Sciences 

Previous opinions 

The  import  of  human  embryonic  stem  cells 
(2001-12-20) 
Following  intensive  debate  the  National  Ethics 
Council  published  its  Opinion  on  the  import  of 
human  embryonic  stem  cells 
research 
purposes on 20 December 2001. 

for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In  conclusion, 
offers the following options: 

the  comprehensive  document 

A  The  temporary  import  of  pluripotent  human 
stem  cells  is  deemed  ethically  acceptable 
under strict conditions (described in detail in 
the Opinion), as the production of such stem 
cells  using  surplus  embryos  is  held  to  be 
ethically 
the 
production  of  such  stem  cells  using  surplus 
embryos  within  Germany  would  also  be 
acceptable. The import conditions mentioned 
would have to apply in equal measure to both 
publicly and privately funded research. 

permissible. 

Therefore, 

B  The  Council  advocates  the  provisional  and 
temporary  import  of  human  embryonic  stem 
cells  under  strict  conditions  as  described  in 
the  Opinion.  All  conditions  shall  apply  in 
equal measure to both publicly and privately 
funded  research,  and  must  be  met  prior  to 
import. 

C  A  provisional  ban  (moratorium)  should  be 
imposed  on  stem  cell  import.  The  legislator 
must arrive at an explicit decision on imports, 
yet not before clarifying a number of issues, 
individually  listed  in  the  Opinion.  These 
issues should be examined before the end of 
2004. 

D  Stem  cell 

to 

import 

is  deemed  ethically 
impermissible,  mainly  due 
the  basic 
considerations surrounding the production of 
stem  cells  using  human  embryos.  As  this  is 
deemed an impermissible instrumentalisation 
(destruction) of human life, it follows that the 
import  of  such  stem  cells  must  be  rejected. 
The  imported  cells  carry  the  stigma  of  the 
conditions  under  which  they  were  produced. 
Their  import  will  lead  to  an  increase  in 
promoting 
demand, 
consumption  of  embryos  in  the  exporting 
countries.  Eventually  the  level  of  protection 
afforded  to  embryos  will  be  lowered  also  in 
Germany. 

directly 

thereby 

Bearing in mind that the National Ethics Council 
is  yet  to  express  its  opinions  on  the  basic  issues 
surrounding  stem  cell  research,  and  while 
decisions regarding the import of embryonic stem 
cells  are  still  pending,  fifteen  Members  have 
moved in favour of a tightly restricted temporary 
import of embryonic stem cells (Option B).  

 10

Nine  among  these  fifteen  also  advocated  Option 
A.  Ten  Members  favour  a  moratorium  on  stem 
cell  imports  for  the  time  being  (Option  C), 
among  these  four  who  are  also  in  favour  of 
Option D. 

Genetic  diagnosis  before  and  during  pregnancy 
(2003-01-23) 

Germany's National Ethics Council unanimously 
the  use  of  prenatal 
recommends  regulating 
diagnosis  (PND)  and  pre-implantation  genetic 
diagnosis  (PGD)  in  a  special  comprehensive 
reproductive medicine law.  

The  Council's  24  members  once  again  urge  an 
open  discussion  of  the  ethical,  legal  and  social 
issues  arising  from  advances  being  made  in 
medicine  and  the  life  sciences,  a  discussion  that 
acknowledges  existing  differences  of  opinion. 
The  Council  points  out  that  mutual  respect  is  a 
prerequisite  for  reaching  a  convincing  political 
solution to the conflicts that have come to light in 
the  course  of  this  discussion.  Furthermore,  this 
particularly  calls  for  a  willingness  to  respect 
differing opinions and to examine the arguments 
behind  these  opinions  equally  conscientiously 
and objectively. 

As  already  stated  in  its  first  Opinion  on  the 
import of human embryonic stem cells, issued in 
December  2001,  the  National  Ethics  Council 
consequently does not consider it to be its task to 
embrace  a  particular  regulatory  arrangement  or 
indeed 
to 
lawmakers as ultimately the only possible option. 

that  arrangement 

to  recommend 

The Council's job is, rather, to develop arguments 
and  point  out  possible  solutions  connected  with 
these  arguments.  It  must  be  left  to  parliament  to 
choose the legislative path that, in its view and in 
cognizance of these arguments, is appropriate. 

the  Opinion 
Based  on 
this  understanding, 
presents  and  discusses  what  are,  from 
the 
Council's perspective, the two possible responses 
to  pre-implantation  genetic  diagnosis,  namely, 
strict  rejection  or  allowing  PGD  only  as  an 
exception when stringent requirements have been 
regulatory 
met.  As  part  of 
arrangements 
the  Opinion  also 
highlights various approaches that could be taken 
and, in doing so, further broadens the scope of its 
critical analysis. 

the  possible 

it  outlines, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Council's members have therefore decided to 
dispense with a vote and have confined themselves 
instead  to  indicating  their  own  position  by 
signing the approaches they support. 

With  the  Opinion  issued  today,  the  Council 
presents a document that: 

•  describes  the  medical  basis  for  PND  and 
PGD  and  outlines  the  legal  and  social 
framework for their actual or possible use, 
•  assesses various arguments in favour of or 

against allowing PGD, and  

•  critically  discusses  the  current  practice  of 

PND. 

Biobanks for research (2004-03-17) 

The  National  Ethics  Council  has  examined  the 
scientific  status  of  biobanks  by  reference  to 
concrete  examples,  established  ethical  principles 
for their evaluation, put forward a framework of 
legal  conditions  to  govern  their  operation,  and 
formulated  conclusions  on  how  they  should  be 
regulated.  The  Opinion 
is  preceded  by  30 
regulatory proposals. 

For  the  purposes  of  this  Opinion,  biobanks  are 
defined  as  collections  of  specimens  of  human 
bodily  substances  associated,  or  associatable, 
with  personal  data  and  information  on  their 
donors.  The  Opinion  deals  exclusively  with 
biobanks intended for medical research. 

resource 

important 

for 
Biobanks  are  an 
identifying the causes and mechanisms of a large 
number of diseases, and in that respect could lead 
to  significant  breakthroughs  in  medical  and 
pharmaceutical  research.  However,  they  also 
arouse anxiety and distrust. The main concern is 
donor  protection.  What 
the 
uncontrolled use of specimens and data, together 
with the possibility that potential donors might be 
pressurized  into  assuming  unreasonable  risks  or 
imprudently divulging personal information. 

feared 

is 

is 

The  National  Ethics  Council  therefore  considers 
it essential for explicit information to be given to 
those  concerned  and  regards  their  consent  as 
being of central importance. At the same time the 
Ethics  Council  is  aware  that  the  full  scientific 
potential  of  biobank  specimens  and  data  can 
often  be  exploited  only  if  their  use  is  not 
restricted  to  individual,  predetermined  research 
projects. For this reason, it must be also possible 
for  donors  to  consent  to  the  use  of  their 
specimens  and  data  for  medical  research  in 
general and for an indefinite period.  

 11

The  risks  to  donors  presented  by  the  greater 
flexibility 
research  must, 
however,  be  offset  by  a  legal  requirement  of 
confidentiality on the part of the researchers. 

thus  afforded 

to 

The  problems  and  issues  raised  by  biobanks  are 
outlined  in  a  joint  declaration  by  the  National 
Ethics  Councils  of  Germany  and  France  (2003-
10-02).  
The  large-scale  collection  and  comparison  of 
body  materials  and  the  data  derived  from  them 
make it possible to establish correlations that may 
in  the  long  term  yield  a  valuable  diagnostic  and 
therapeutic  return.  However,  there  is  a  risk  that 
the data and samples could be used for purposes 
other 
the  donor  has 
to  which 
consented or be passed on to third parties.  

those 

than 

following  aspects  are  of  paramount 

The 
importance in the regulation of biobanks:  

•  the  existence  of  a  guaranteed  continuous 
"chain  of  responsibility"  in  relation  to  the 
derivation,  storage,  handling  and  use  of 
body materials and personal data;  

•  a  clear  definition  of  the  donor’s  free  and 

informed consent; and  

•  issues of solidarity, altruism and justice.  

is 

that  a  new 

The  conclusion 
regulatory 
framework must be established in both countries 
to  reconcile  the  development  and  utilization  of 
research with protection of the individual. This is 
not only a task confronting Germany and France, 
but must also be addressed internationally.  

Polar body diagnosis (2004-06-16) 

The  German  National  Ethics  Council  does  not 
see  any  need  for  specific  legislation  on  polar 
body  diagnosis  at  present,  but  continues  to 
recommend 
the  passing  of  a  Reproductive 
Medicine  Law  to  regulate  the  entire  field  of 
reproductive medicine. 

In  its  Opinion  on  genetic  diagnosis  before  and 
during  pregnancy  (2003)  the  National  Ethics 
Council  already  discussed  the  possibilities  and 
limits  of  polar  body  diagnosis  and  evaluated  its 
ethical  and  legal  aspects  in  the  context  of  pre-
implantation genetic diagnosis. 

is  deemed 

is  practised, 

to  be 
Polar  body  diagnosis 
in  Germany 
permissible,  and 
the 
because 
“pronuclear stage” – that is, before an embryo as 
defined  by  the  German  Embryo  Protection  Law 
has come into being. 

is  examined  at 

the  egg  cell 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Against  this  background  the  National  Ethics 
Council  convened  a  group  of  experts  for  a 
to  obtain 
hearing  on  19  February  2004 
information  on  advances  in  the  technique,  its 
application  in  the  field  of  reproductive  medical 
therapy  and  its  use  under  the  conditions  laid 
down by the Embryo Protection Law. 

The  National  Ethics  Council  welcomes 
the 
initiative  of  the  centres  that  conduct  polar  body 
diagnosis  in  using  the  procedure  only  in  the 
context of a joint scientific study. 

Cloning  for  reproductive  purposes  and  cloning 
for the purposes of biomedical research   
(2004-09-13) 

After  more  than  a  year  of  intensive  deliberation 
the  German  National  Ethics  Council  issued  its 
Opinion  on  cloning  for  reproductive  purposes 
and  cloning  for  the  purposes  of  biomedical 
research on 13 September 2004. 

The  National  Ethics  Council  unanimously  takes 
the view that a worldwide ban should be imposed 
on human cloning for reproductive purposes and 
that  the  legal  situation  in  Germany  should  be 
clarified  by 
the  adoption  of  criminal-law 
provisions prohibiting the practice. 

Three positions have emerged on human cloning 
for research purposes: 

A  Retention  of  the  prohibition  of  research 

cloning; 

B  Limited sanctioning of research cloning; 
C  Prohibition  of  research  cloning  for  the 

time being. 

these 

Notwithstanding 
the 
National Ethics Council has reached a consensus 
to  the  effect  that  human  cloning  for  research 
purposes should not be allowed at present. 

three  positions, 

and 

ethical 

The  Council’s 
constitutional 
assessments on reproductive and research cloning 
are  based  on  a  thoroughgoing  analysis  of  the 
scientific state of the art and of the current legal 
situation. 
As with the Opinion on genetic diagnosis before 
and  during  pregnancy  (2003),  the  Council  again 
decided  to  dispense  with  a  vote.  The  differing 
positions on research cloning are each signed by 
the members who subscribe to them. 

The  patenting  of  biotechnological  inventions 
involving the use of biological material of human 
origin (2004-10-06) 

 12

After  several  months  of  intensive  debate  the 
German  National  Ethics  Council 
its 
Opinion  on  the  patenting  of  biotechnological 
inventions 
the  use  of  biological 
material of human origin on 6 October 2004. 

involving 

issued 

are  given 

that  donors 

The  majority  recommendation  of  the  National 
Ethics  Council  is  that  the  EU  directive  on  the 
legal  protection  of  biotechnological  inventions 
should be transposed into national law as soon as 
possible.  This  recommendation  is  based  on  the 
view  that  the  purpose  of  the  draft  law  presented 
by the Federal Government is to limit the content 
that  can  be  protected  by  a  patent.  The  majority 
also  recommends  the  adoption  of  measures  –  if 
necessary  outside  the  field  of  patent  law  –  to 
ensure 
adequate 
information  and  that  due  evidence  of  their 
consent  is  furnished.  There  is  no  need  for  any 
further  measures:  the  practical  treatment  of 
substance  protection  on  the  one  hand  and  the 
limitation  and  concrete  shaping  of  patent 
protection  on  the  other  can  be  left  to  patent 
practice.  However, 
in 
particular,  the  practice  of  the  courts  and  patent 
offices  should  be  closely  monitored,  especially 
with  respect 
the  handling  of  substance 
protection  and  of  the  prohibition  of  granting  on 
ordre  public  grounds,  and  as  regards 
the 
facilitation of compulsory licensing provided for 
in the draft law. Any concerns arising should give 
rise 
secure  changes  and 
to  attempts 
clarifications at EU level. 

trends  and, 

future 

to 

to 

recommend 

the  Council 

full  use  of 

In a more far-reaching position statement, eleven 
members  of 
that 
Germany  make 
the  existing 
arrangements allowing the adoption of individual 
national  provisions,  as  in  other  EU  Member 
States,  and  regret  that  considerations  of  time 
preclude  a  review  of  a  number  of  fundamental 
elements of the directive. They therefore suggest 
that  any  necessary  corrections  be  set  out  in  the 
explanatory  memorandum 
law  and 
communicated  to  the  European  Commission  as 
soon  as  possible.  With  regard  to  the  legal 
instrument itself, they recommend that: 

the 

to 

•  the  extent  of  protection  afforded  by  a  claim 
should  be  limited  to  the  technical  application 
of  a  function  as  specifically  set  forth  in  the 
description;  

•  explicit  provisions 

should  be 
reproductive 

adopted 
stipulating 
human 
substances,  human  organs,  human  embryonic 
stem  cells  and  stem  cell 
lines  are  not 
patentable;  

that 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  it should be obligatory to furnish evidence of 
the provenance of the biological substances of 
human  and  non-human  origin  used  in  each 
case;  

THE HELLENIC NATIONAL 
BIOETHICS COMMISSION 

•  it  should  be  compulsory  to  obtain  free  and 

informed donor consent; and 

The  Commission’s  areas  of  commitment  in  the 
second semester of 2004 

•  the  need  for  as  restrictive  as  possible  an 
should  be 

inventions 

interpretation  of 
emphasized.  

Current work and forthcoming opinions 

•  Predictive health information 
•  End-of-life issues 

Annual public meetings 

•  Biobanks  –  a  chance  for  progress  in 
science  or  a  sellout  of  the  “resource” 
human body? (2002-10-24) 

•  The  attitudes  of  non-Western  cultures  to 

prenatal life (2003-10-23) 

•  What  kind  of  doctors  does  our  society 
treatment  contract 

want?  The  medical 
today (2004-10-21). 

elaborating 

Current work 
The  Commission  has  met  several  times  and  is 
still 
on 
“Biomedical  experimentation  on  human  beings 
and  the  clinical  trials  on  medicinal  products  for 
human  use”,  which  is  expected  to  be  published 
by the end of this year. 

recommendation 

the 

Future Agenda 
The  Commission  estimates  that  the  issue  of 
“Review  Ethics  Committees”  deserves  special 
attention  and  intends  to  discuss  it  further  at  its 
scheduled meetings.  

New Activities: Hearings  
Trying  to  establish  a  generous  flow  information, 
the  Commission  has  already  arranged  hearings 
with  four  experts,  in  October  and  November 
2004, on the issue of “clinical trials on medicinal 
products for human use”.  

Cooperation  with  other 
organizations 

institutions  and 

For more information 

Parliament 

A  collaboration  with  the  Special  Permanent 
Committee  on  Technology  Assessment  of  the 
Greek  Parliament  has  been  recently  established 
a  monthly  basis.  The  Commission, 
on 
represented by its President and a member or/and 
a  scientific  assistant,  is  presenting  its  current 
work at hearings, organized by the parliamentary 
Committee. Furthermore, it is prompt to reply to 
any question related to bioethical development in 
Greece or abroad, posed by the participants of the 
hearings. 

first 

issue 

to  be  presented  by 

The 
the 
Commission  at  the  parliamentary  Committees’ 
meeting, in November 2004, will be the issue of 
the  “clinical  trials  on  medicinal  products  for 
human use”. 

Address: 
German National Ethics Council 
Jaegerstrasse 22/23 
D – 10117 Berlin 

Contact: 
Dr Rudolf Teuwsen 
Head of Office 
Tel. +49-30-20370 612 
Fax: +49-30-20370 252 
E-mail: rteuwsen@ethikrat.org 

Ulrike Florian 
Press and public relations officer 
Tel. +49-30-20370 246 
Fax: +49-30-20370 252 
E-mail: florian@ethikrat.org  
Website: http://www.ethikrat.org/ 

 13

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Informative work 

enquiries 

Both  the  Secretariat  and  the  scientific  assistants 
receive  very  often 
the 
Commission’s  work  from  students,  journalists 
and  special-interest  organizations,  among  others. 
Some  of  the  enquiries  can  be  answered  by 
referring  to  the  Commission’s  homepage,  where 
the necessary information is often to be found.  

about 

foreign 

relevant 

especially 

enquiries 
But  many, 
(questionnaires  by 
ethics  bodies 
included)  require  more  in  –  depth  attention.  The 
Commission highly appreciates such approaches, 
since  they  are  a  “trigger”  to  its  work,  providing 
an  idea  of  what  is  preoccupying  people  and  of 
what  specific  issues  other  relevant  bodies  are 
dealing with. 

Current initiative 

In  the  frame  of  the  FP6-2004-Science  and 
Society  9,  the  Commission  took  the  initiative, 
being  also  the  co-coordinator  organization,  to 
submit,  in  20  October  2004,  a  proposal  with  the 
other  Bioethics 
three 
collaboration 
Committees  (The  German  Ethics  Council,  the 
French  Consultative  Ethics  Committee  and  the 
National Bioethics Committee of Cyprus).  

of 

The  subject  of  the  proposal  is  “Ethical  Research 
on  Supernumerary  Human  Embryos”  and  the 
proposed project seeks to determine the degree of 
convergence  between  national  norms  in  Europe, 
with regard to human supernumerary embryos in 
medical research. 

Its  scope  is  to  explore  the  possibility  of  an 
“integrated”  European  regulation  on  this  matter, 
such  as  a  new  Directive,  and  to  provide  a 
platform for setting up comprehensive and ethical 
standards  for  publicly  funded  human  embryonic 
stem cell research. 

Website of the Commission 

(www.bioethics.gr) 

A  new  rubric  has  been  added  under  the  title 
“Bioethics  and  Law”,  providing  an  overview  of 
the laws regulating bioethics issues in Greece (in 
Greek). 

For more information 

New address: 
Evelpidon 47 str.,  
T.K. 11362 Athens,  
Greece 

Contact:  
Ms Marianna Dracopoulou 
Executive Head Secretary 

Tel: +30-210-88-47-700 
Fax: +30-210-88-47-701 

E-mail: 
Website:  http:// www.bioethics.gr 

Secretariat@bioethics.gr 

 14

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HUNGARY 
The Hungarian Medical Research 
Council, Scientific and Research Ethics 
Committee 

The  Medical  Research  Council  was  created  in 
1961  by  the  Ministry  of  Health,  as  an  advisory 
board.  It  is  composed  of  three  committees:  the 
Scientific  and  Research  Ethics  Committee,  the 
Ethics Committee for Clinical Pharmacology and 
Ethics Committee for Human Reproduction. The 
main  task  of  the  Scientific  and  Research  Ethics 
Committee  is  to  evaluate  medical  and  ethical 
aspects of human biological research. Among the 
tasks of the committee is discussing international 
bioethical questions.  

The members of the Committee are appointed for 
a period of three years with the possibility of re-
appointment. In May 2004 the Ministry of Health 
affirmed  Prof.  Zoltán  Papp,  the  president  of  the 
Scientific  and  Research  Ethics  Committee, 
appointed  Prof.  László  Vécsey  vice-president 
Scientific and Research Ethics Committee and all 
the 27 members of the Committee.  

and 

several 

The Committee meets on a bi-monthly basis. The 
forthcoming  most  important  event  is  to  discuss 
the achievement of the Regional and Institutional 
Ethics  Committees  in  Hungary.  There  are  13 
Regional 
Institutional  Ethics 
Committees. The evaluation meeting is organized 
by  the  Medical  Research  Council  with  the 
participation  of  the  presidents  and  secretaries  of 
the  Scientific  and  Research  Ethics  Committee, 
the Ethics Committee for Clinical Pharmacology 
and 
for  Human 
Reproduction,  the  Regional  and  Institutional 
Ethics  Committees.  This  meeting  provides  a 
good  opportunity  to  discuss  the  experiences  and 
the difficulties.  

the  Ethics  Committee 

The committee published a book about the last 10 
years of the committee (unfortunately it is written 
in Hungarian). 

 15

For more information 

Address: 
Medical Research Council 
Scientific and Research Ethics Committee  
Arany János u.6.-8 
Budapest - H-1051 
HUNGARY 
Tel/fax: +36-1-301 78 77 

Website: www.ett.hu 

Contact: 
László Szőnyi MD 
Secretary of the Medical Research Council 
Scientific and Research Ethics Committee 
Bókay János u.53 
Budapest - H-1083 
HUNGARY 
Mobile: +36-20-915 17 95 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possible  in  Malta,  but  very  easily  arranged 
abroad.  The  truth  is  that  all  of  us  contain  up  to 
five  genetic  deletions  or  mutations  which  pre-
dispose  to  disease!  Many  authorities  wisely 
advise  that  prenatal  genetic  tests  should  be 
strictly reserved for potential diseases that can be 
cured,  thereby  avoiding  what  is  called  "The 
Therapeutic  Lag'.  One  can  realize  here  how 
important  genetic  counselling  for  the  parents,  is 
in these cases and that it should be established by 
law.  These  tests  may  also  be  abused  in  the 
predilection  of  certain  sexes,  male  or  female, 
especially  where 
linked  diseases  are 
concerned,  or  in  societies  which  prefer  male  or 
female offspring. 

sex 

The other issue concerns genetic tests after birth 
and  in  adult  life.  There  are  three  main  areas 
where these may be abused and used in a eugenic 
manner. Eugenesis is the choosing of individuals 
on the basis of their genetic or physical traits. Its 
what Hitler did in the second world war with the 
Arian  Race  issue  and  which  led  ultimately  to 
Dachau  and  Auchwitz  among  others.  Eugenic 
issues  may  arise  in  three  main  spheres.  In 
Educational  establishments  which  may  ask  such 
information 
to  establish  a  child's  potential 
intelligence  which  is  partly  genetic  coded.  In 
Labour  establishments  which  may  ask  for  a 
worker's  genetic  code  not  to  get  lumbered  with 
workers  who  will  get  ill  earlier  than  the  usual 
average,  trade  unions  please  note.  In  Insurance 
Companies which might ask for a genetic test to 
offset  their  losses  and  consequently  either  ask 
individuals for higher premiums or fail to insure 
them completely. In countries where an adequate 
health  care  system  is  based  on  adequate  private 
insurance,  this  can  have  serious  repercussions  in 
the  availability  of  health  care  for  the  individuals 
concerned. 

these 

issues  and  an 

As one can see, books may be written about these 
issues. Fortunately for Malta, being a member of 
the Council Of Europe, the COE has done a lot of 
work  on 
important 
convention  that  Malta  has  not  yet  signed  called 
the Bioethics or Oviedo Convention, lists what is 
and  is  not  allowable  when  carrying  our  genetic 
tests.  For  example,  educational, 
labour  and 
insurance  establishments  may  not  even  ask  for 
the test to be carried out, i.e. it is illegal to ask a 
person  for  these  tests.  It  is  illegal  to  use  these 
tests for eugenic or sexual selection purposes.  

MALTA’S BIOETHICS 
CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE 

The  Threat  to  Human  Rights  Posed  by 
Genetic Testing 

Genetic  tests  are  tests  carried  out  on  any  human 
cells,  whereby  we  are  able  to  read  the  genetic 
code  of  any  human  being  (or  animal  or  plant). 
These tests, carried out in the proper manner and 
with the proper ethical protocol are very valuable 
in  identifying  diseases  at  an  early  stage  even 
before  the  particular  disease  has  actually  been 
realized,  and  this  gives  doctors  an  extra  tool  to 
deal  with  pathology  early  or  identify  those 
factors, which if avoided, can help to prevent the 
onset of the particular illness in question. 

Like  all  good  things  in  life,  there  is  an  obverse 
side to the coin. If used unwisely, these tests may 
be  a  direct  threat  to  fundamental  human  rights. 
There are three main categories where this might 
occur.  First  in  genetic  tests  carried  out  before 
birth  on  the  embryo  or  foetus.  Second,  during 
childhood  or  adult  lives.  Thirdly,  in  matters 
related  to  police  work  and  jurisprudence  in 
general. The latter consideration has already been 
dealt  with  by  me  at  length,  in  a  letter  I  wrote  to 
the  Independent  on  Sunday.  In  a  nutshell,  all 
procedures  of  genetic  testing  that  have  to  deal 
with matters of the law, should be put under the 
jurisdiction of the Courts of Law. 

I would now like to address the other two issues. 
Prenatal  genetic  testing.  This  is  quite  simply 
carried out by inserting a needle into the amniotic 
sac  during  pregnancy  and  obtaining  a  sample  of 
amniotic  fluid  which  contains  abundant  foetal 
cells. This information will lead to a full reading 
of the foetus' genetic code. Therefore if there are 
any  inherent  potential  or  actual  diseases,  one 
would  know  at  a  very  early  stage.  This  is 
extremely helpful if the diseases are treatable, but 
what  if  they  are  not?  How  does  this  help  the 
parents? It does not. It simply puts a very heavy 
burden  on  them,  so  that  even  with  relatively 
simple  predictions  of  diabetes  and  hypertension, 
which  are  common  and  relatively  easy  to  treat, 
the  doctor  starts  to  get  undue  pressure  from 
parents  to  abort  the  foetus  at  an  early  or  late 
stage.  As  everyone  knows,  this  is  not  legally 

 16

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There are other legal articles which are extremely 
important  for  the  preservation  of  Human  Rights 
in this sphere. Now that Malta is a member of the 
EU  and  that  there  is  freedom  of  movement  and 
travel  to  and  from  Malta.  It  is  more  important 
than  ever  that  we  put  our  house  in  order  in  this 
matter. 

Genetic 
Purposes 

testing 

for  Legal  and  Forensic 

Modern  genetics  has  multiple  good  potentials, 
but like all things in life, it may also be used in a 
bad manner. I do not believe in science regulating 
itself.  Although  that  has  its  advantages,  it  very 
often  falls  far  off  the  mark.  We  have  seen  very 
many cases of this occurring throughout history, 
and  this  is  not  the  place  to  go  into  an  in  depth 
account,  but  if  I  mention  Nazi  Germany  during 
the last world war, or the occurrences behind the 
iron  curtain  or  the  abuse  of  Iraqi  prisoners  by 
British  and  American  doctors  in  Iraq  up  to  until 
recently, I think I would have made my point. 

There  are  many  opinions  as  to  the  regulation  of 
genetic  testing.  I  know  what  the  UK,USA  and 
Australia  do  with  regard  to  that  matter,  but  that 
does  not  mean  that  we  should  emulate  these 
countries, which I find somewhat liberal in their 
application of the science, and even the USA, has 
to its merit, in fact now changed and buckled up 
many  of  its  past  practices.  Many  individuals  in 
these  countries  also  agree  with  me  on  these 
matters.  Other  countries  in  the  EU,  such  as 
France,  Italy  and  Germany,  have  a  much  more 
reasonable  perspective  on  these  issues,  than  the 
so called Anglo-Saxon perspectives.  

One  must  distinguish  between  'normal'  genetic 
tests and those used for paternity and or forensic 
purposes.  Normal  genetic  testing,  has  its  own 
intricate  procedures  and  ethical  considerations, 
which  should  be  safeguarded  by  law.  The 
alternatives  are  too  serious  to  consider.  Shortly, 
there  could  be  serious  repercussions  within  the 
educational, labour, health and insurance fields, if 
certain  ethical  and  legal  safeguards  are  not 
enforced.  

However  in  the  case  of  paternity  and  forensic 
genetic  tests,  other  serious  considerations  must 

also  be  ruminated  upon.  This  is  that  the  law 
should  protect  the  potential  abuse  of  these  tests 
by unscrupulous individuals for their own sinister 
purposes.  In  the  case  of  forensic  medicine  it 
should only be the courts which allow the police 
to carry out genetic tests for investigative or other 
purposes.  It  is  easy  here  to  imagine  serious 
possible abuses and also the unearthing of serious 
personal information concerning each individual, 
which  would  then  be  available  to  all.  In  some 
countries, the police have been known to abuse of 
their  position  during  the  investigation  of  alleged 
or actual criminals. Many authorities in the field 
of bioethics have advised that where legal issues 
are  concerned,  then,  these  tests  should  only  be 
made  available  after  the  courts  have  considered 
their  proper  use,  and  safeguarded  against  any 
abuse.  

In  the  case  of  paternity  testing  especially  where 
minors are involved, unfettered access to genetic 
paternity  testing  could  be  abused  in  many  ways 
especially  where  children  have  been  adopted  or 
where there has been a medical procedure for the 
sake of bringing about fertilization! Legal issues 
of  paternity  or  maternity  or  siblings  or 
inheritance  could  easily  be  brought  up  by 
unscrupulous people to make an easy buck or for 
other personal or frivolous reasons. That is why I 
am  informed  by  the  President  of  the  French 
National Bioethics Commission for example, that 
in France, all genetic paternity testing must only 
occur  after  the  individuals  concerned  have  had 
recourse  to  the  law  courts  to  determine  the 
legitimacy  or  otherwise  of  the  request,  for  a  test 
to  be  carried  out  on  or  by  a  certain  individual! 
Not  doing  this  would  leave  many  individuals, 
serious 
especially 
undermining! 

children, 

exposed 

to 

for 

In  Malta  of  course,  there  are  no  such  legal 
provisions.  Comprehensive  legislation  must  be 
considered 
the  common  good  of  all 
concerned, especially with the presence, which I 
condone  and  hope  to  see  expanding,  of  several 
molecular  genetic  laboratories.  However,  there 
must  be  a  legal  framework,  not  a  legal  vacuum. 
This  should  not  be  too  difficult  considering  the 
work  already  done  by  other  countries  such  as  in 
Italy in the area of artificial reproduction, and the 
work  done  by  the  Council  of  Europe  in  the  area 
of  genetics. What  I  very much  fear  is  that  many 
of  our  academic,  medical,  legal,  journalistic  and 
political  colleagues  have  not  yet  fathomed  the 
implications  of  what  might  go  wrong  in  the 

 17

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
absence  of  good  legal  and  ethical  controlling 
criteria.  This  puts  a  stronger  argument  forward, 
for  putting  this  issue  on  the  country's  and  the 
government's political agenda. 

For more information 

Address: 
The National Bioethics Committee 
Flat 2 Macem Court 
26 Sir George Borg Street 
Sliema  SLM 09 
Malta 

Contact: 
Dr. Michael Asciak, 
Chairman 
60 Triq L-Akkwedott 
Birkirkara, BKR 09 
Malta 

Tel: +356-21-44 67 84 
Fax: +35- 2123 29 09 
E-mail: Michael.asciak@gov.mt 

 18

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
NUFFIELD COUNCIL ON BIOETHICS 
UNITED KINGDOM 

CURRENT WORK 

The ethics of research involving animals 

issues  raised  by  research 

Many  people  are  concerned  about  the  use  of 
animals  in  research.  There  is  also  widespread 
recognition  of 
the  need  for  more  medical 
research.  Since  much  of  this  currently  involves 
the use of animals, these two views are not easily 
reconciled.  The  Nuffield  Council  on  Bioethics, 
recognising  that  people  feel  very  deeply  about 
this topic, set up a Working Party to consider the 
ethical 
involving 
animals.  The  Working  Party  has  now  met  ten 
times,  and  held  a  number  of  fact-finding 
meetings.  A  public  consultation  exercise  was 
held  during  the  autumn  of  2003;  more  than  160 
responses  were  received  from  a  wide  variety  of 
interested 
individuals  and  organisations.  A 
Report  is  scheduled  to  be  published  in  spring 
2005.  Consultation  responses,  with  the  authors’ 
permission, will simultaneously be posted on the 
Council’s website. 
Further information is available at: 
http://www.nuffieldbioethics.org/animalresearch  

The  ethics  of  prolonging  life  in  foetuses  and 
the newborn. 

legal  and  economic 

In  developed  countries,  modern  medicine  has 
reached the stage where we can sustain the life of 
babies who in the past might not have survived a 
difficult birth. However parents who have a very 
premature  or  very  sick  baby  may  be  faced  with 
complex  questions  about  what  the  future  holds. 
The  Nuffield  Council  on  Bioethics  has 
established  a  Working  Party  to  consider  the 
ethical,  social, 
issues 
involved  in  saving  the  lives  of  foetuses  and  the 
newborn. These issues include the quality of life 
for  the  developing  child,  the  family  and  society. 
The  first  meeting  was  held  in  September  2004, 
and  this  will  be  followed  by  regular  meetings 
over 
the  next  eighteen  months.  Additional 
information  will  be  sought  through  fact  finding 
visits  and  there  will  be  a  consultation  with  the 
public  in  the  first  half  of  2005.  The  Council 
expects to publish a Report on the topic towards 
the end of 2006. 
Further information is available at: 
http://www.nuffieldbioethics.org/go/ourwork/pro
longinglife/introduction.html  

 19

The ethics of research related to healthcare in 
developing countries 

In April 2002, the Council published a Report on 
the  ethics  of  research  related  to  healthcare  in 
developing  countries.  A  follow-up  Workshop 
was  held  in  Cape  Town  in  February  2004,  to 
consider  developments  since  the  publication  of 
the  Report.  Fifty  eight  delegates  from  28 
countries  attended  the  meeting  and  the  mix  of 
delegates,  with  diverse  backgrounds  and  a  wide 
range  of  experiences,  facilitated  very  valuable 
discussion.  
The meeting provided the opportunity to consider 
how  guidance  is  implemented  in  practice,  and 
difficulties 
that  may  be  encountered  when 
guidelines are conflicting. 
A  follow-up  paper  based  on  discussions  at  the 
meeting is due to be published early in 2005. 

The ethics of public health 

A  Workshop  on  the  ethics  of  public  health  was 
held  in  July  2004,  with  the  main  focus  to 
consider  the  balance  between  individual  choice 
and  community  benefit.  A  number  of  experts 
were  invited  to  speak  on  case  studies  including 
vaccination and the use of databanks. These were 
followed by a more general discussion on public 
health.  
The Council has also discussed this issue at a bi-
lateral  meeting  with 
in 
November  2003,  and  in  a  similar  meeting  with 
members of the German Nationaler Ethikrat held 
in July 2004.  
Following these meetings and the Workshop, the 
Council  has  agreed  to  set  up  a  new  Working 
Party  on  the  ethics  of  public  health  which  will 
commence in 2005.  

the  French  CCNE 

FUTURE WORK 

Genetic screening 

To mark the tenth anniversary of its first Report, 
Genetic  Screening:  ethical  issues  (1993),  the 
Council  is  currently  undertaking  a  follow-up 
project.  
A  Steering  Committee,  which  includes  members 
of  the  former  Working  Party,  will  consider  the 
impact  of  the  Report  and  identify  significant 
developments since its publication.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREVIOUS PUBLICATIONS: 

MEMBERS OF COUNCIL 

(cid:131)  Genetic 

screening: 

ethical 

issues 

(December 1993) 

(cid:131)  Human  Tissue:  ethical  and  legal  issues 

(April 1995) 

(cid:131)  Animal-to-human  transplants:  the  ethics 
of xenotransplantation (March 1996) 
(cid:131)  Mental disorders and genetics: the ethical 

context (September 1998) 

(cid:131)  Genetically  modified  crops:  the  ethical 

and social issues (May 1999) 

(cid:131)  The  ethics  of  clinical 

in 
developing  countries:  a  discussion  paper 
(October 1999) 

research 

(cid:131)  Stem  cell  therapy:  the  ethical  issues 

(April 2000) 
(cid:131)  The  ethics  of 

to 
healthcare in developing countries (April 
2002) 

research 

related 

(cid:131)  The  ethics  of  patenting  DNA:  a 

discussion paper (July 2002) 

(cid:131)  Genetics  and  human  behaviour: 
ethical context (October 2002) 
ethical 

(cid:131)  Pharmacogenetics: 
(September 2003)  

the 

issues 

(cid:131)  The use of genetically modified crops in 
follow-up 
countries: 

developing 
Discussion Paper (December 2003) 

a 

All the Council’s publications are available to 
download from the Council’s website at:

www.nuffieldbioethics.org/publications  

Chairman: 
Professor Sir Bob Hepple QC, FBA 

Deputy Chairman: 
Professor Catherine Peckham CBE 

Members: 
Professor Tom Baldwin 
Professor Margot Brazier OBE 
Professor Roger Brownsword 
Professor Sir Kenneth Calman KCB FRSE 
Professor Peter Harper 
Rt Reverend Richard Harries DD FKC FRSL 
Professor Peter Lipton 
Professor Lord Raymond Plant 
Baroness Perry of Southwark 
Professor Martin Raff FRS 
Mr Nick Ross 
Professor Herbert Sewell 
Professor Peter Smith CBE 
Professor Dame Marilyn Strathern DBE FBA 
Dr Alan Williamson FRSE 

SECRETARIAT: 
Director: Dr Sandy Thomas 
Deputy Director : Dr Catherine Moody 
Assistant Director: Harald Schmidt 
PA to Secretariat: Julia Fox 
Research Officer: Caroline Rogers 
Secretary: Elaine Talaat-Abdalla 
Information Assistant: Mun-Keat Looi 

For more information 

Address: 
Nuffield Council on Bioethics 
28 Bedford Square 
UK – London WC1B 3JS 

Contact:  
Nicola Perrin,  
Public Liaison Officer 

Tel: 00 44 207 681 9619 
Fax: 00 44 207 637 1712 

E-mail: bioethics@nuffieldfoundation.org 
Website: www.nuffieldbioethics 

 20

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
POLAND 
The Medical Ethics Committee of the 
Polish Supreme Medical Council 

World Health Organization (WHO) 
Ethics, Trade, Human Rights 
and Health Law 
SDE/ETH 

The  Medical  Ethics  Committee  of  the  Polish 
Supreme  Medical  Council 
in 
Warsaw at 24th November, 2004, the Conference 
“The Ethical Questions Connected With Prenatal 
Biotechnology”. 

is  organizing 

The  Conference  is  dealing  with  the  ethical 
cloning 
connected  with  human 
problems 
(reproductive,  and  so  called  not  reproductive), 
with  the  problem  of  spear  human  embryos,  with 
stem  cells  obtained  from  human  embryos  and 
from other sources , and with  medically assisted 
procreation. 

The  Conference  will  not  present  any  arbitrary 
opinions;  the  subject  of  the  Conference  is  to 
formulate  the  ethical  questions  which  should  be 
the subject of a public debate in Poland.  

Ethics at the World Health Organization 

The Department of Ethics, Trade, Human Rights, 
and  Health  Law  (ETH)  implements  activities 
collaboratively  with  departments  in  head  quarter 
and the regional offices. 

The  efforts  are  concentrated  in  the  following 
areas: 

Equitable access to care 

•  ETH is engaged in the policy development of 
one  of  WHO's  top  priorities  -  to  provide 
treatment to 3 million HIV/AIDS patients by 
2005 (3x5 initiative). The role of ETH in this 
process  is  to  advise  the  3x5  initiative  on 
ethical  issues  in  clinical  ethics,  standard  of 
care,  and  equitable  access,  with  a  strong 
focus on the latter. Guidance documents and 
training  materials  are  to  be  elaborated.  To 
this end, ETH, in collaboration with others at 
WHO and UNAIDS, organised a consultation 
on "Equitable Access to Care for HIV/AIDS" 
which  took  place  at  WHO  HQ  on  26-27 
January  2004,  involving  many  stakeholders 
from  all  WHO  regions.  The  report  of  the 
meeting  and  other  related  materials  are 
available at:  
http://www.who.int/ethics/resource_allocatio
n/en/ 

For more information 

Address: 
Ul. Norwida 4 
81-434 GDYNIA 
Poland 

Contact: 
Dr Jerzy Umiastowski 
Chairman  of  the  Medical  Ethics  Committee  of 
the Polish Supreme Medical Council 
Tel: +48-(0) 58-622 76 76 
Fax: +48-(0) 58-622 76 76 

E-mail: oil@gdansk.oil.org.pl 

•  Regional 

and 

follow-up  meetings  and 

the 
integration 
into  country  missions  and 
capacity-building  activities  are  under  way, 
the 
the  aim  of  operationalizing 
with 
guidelines.  Monitoring 
impact 
assessment  tools  are  to  be  developed  in 
collaboration  with  other  WHO  departments. 
A  first  workshop  is  planned  for  the  end  of 
2004 
involve 
in  Malawi,  which  will 
participants  from  several  SADC  countries. 
The  main  goal  of  the  meeting  will  be  to 
the  establishment  of  national 
promote 
policies on equitable access to treatment and 
care for HIV/AIDS. 

ETH  is  member  of  the  Technical  Advisory 
Group  (TAG)  for  the  development  of  the 
Guide for Essential Practice in Comprehensive 
Cervical  Cancer  Control  at  WHO.  In  this 
capacity, ETH is advising the TAG on issues 

 21

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from  clinical  ethics 

ranging 
to  ethical 
considerations  in  cost-effectiveness  analyses 
and  equity  for  the  development  of  this 
guidance document. 

•  ETH  is  involved  in  an  initiative  to  promote 
the access to opioid drugs in palliative care in 
developing  countries.  Partners  include  other 
WHO departments, collaborating centers and 
the  International  Narcotics  Control  Board  in 
Vienna.  The  topics  on  the  agenda  for  ETH 
include  equity  in  access,  informed  consent, 
cultural perceptions and barriers, and end-of-
life issues. 

Human organ and tissue transplantation 

in  May  2004 

Responding  to  requests  from  member  states 
ETH,  together  with  the  department  of  Essential 
Health  Technologies 
(WHO/HTP/EHT),  has 
prepared  a  report  on  Human  Organ  and  Tissue 
Transplantation for the Executive Board Meeting 
in  January  2004.  The  Executive  Board,  having 
considered  the  report,  recommended  to  the  next 
World  Health  Assembly 
the 
adoption of a resolution that addresses ethical and 
technical aspects of  allogeneic transplantation as 
well  as  xenotransplantation.  On  22  May  2004, 
the  57th  World  Health  Assembly  adopted  a 
slightly amended version of the resolution  
(http://www.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/WHA57
/A57_R18-en.pdf ).  
The WHO Secretariat is now at work on the tasks 
set forth in that resolution and will report back at 
a later date to the Assembly. 
As  further  background  information,  a  report  on 
the  WHO  meeting  “Ethics,  access,  and  safety  in 
tissue and organ transplantation: Issues of Global 
Concern” 
is 
available at : 
http://www.who.int/ethics/topics/en/madrid_repo
rt_final.pdf.  

(Madrid,  October  6-9,  2003) 

Research ethics 

•  WHO  has  been  engaged  for  many  years  in 
numerous  activities  in  the  field  of  research 
ethics,  running  workshops  for  Research 
Ethics  Committees,  promulgating  guidelines 
and standards. 
( http://www.who.int/ethics/research/ ). 

• 

 ETH  is  responding  to  demands  of  countries 
according to their needs. In that respect, ETH 
contributed to the 1st international seminar on 
research  ethics  organised  by  the  National 
Laboratory  of  Public  Health  of  Congo  an  in 
Brazzaville in June 2004 and to the regional 

 22

meeting  organised  by  National  Bioethics 
Committee  of  Cyprus  ETH.  The  main 
objective of both activities was to establish a 
national  ethical  review  process  for  research 
involving human subjects. 

•  ETH  is  partner  of  NEBRA  (Networking  for 
Ethics  on  Biomedical  Research  in  Africa)  in 
collaboration  with  a  group  of  African  and 
European  institutions.  This  project  is  funded 
by the European Commission (6th Framework 
programme);  activities  in  the  field  should 
start in December 2004 with a comprehensive 
survey in 15 West African countries in order 
to  establish  what  are  the  specific  needs  an 
resources of this region with regard to ethics 
review  process.  Based  on  this  inventory,  a 
long  term  strategy  will  be  established  in 
collaboration  with  already  existing  African 
networks  and 
institutions.  Other  similar 
initiatives  are  discussed  in  interaction  with 
-  Developing  Countries 
the  European 
Clinical Trials Programme (EDCTP).  

•  ETH is part of the Steering Committee of the 
Global Forum for Bioethics in Research; the 
last forum hosted in Paris in April 2004 was 
an  occasion  for  120  participants,  most  of 
them  from  developing  countries,  to  discuss 
the  issue  of  benefit  sharing  in  research.  The 
next 
in  Blantyre 
to  be  hosted 
(Malawi),  in  March  2005  will  raise  the 
question 
of 
researchers  and  sponsors.  More  information 
is available at: http://www.gfbronline.com/ .  

obligations 

post-trial 

forum 

of 

• 

 ETH  is  also  collaborating  with  CIOMS  on 
the  elaboration  of  guidelines  for  research 
epidemiology. 

activities 

•  Within  WHO,  ETH  takes  part  to  internal 
of  Ethics  Review 
training 
Committee  and  to  regional  workshops  with 
other technical departments as Immunization, 
Vaccines and Biologicals.  

ETH  collaboration  with  other  international 
and regional bodies 

•  ETH 

is  member  of  UN 

Interagency 
Committee  on  Bioethics.  The  3rd  meeting  in 
June  2004  was  focused  on  the  elaboration  of 
universal 
by 
UNESCO.  ETH  is  also  observer  for  the 
International  Bioethics  Committee  (IBC)  of 
UNESCO. 

on  Bioethics 

instrument 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  ETH  participates 

in 

the  CDBI  plenary 
meetings  of  the  Council  of  Europe  as  an 
observer  and  takes  part  in  the  Working  Party 
on  research  on  stored  human  biological 
materials. 

•  A  program  for 

internship  welcomes 
academics,  healthcare  professionals,  and 
graduate students in bioethics to junior or 
Senior Fellowships at the Department  of 
Ethics, Trade, Human Rights and Health 
Law.  

•  ETH  provides  the  permanent  secretariat  for 
the  Global  Summit  of  National  Bioethics 
Commissions  which  will  next  meet 
in 
Australia in November 2004. 

      http://www.who.int/ethics/globalsummit/en/  

ETH collaboration with academic centers 

•  ETH  is  conducting  a  research  project  on 
"Human Genetic Databases: Toward a Global 
Ethical Framework" in collaboration with the 
University of Geneva (funded by the Geneva 
International  Academic  Network).  After  a 
comprehensive 
the  scientific 
review  of 
literature  and  a  comparative  analysis  of 
existing normative frameworks unresolved or 
controversial  issues  are  now  being  taken  up 
in  the  development  of  interview  guides  that 
will  also  contain  case  vignettes  modelled  on 
existing  databases.  Interviews  will  be  held 
later  this  year  with  25-30  respondents  (from 
countries  selected  to  ensure  diversity  of 
regions 
economic 
levels 
and 
development). 

of 

•  ETH  is  also  co-leading  a  project  on  the 
development of "WHO Intercultural Research 
Assessment Materials", in collaboration with 
WHO/TDR  and  Case  Western  Reserve 
University, Ohio. A comprehensive review of 
the  literature  and  ongoing  research  efforts  is 
currently  being  completed  and  will  serve  as 
the basis for further work in this area. 

Other activities 

•  ETH is considering possible contribution 
to  projects  on  long  term  care,  palliative 
care 
in 
and 
different  WHO 
collaboration  with 
departments and collaborating centers. 

pain  management 

•  Dissemination  of  information  ETH  has 
established  an  extensive  web  page 
(http://www.who.int/ethics/en/). A Global 
Calendar  of  events  is  offered  as  well  as 
documents of reference and guidelines. A 
comprehensive  list  of  national  ethics 
committees has been completed. 

For more information 

Address: 
World Health Organization 
Ethics, Trade, Human Rights and Health Law 
SDE/ETH 
20 av. Appia 
CH – 1211 Geneva 
Switzerland 

Contact: 
Dr Marie-Charlotte Bouësseau 
Tel : +41-22-791 14 32 
Fax : +41-22-791 13 99 

E-mail : bouesseaum@who.int 
Website : http://www.who.int/ethics 

 23

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Commission 

Ethically speaking 

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities 

2004 — 23 pp. — 21 x 29.7 cm 

ISBN 1725-5562 

   
 
 
 
 
 
