The European Group on Ethics in Science and New  
Technologies to the European Commission 

Opinion on the ethical aspects of  
umbilical cord blood banking 

- Opinion N° 19 - 

-  16 March 2004  - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers  
to your questions about the European Union 

New freephone number: 
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11 

A great deal of additional information on the European Union is available on the Internet. 
It can be accessed through the Europa server (http://europa.eu.int). 

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication. 

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, 2004 

ISBN 92-894-7439-4 

© European Communities, 2004 
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. 

Printed in Luxembourg 

PRINTED ON WHITE CHLORINE-FREE PAPER 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

OPINION N° 19:  

ENGLISH VERSION  ........................................................................................................... 3 
FRENCH VERSION ........................................................................................................... 23 
GERMAN VERSION……. .................................................................................................. 45 

STUDY INITIATED WITHIN THE PREPARATION OF THE OPINION: 

"A WORLDWIDE STUDY OF UMBILICAL CORD CELL BANKING", ................................ 67 
    BY DR JENNIFER GUNNING, CONSULTANT IN BIOETHICS AND SCIENCE AFFAIRS 
     JUNE 2003 

APPENDIX: 

THE SECRETARIAT OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS ............................. 177 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Text of the Opinion N° 19 

ETHICAL ASPECTS OF UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD BANKING 

Delivered by the European Group on Ethics 
in Science and New Technologies 
to the European Commission 

on 16 March 2004 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPINION  OF  THE  EUROPEAN  GROUP  ON  ETHICS  

IN  SCIENCE  AND  NEW  TECHNOLOGIES  

TO  THE  EUROPEAN  COMMISSION 

No 19   

Original in English 

16th March 2004 

******************************************************************************** 

ETHICAL ASPECTS OF UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD BANKING 

Reference:  
Rapporteurs:   Dr. P. Puigdomenech Rosell and Prof. G. Virt 

Request from Romano Prodi, President of the European Commission 

******************************************************************************** 

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE), 

Having regard to the request of Romano Prodi, President of the European Commission, to the 
EGE on 24 August 2001, to prepare an opinion on private cord blood banking; 

Having regard to the Treaty on European Union and in particular its Article 6 of the common 
provisions concerning the respect for fundamental rights, and to Article 152 of the EC Treaty on 
public health, and in particular paragraph 4(a) referring to substances of human origin; 

Having regard to the Charter of Fundamental rights of the European Union, approved by the 
European  Council  in  Biarritz  on  October  14th  2000  and  proclaimed  solemnly  in  Nice  by  the 
European Parliament, the Council and the Commission on December 7th 2000, in particular its 
Article 1 on « Human dignity », Article 3 on the « Right to the integrity of the person », Article 8 
on « Protection of personal data » and Article 38 on « Consumer protection »; 

Having  regard  to  the  Directive  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  on  setting 
standards of quality and safety for the donation, procurement, testing, processing, preservation, 
storage, and distribution of human tissues and cells adopted on 2nd March 2004; 

Having  regard  to  Directive  95/46/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  the 
European  Union  of  24  October  1995  on  the  protection  of  individuals  with  regard  to  the 
processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data1; 

1 Official Journal L 281, 23/11/1995 P. 0031 - 0050 

3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Having regard to the Council of Europe Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, signed 
on 4 April 1997 in Oviedo, in particular its Article 5 on “Informed consent” and its Article 21 on 
« Prohibition of financial gain » and the Additional Protocol on Transplantation of organs and 
tissues of human origin opened for signature on 24th February 2001; 

Having  regard  to  the  Universal  Declaration  on  the  human  genome  and  the  rights  of  man 
adopted by the UNESCO on 11 November 1997; 

Having regard to the various laws and rules applying in some Member States concerning cord 
blood; 

Having  regard  to  the  opinions  expressed  by  national  instances  on  that  issue,  namely  the 
Opinion  n°  74  of  12  December  2002  of  the  National  Consultative  Ethics  Committee  on 
umbilical cord blood banks for autologous use or for research (France)2, the statement by the 
Belgian  Medical  Association  addressed  to  gynaecologists  and  general  practitioners3,  the 
opinion  paper  of  October  2001  of  the  Scientific  Advisory  Committee  of  the  Royal  College  of 
Obstetricians  and  Gynaecologists  (UK)4,  the  opinion  of  7th  December  2001  of  the  Belgian 
Health  Council  on  the  revision  of  tissue  banks’  legislation5  and  the  American  Academy  of 
Paediatrics’ recommendations of 14th July 19996; 

Having  regard  to  the  previous  EGE  Opinion  No.  11  of  21.07.1998  on  the  ethical  aspects  of 
human tissue banking and Opinion No. 15 of 14.11.2000 on the ethical aspects of human stem 
cell research and use7; 

Having regard to the hearings of experts and Commission departments on 16 September 2003, 
18 November 2003 and 16 December 2003 in Brussels and 20 October 2003 in Rome; 

Having heard the rapporteurs, Dr. P. Puigdomenech Rosell and Prof. G. Virt, 

2 Internet: http://www.ccne-ethique.fr/english/start.htm 
3 Internet: http://www.ordomedic.be/braf/sangcordon.htm  
4 Internet: http://www.rcog.org.uk/print.asp?PageID=430&Type=main  
5 Internet: http://www.health.fgov.be/CSH_HGR/Francais/Avis/Avis_Banques_Tissus.htm 
6 Internet: http://www.cordblood.med.ucla.edu/experts.html  
7 Internet: http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm  

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1. WHEREAS : 

BACKGROUND OF THE REQUEST 

The  Group  is  issuing  an  Opinion  on  the  ethical  aspects  of  cord  blood  banking  following  a 
request  from  President  Prodi  in  2001.  Concerns  on  commercial  cord  blood  banks  were  also 
expressed  in  questions8  from  members  of  the  European  Parliament  to  the  European 
Commission.  There  are  concerns  namely  about  the  fact  that  promises  about  the  benefits  of 
cord  blood  transplantations  to  treat  a  number  of  diseases  were  made  to  convince  future 
parents  to  store  cord  blood  from  newborn  babies  against  payment  with  a  view  to  using  it  to 
treat  a  disease  incurred  by  the  child  or  one  of  his  family  members  and  for  which  there  is  at 
present no medical evidence for the validity of the treatment.  

INTRODUCTION 

Since 1988 it has been shown that the haematopoietic stem cells present in the blood of the 
umbilical  cord  can  be  used  for  allogeneic  transplantation  in  a  number  of  genetic  diseases, 
blood malignancies and immune deficiencies, for example leukaemia. After transplantation, the 
haematopoietic stem cells can repopulate the bone marrow of the patient, providing a source of 
blood  cells.  It  currently  constitutes  an  increasingly  used  alternative  to  bone  marrow 
transplantation.  

In order to have cord blood cells available for transplantation a number of banks were created 
worldwide. These banks are run by either hospitals or non-profit organizations that collect the 
samples from donors and provide them when the cells are needed for transplantation. 
Recently, private firms have been offering to future parents the conservation of blood from the 
umbilical cord of newborn children for one’s own use or for the use of close relatives. Different 
types of cord blood banks can be distinguished: private or public, for-profit or non-profit.  

In  this  opinion,  the  Group  considered:  1. public  (non-profit)  banks  that  store  cord  blood  cells 
from donors and provide them when transplantation is prescribed to an unrelated patient and 
2.  Private banks that offer a commercial service to parents in order to preserve the cells to be 
used for their child or children in the future. 

8 Written question E-1079/01 by Ria Oomen-Ruijten (OJ C 340 E of 04/12/2001, p. 166) and written question E-
3677/02 by Bart Staes (OJ C 137 E of 12/06/2003, p. 238) 

5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
DEFINITIONS 

For the purposes of this Opinion: 

a)  « cord blood » means: residual placental blood collected from the cord of the newborn; 

b)  « stem cells » means cells that can both replicate and also differentiate into several types 

of cells ; 

c)  « progenitor  stem  cells »  means  cells  whose  terminal  progeny  consist  of  a  single  cell 

type only ; 

d)  « haematopoietic stem cells » means those cells that give rise to cells present in blood ; 

e)  « pluripotent » means capable of giving rise to all cell types in the body ; 

f)  « HLA (Human Leukocytic Antigen) types » are determined by proteins present on the 
surface of leukocytes that allow the cells from the individual to be recognized. Identical or 
similar HLA types are necessary for successful transplantation; 

g)  « autologous  transplantation »  refers  to  the  transplantation  to  a  patient  of  his/her  own 

cells; 

h)  « allogeneic transplantation» refers to the transplantation of cells from a donor to another 

person. 

6

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND 

1.1. Characteristics of cord blood 

Umbilical  cord  blood  was  found  to  be  rich  not  only  in  normal  blood  cells  but  also  in 
haematopoietic stem cells. These stem cells are found only in insignificant numbers in normal 
adult peripheral blood. After transplantation, the haematopoietic stem cells can repopulate the 
bone marrow of the patient, providing a source of blood cells. 

An  important  characteristic  of  cord  blood  cells  is  their  immunological  immaturity.  Therefore, 
haematopoietic  stem  cells  from  cord  blood  are  less  likely  to  induce  immunological  reactions 
when transplanted than haematopoietic stem cells from bone marrow.  

Furthermore,  in  laboratory  experiments  it  has  been  shown  that  cord  blood  stem  cells  can 
differentiate into a number of different cell types, which could give rise to future potential new 
therapeutic uses.  

1.2. Advantages of cord blood cells compared to bone marrow 

The  collection  of  cord  blood  units  is  easy  and  non-invasive  for  the  donor  and  therefore  the 
number of potential donors is higher than for bone marrow. 

Cord blood units are stored in advance and are therefore rapidly available when needed while 
bone marrow has to be collected from the donor just before transplantation and there is always 
a risk of last minute consent refusal. 

The  HLA  type  does  not  need  to  be  a  perfect  match  in  case  of  allogeneic  cord  blood  cell 
transplantation because these cells are less likely to induce immunological reactions than bone 
marrow cells. 

1.3. Current uses of cord blood 

Cord blood can be an alternative to bone marrow transplantation in the treatment of patients 
with blood and immune disorders requiring a source of haematopoietic stem cells.  

Cord  blood  is  currently  being  used  for  the  treatment  of  leukaemia,  lymphomas,  aplastic 
anaemia and hereditary disorders of the blood. 

It is also used as a source of stem cells for current research. 

7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.4. Allogeneic transplantation 

In all the current uses of cord blood indicated above, the transplantations are allogeneic and 
the cells used are obtained from donation. The use of autologous graft would be inappropriate 
in case of a genetic disease as the cells of the patient would carry the same genetic defect, or 
in case of leukaemia, as the cells of the patient could also become malignant. In the case of an 
allogeneic transplantation there is always a risk that the body rejects the transplanted tissue. 
Therefore, HLA-typing is essential to have the best possible HLA matching between donor and 
recipient in order to minimize rejection effects and optimize the chances of therapeutic success.   

The residual HLA differences between donor and recipient may induce a limited immunological 
reaction.  In  the  treatment  of  leukaemia,  this  “graft  against  host  reaction”  is  beneficial  and 
contributes to destruction of the leukaemia cells. 

1.5. Limitations of the use of cord blood cells 

In  order  to be  useful for  transplantation  samples  have  to  contain  a  sufficient  number  of  cells 
according  to  the  patient’s  weight  and  therefore  mainly  young  patients  of  small  weight  can 
benefit  from  this  kind  of  transplantation.  Nevertheless,  recent  experience  shows  that  it  is 
possible  to  combine  several  samples  in  order  also  to  treat  adults9.  Further,  research  on 
methods of cell expansion is actively being pursued in order to overcome the problem of the 
limited number of cells contained in cord blood samples, which would allow a more systematic 
treatment of adults. 
Until  now  between  2  500  and  3  000  transplantations  from  cord  cells  have  been  carried  out 
worldwide10. Studies show higher survival rates for children than for adults. 

1.6. Autologous transplantation 

Most  indications  of  autologous  grafts  concern  adults  who  are  undergoing  aplasia  following 
chemo- or radio-therapy. The aim of the transplantation is to repopulate the bone marrow of the 
patient  with  his/her  own  haematopoietic  stem  cells  that  will  provide  a  source  of  blood  cells. 
Such autologous grafts do not require one’s own cord blood stem cells to have been stored at 
birth. Indeed, such grafts can be performed by harvesting before the therapy stem cells from 
the peripheral blood of the patient after stimulation by a growth factor. Therefore, indications to 
store cord blood at birth in view of a future autologous graft are for the present time almost non-
existent. 

9 Report “A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking” by Dr J. Gunning (June 2003) 
10 Hearing of Prof. Gluckman on 18 November 2003 

8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
The probability of needing an autologous transplantation has been estimated as approximately 
1 in 20 000 during the first 20 years of life11.  

Exceptions  can  however  be  mentioned.  In  case  of  rare  HLA  types  or  in  a  family  at  risk  of 
specific  leukaemia  it  may  be  appropriate  to  store  cord  blood  of  newborn  children  in  order  to 
have  available  cells  in  case  of  need  for  a  member  of  the  family.  The  purpose  is  then  for  an 
intra-familial allogeneic graft rather than for a strictly autologous use. Until January 2003, only 5 
autologous  transplants  for  the  treatment  of  Neuroblastoma,  Aplastic  Anaemia,  and  Retino-
blastoma12 have been mentioned in the scientific literature.   

1.7. Current research 

During  recent  years,  research  on  stem  cells  has  expanded  rapidly.  Research  is  taking  place 
into differentiation of pluripotent stem cells into specific cell types which could be used for the 
treatment  of  chronic  diseases  such  as  Parkinson’s,  diabetes,  cancer,  or  cardiac  infarcts  by 
means of human stem cells but no clear proof of the utility of these stem cells has been shown. 
Stem cells from embryonic origin raise many ethical concerns as well as some scientific ones. 
Cord blood is another valuable source for research on stem cells. 

The possibility of using one’s own cord blood stem cells for regenerative medicine is currently 
purely hypothetical. Research in this field is only at a very early stage.  To become a reality it 
would be necessary: 

•  To be able to control the differentiation of stem cells; 
•  To have evidence of the efficacy and safety of such therapy; 
•  To be able to store cord blood stem cells for decades; 
•  To be able to multiply cord blood stem cells. 

Even  if  these  conditions  were  met,  it  is  not  evident  that  the  use  of  patient’s  own  cord  blood 
would  be  preferable  to  the  use  of  his  /  her  own  bone  marrow  or  to  well-matched  allogeneic 
stem cells from donation. 

It  is  therefore highly hypothetical  that  cord blood  cells  kept for  autologous  use will  be  of any 
value in the future.  

11 Annas, NEJM 2000 ; 340 :1521 
12 Report “A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking” by Dr J. Gunning (June 2003) 

9

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1.8. Collection of cord blood 

During  or  immediately  after  the  birth  of  a  child  residual  blood  from  the  umbilical  cord  and 
placenta  can  be  collected.  The  collection  is  a  technically  simple  procedure  that  poses,  if 
carefully done, no foreseeable health risks to the mother or the child in a normal delivery. In 
Europe the most widely used technique involves collecting the umbilical cord blood while the 
placenta is still in utero, while another technique waits until the placenta is delivered and then 
places  the  placenta  in  a  sterile  supporting  structure  and  finally  collects  the  blood  by 
venepuncture. The first technique is more intrusive, and has the potential to interfere with the 
mother’s  care  after  the  delivery,  while  the  latter  requires  extra  and  specially  trained  staff 
members and holds a greater risk of contamination. Cord blood can also be collected during 
delivery by Caesarean section. 

The  blood  collected  in  order  to  be  donated  to  public  banks  is  collected  in  some  maternity 
departments  where  it  is done on a  regular basis  with well  established  procedures  and  by  an 
experienced  staff.  However,  in  the  case  of  autologous  storage,  the  staff  of  the  maternity 
hospital  that  has  to  collect  the  blood  might  have  no  prior  experience  of  the  procedure. 
Commercial cord blood banks simply issue collection kits to the expectant parents who pass 
them on to the obstetric staff. 

1.9. Storage and quality of cord blood 

After collection, the cord blood is reduced in volume, frozen at a controlled rate and stored in 
liquid nitrogen at – 196°C. 

According to current experience, cells are usable for transplantation for at least 15 years.  

Before storage, quality control has to be performed. Cord blood units are screened for some 
infectious  diseases  before  storage  in  order  to  diminish  the  risk  of  transmission  of  infections. 
Protection against infection requires checking the mother for HIV, hepatitis, etc. at the time of 
collection as well as several months after collection. In case of donation made for the purpose 
of allogeneic use, including within the family, the sample has to be HLA-typed. The HLA type is 
necessary to identify the sample which is compatible with the recipient. 

To  be  clinically  useful  the sample,  at  the  present  time,  has  to  contain a  minimum  number  of 
cells; below this number it does not have at this moment any use. Therefore, more than half of 
cord blood units have to be discarded13 (the minimum cell dose to be transplanted should be 
2.0 x 107/kg before freezing14). This might change if the samples of different donors are bulked 
or if cell expansion techniques are successfully developed. 

13 Report « A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking » by Dr J. Gunning (June 2003) 
14 Hearing of Prof. Gluckman on 18 November 2003 

10

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1.10. Umbilical cord blood banking 

There are now about 100 cord blood banks worldwide15. The present geographical distribution 
is approximately as follows : 40 % in Europe, 30 % in US and Canada, 20 % in Asia, 10 % in 
Australia and none in Africa.  

About 75 % of cord blood banks in the world are public or private non-profit banks, which offer 
a service for the public benefit. They store donated samples for the purpose of transplantation 
or research. They also store cord blood for family use in case of a known risk in a family with a 
rare HLA group. 

The  remaining  25 %  are  commercial  banks,  which  propose  as  a  service  the  conservation  of 
cord  blood  cells  for  autologous  use  for  the  benefit  of  their  customers.  In  Europe,  there  are 
commercial  banks  namely  in  Austria,  Belgium,  Germany,  The  Netherlands,  Poland  and  the 
United Kingdom16. 

1.11. Necessity of a great diversity of cord blood cells 

There is a need for a great diversity of cells with different genetic and HLA types from different 
populations  in  order  to  be  able  to  find  an  acceptable  donor  for  any  recipient  in  need.  The 
probability  to  find  an  acceptable  donor  is  much  lower  for  some  ethnic  populations.  It  is  for 
example much easier to find a suitable donor for a patient of Caucasian origin than for one of 
an African origin, because most of the banks are set up in Western countries, and donors will 
be more frequently recruited within the Caucasian population. 

1.12. Networks and registries 

Networks  of  banks  and  registries  have  been  created around  the  world  in order  to  share  and 
exchange  samples.  Such  co-operation  between  the  banks  is  necessary  in  order  to  have  the 
largest possible choice of donors. In general, data about the stored blood samples are held by 
the same registries which were originally holding information about bone marrow donors. The 
biggest  international  bone  marrow  and  cord  blood  registry  is  the  Bone  Marrow  Donors 
Worldwide (BMDW)17. It is a voluntary collaborative effort of bone marrow donor registries and 
cord blood banks with the goal of providing centralised and anonymous information on the HLA 
phenotypes and other relevant data of unrelated bone marrow donors and cord blood units. All 
cord  blood  registries  participating  in  BMDW  are  expected  to  adhere  to  the  guidelines  of  the 
WMDA (World Marrow donor association)18, which promotes the definition and standardisation 
of  ethical,  technical,  medical  and  financial  aspects  of  international  haematopoietic  stem  cell 
transplantation.  It  has  now  extended  its  remit  to  cord  blood  registries.  In  2003  the  BMDW 
registry contained data on roughly 130 000 samples in about 34 different public banks all over 
the world. 

15 Report “A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking” by Dr J. Gunning (June 2003) 
16 Report “A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking” by Dr J. Gunning (June 2003) 
17 Internet: http://www.bmdw.org  
18 Internet: http://www.worldmarrow.org  

11

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1.13. The European Network 

The  NETCORD  Foundation19  was  established  in  1998  with  the  aim  of  promoting  the  use  of 
umbilical  cord  blood  for  allogeneic  stem  cell  transplantation.  It  is  a  non-profit  organization 
promoting the establishment of high quality umbilical cord blood banks and has issued statutes 
and guidelines in order to further promote studies and research on the collection, processing, 
characterization, preservation and ex vivo expansion of placental blood with the primary aim of 
improving  the  quality  of  such  components  for  clinical  cell  therapy  on  an  international  level. 
16 banks participate from 12 countries all over the world, currently totalling around 72 000 cord 
blood units and representing more than half of the units banked in the world20.  

To  facilitate  the  searches  for  cord  blood  units  by  transplant  centres,  NETCORD  has  also 
established an on-line search program, called the Virtual Office. By submitting a search request 
to the Virtual Office transplant centres will no longer have to search multiple data bases of the 
different cord blood banks, but they will receive a single unified search report on all units that 
are contained in the inventory of NETCORD.  

In order to ensure high and uniform quality of all cord blood units in the NETCORD inventory, 
NETCORD  has  established  quality  standards  in  collaboration  with  the  Foundation  for  the 
Accreditation  of  Cellular  Therapy  (FACT)  on  the  collection,  cryopreservation,  storage  and 
release  of  units.  All  NETCORD  banks  must  obtain  accreditation  by  FACT  and  thus  have  to 
comply with quality standards of FACT/NETCORD.  

1.14. Research in Europe 

The  European  Commission  is  financing  in  partnership  with  Member  States  research  projects 
through its Research and Development Framework Programmes. 
A research project called EUROCORD was initiated in 1996 by The European Group for Blood 
and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT)21. EBMT is a non-profit organisation established to allow 
scientists  and  physicians  involved  in  clinical  bone  marrow  transplantation  to  share  their 
experience and to develop co-operative studies. It aims to promote all aspects associated with 
the  transplantation  of  haematopoietic  stem  cells  from  all  donor  sources  and  donor  types 
including  basic  and  clinical  research,  education,  standardisation,  quality  control,  and 
accreditation for transplant procedures. 

The objectives of EUROCORD include establishing a European Registry of patients treated by 
cord blood transplants. EUROCORD works  in close collaboration with NETCORD banks and 
registries. 

These objectives are in conformity with the recommendations made in the Opinion no. 11 of the 
European Group on Ethics concerning the necessity to promote surveys on practices relating to 
tissue  banks  and  to  use  the  surveys  to  provide  information  on  perspectives  in  therapy, 
diagnosis and research offered by human tissues. 

19 Internet: https://www.netcord.org  
20 Hearing of Prof. Wernet, Chairman of NETCORD, on 18 November 2003 
21 Internet: http://www.ebmt.org  

12

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
LEGAL BACKGROUND 

Most European countries have no specific legislation on cord blood banking. In fact, they have 
been following different practices. Only a very few, including Italy, have enacted specific rules 
on the issue. 

When regulations on human tissue or human blood at large exist, such as in France then cord 
blood is considered as a tissue and not as blood because it is the haematopoietic progenitor 
cells contained in cord blood which are important for transplantation. For instance the Directive 
of the European Parliament and the Council on setting standards of quality and safety for the 
donation,  procurement,  testing,  processing,  preservation,  storage  and  distribution  of  human 
tissues  and  cells,  adopted  on  2nd  March  200422,  covers  haematopoietic  progenitor  cells  but 
excludes  blood  and  other  blood  products.  Another  example  is  the  Additional  Protocol  to  the 
Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, on Transplantation of Organs and Tissues of 
Human Origin which applies to tissues and cells, including haematopoietic stem cells but does 
not apply to blood and blood derivatives. 

1.15. The European Community 

The Treaty establishing the European Community23 in its Article 152 § 4(a) provides that “the 
Council  …  shall  contribute  to  the  achievement  of  the  objectives  referred  to  in  this  article 
through  adopting  measures  setting  high  standards  of  quality  and  safety  of  organs  and 
substances of human origin, blood and blood derivatives; these measures shall not prevent any 
Member States from maintaining or introducing more stringent protective measures.” 

In order to implement high quality standards, a legal framework has been adopted.  

First, there is a directive 2002/98/EC of 27 January 200324 concerning the quality and safety of 
collection,  storage  and  distribution  of  human  blood  and  components  but  it  does  not  apply  to 
blood stem cells. 

Second,  the  directive  of  the  European  Parliament  and  the  Council  on  setting  standards  of 
quality and safety for the donation, procurement, testing, processing, preservation, storage and 
distribution  of  human  tissues  and  cells,  adopted  on  2nd  March  2004,  applies  to  cord  blood 
banks as haematopoietic stem cells are considered as tissues. Transplantations of tissues and 
cells  are  increasingly  offering  greater  opportunities  for  the  treatment  of  as  yet  incurable 
diseases. The objective of the directive is to ensure the quality and safety of tissues and cells 
at European level, particularly in order to prevent the transmission of diseases.  

Although the directive does not specifically mention commercial or for-profit private cord blood 
banks, it also applies to them. It therefore means that these types of institutions also have to 
apply the quality and safety standards set out in the directive, namely in terms of staff training 
or accreditation. 

22 At the time of adoption of this Opinion an Official Journal number has not yet been attributed. 
23  The 
search_treaties.html  
24 Official Journal L 033 , 08/02/2003 P. 0030 - 0040 

the  Treaties  can  be 

found  on 

texts  of 

the 

Internet:  http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/en/search/ 

13

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
The European Community is however not competent when it comes to national measures on 
donation or medical use of organs and blood. Indeed, Article 152 § 5 of the Treaty establishing 
the European Community provides that “Community action in the field of public health shall fully 
respect  the  responsibilities  of  the  Member  States  for  the  organisation  and  delivery  of  health 
services and medical care. In particular, measures referred to in paragraph 4(a) shall not affect 
national provisions on the donation or medical use of organs and blood.”  

It can however be noted that the directive provides in its Article 12 that “Member States shall 
take the necessary measures to encourage voluntary and unpaid donations of human tissues 
and  cells  with  a  view  to  ensuring  that,  insofar  as  is  possible,  they  are  obtained  from  such 
donations”, that “Member States shall report to the Commission on these measures” and that 
“on the basis of these reports the Commission shall inform the European Parliament and the 
Council of any necessary further measures it intends to take at Community level”. It provides 
further that “Member States shall encourage the procurement of tissues and cells to be carried 
out on a non-profit basis.” 

Concerning the duty of information, Article 28(d) refers to the information to be provided on the 
donation of cells and/or tissues. 

Finally, the respect for fundamental rights is mentioned in the recitals of the directive. Mention 
of the EGE opinions is also made in the recitals. 

1.16. The Council of Europe 

Article  21  of  the  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine25  of  the  Council  of  Europe 
(Oviedo Convention) provides that “the human body and its parts shall not, as such, give rise to 
financial gain”. 

The  Additional  Protocol  to  the  same  Convention26  concerning  transplantation  of  organs  and 
tissues of human origin, opened for signature on 24 January 2002, provides in its article 2  that 
“The  provisions  of  this  Protocol  applicable  to  tissues  shall  apply  also  to  cells,  including 
haematopoietic stem cells.”  

The European Health Committee of the Council of Europe adopted a draft Recommendation on 
autologous  blood  banks.  At  the  time  of  adoption  of  this  opinion  the  recommendation  has 
however  not  been  adopted  yet  by  the  Committee  of Ministers.  It  recommends  to  its  member 
states that : 

1.  “If  cord  blood  banks  are  established,  they  shall  be  from  altruistic  and  voluntary  cord 

blood donation and used for allogeneic transplantation and related research. 

2.  The  promotion  of  donation  for  autologous  use  and  the  establishment  of  cord  blood 
banks for  autologous  use  should  not  be  supported by member  States or  their  health 
services. 

25 The text of the Convention can be found on the Internet: 
http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/en/treaties/html/164.htm 
26    The  text  of  the  Additional  Protocol  on  Transplantation  to  the  Convention  can  be  found  on  the  Internet: 
http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/en/treaties/html/186.htm 

14

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
3.  Accurate information should be provided to the population about the advantages and 

disadvantages of cord blood banking. 

4.  Where  autologous  cord  blood  banks  are  being  established,  the  publicity  and 
information provided  to  families  must  be  accurate  and  fully  informed  consent  to  cord 
blood storage must be obtained.  

5.  Autologous  blood  banks  that  are  being  established  must  meet  the  same  quality  and 
safety  standards  as  set  out  in  the  Council  of  Europe’s  Guide  to  safety  and  quality 
assurance for organs, tissues and cells.” 

1.17. French legal framework 

Although  there  is  no  special  regulation  concerning  the  umbilical  cord  blood,  there  is  every 
reason to admit that the rules of the code of public health relating to tissues and cells would be 
applicable to it. This would mean that umbilical cord blood can only be taken by establishments 
being the subject to an administrative authorization and only with a therapeutic or scientific aim.  

On the one hand, although the creation and functioning of a commercial private bank for the 
auto conservation of the cord blood are not expressly prohibited, such banks seem not to be in 
accordance with the principles and rules laid down by the code of public health. On the other 
hand,  in  the  eyes  of  civil  law  of  contracts  and  medical  deontology,  the  validity  or  the 
enforceability of the contracts by which parents are prompted to the taking and conservation of 
the cord blood for their child, taking account in particular the absence of medical and current or 
future therapeutic usefulness, could be discussed. 

In  December  2002  the  French  National  Consultative  Ethics  Committee  (CCNE)  gave  an 
opinion on umbilical cord blood banks for autologous use or for research (opinion no. 74)27. 

The  CCNE  concludes  that  although  it  cannot  recommend  that  private  banks  should  be 
prohibited, it draws attention to a number of risks: 

• 

• 

• 

“The gravest danger is for society in so far as setting up such banks is likely to contradict 
the principle of solidarity, without which no society can survive”; 
“Such  banks  raise  hopes  of  utopia and  disguise a  mercantile  project  using assistance to 
children as a screen”; 
If  autologous  use  proved  to  be  useful,  the  principles  of  justice  and  equity  should 
predominate and autologous storage should become routine and taken in charge by public 
authorities; 

•  The uselessness of autologous storage and its cost could constitute a provocation for the 

poorest countries; 

•  At the moment of birth the attention and care for the mother and child could be diverted; 
•  The advertising made by private banks could play on the parents’ feelings such as fear and 
guilt,  although  it  should  be  made  clear  that  today  there  is  no  scientific  justification  to 
autologous storage; 

•  Should  the  management  of  an  autologous  bank  be  left  to  the  State,  the  high  cost  for  a 

currently useless technique would be unethical. 

27 The text of the Opinion can be found on the Internet: http://www.ccne-ethique.fr/english/start.htm 

15

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
In  conclusion,  the  CCNE  recommends  to  public  authorities  to  promote  the  development  of 
public banks which store umbilical cord blood for allogeneic purposes. 

1.18. The situation in Belgium 

The Belgian Health Council gave on 7th December 2001 an opinion on the revision of tissue 
banks’ legislation28. It recommends in particular for the cord, cord blood and derived cells that :  

“The cord and cord blood cells are part of the legislation regulating tissues and cells ; 

• 
•  Quality standards for cord blood banks have to be worked out ; 
•  The  therapeutic  autologous  uses  for  deferred  preventive  intentions  have  to  be 

prohibited.”  

In  its  Annex  II,  the  Health  Council  lists  the  conditions  of  approval  and  authorisation  of  the 
activities relating to cell and tissue banks. It stipulates in particular that “each cell or tissue bank 
has to be approved by the Minister after a report of the relevant service and after the opinion of 
the  Health  Council  and  that  this  approval  can  only  be  granted  for  (…)  non-profit-making 
organisms”. 

A Royal Decree is in preparation by the Ministry of Public Health29 in order to have a clearer 
legislation regarding umbilical cord blood banks. The draft Decree provides that all tissue banks 
will  have  to  be  accredited  by  the  Ministry  of  Health.  The  Royal  Decree  proposes  that  the 
accreditation  will  be  granted  to  non-profit  organizations  only.  The  draft  Decree  also  clearly 
forbids  the  use  of  umbilical  cord  blood  cells  for  deferred  preventive  intentions  as  well  as  all 
discrimination  aiming  at  favouring  a  person’s  access  to  therapeutic  possibilities  linked  to 
tissues of human origin, any form of publicity and the research of profit.  

1.19. The Italian law30 

An  ordinance  from  the  Ministry  of  Health  was  adopted  on  30  December  2002  concerning 
urgent  measures  with  respect  to  stem  cells  of  the  umbilical  cord  blood  and  replacing  the 
ordinance  adopted  on  11  January  2002.  It  has  been  published  in  the  official  government 
announcements  (Gazzetta  Ufficiale)  no.  27  of  3  February  2003  and  is  valid  for  one  year.  It 
provides the following: 

•  Cord blood banking is only authorized as a public conservation structure; 
•  Each bank is also subject to approval by the regional government where it is located;  
•  Private banking is forbidden; 
•  The import or export of cord blood must be authorized by the Ministry of Health; 
•  These provisions are believed necessary because therapies using stem cells from umbilical 

cord blood are still under study. 

28 Internet: http://www.health.fgov.be/CSH_HGR/Francais/Avis/Avis_Banques_Tissus.htm  
29 Internet: http://www.lachambre.be/QRVA/pdf/50/50K0156.pdf , p. 120 
30 Internet: http://www.cittadinolex.kataweb.it/Article/0,1519,22470|99,00.html  

16

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
ETHICAL BACKGROUND 

1.20. Fundamental ethical principles 

There are several fundamental ethical principles and values which can be considered relevant 
for this opinion: 

•  The principle of respect for human dignity and integrity, which asserts the principle of 

non commercialisation of the human body; 

•  The  principle  of  autonomy  or  the  right  to  self-determination  on  the  basis  of  full  and 

correct information; 

•  The principles of justice and solidarity, as regards to fair access to healthcare services; 
•  The  principle  of  beneficence,  or  the  obligation  to  do  good,  especially  in  the  area  of 

health care; 

•  The principle of non-maleficence, or the obligation not to harm, including the obligation 
to protect vulnerable groups and individuals, to respect privacy and confidentiality; 
•  The principle of proportionality which implies a balance between means and objectives. 

There  are  also  some  value  conflicts.  The  values  of  freedom  and  free  enterprise  can  conflict 
with the principles of solidarity and justice, according to which access to healthcare should be 
on an equitable basis and based on realistic needs, as well as with the principle of protection of 
vulnerable groups. 

1.21. Ethical concerns regarding tissue banking 

The ethical implications of cord blood banking in the case of donated samples for the purposes 
of allogeneic transplantation or research are the same as for any tissue bank. This issue has 
already been addressed in the EGE Opinion no. 11 on the ethical aspects of tissue banking (21 
July  1998).  The  ethical  values  underlined  in  this  opinion  are  the  following:  body  integrity, 
respect  of  privacy  and  confidentiality  of  data,  promotion  of  solidarity,  fairness  of  access  to 
healthcare and information and consent of the donors. 

Regarding umbilical cord blood, the opinion no. 11 provides that “the information provided to 
the woman or to the couple must clearly explain these prospective new treatments, but stress 
that  they  are  still  very  much  at  the  experimental  stage”.  This  opinion  also  provides  that  “in 
principle,  tissue  bank  activities  should  be  reserved  to  public  health  institutions  or  non-profit 
making organisations” but that “tissue banks set up by industry should be subject to the same 
licensing and monitoring requirements as non-commercial operators”. The Group insists on the 
ethical  imperative  to  protect  health  by  appropriate  quality  and  safety  rules  and  calls  for  a 
European  legal  framework  in  that  field  and  finally  recommends  that  “the  European  Union 
should promote periodic surveys in the Member States to obtain and diffuse data on practices 
relating  to human  tissues,  from  procurement  to  distribution,  the  organisation of  tissue  banks, 
particularly concerning the profit-making or non-profit making aspect…”. 

17

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.22. Specific concerns raised by cord blood banking for autologous uses 

Cord  blood  banking  for  potential  future  autologous  uses  raises  additional  ethical  concerns. 
Tissue  banks  were  up  till  now  relying  on  free  donation  for  treatment  to  the  benefit  of  other 
persons  or  for  research,  and  by  the  fact  that  it  implies  an  act  of  solidarity  or  generosity  it 
contributes to the social cohesion, while the commercial cord blood banks are running for profit. 
This reflects a more general shift to a privately funded health care system from a health system 
based  on  solidarity  and  motivated  by  public  health  considerations,  which  has  characterised 
Europe in the last decades. 

The services proposed by these banks and for which parents pay do not have any realistic use 
in the foreseeable future. If proposed and endorsed by medical doctors, it may raise a problem 
of trust. 

1.23. Information to consumers/citizens 

Citizens may be tempted to take advantage of all possibilities proposed for health even if they 
are  not  validated.  Furthermore,  time  of  pregnancy  and  of  birth  represents  a  period  when 
women / parents might be vulnerable. This vulnerability and the sense of guilt in the parents 
who wish to do everything possible for their child’s good, induced by providing misleading or 
over  optimistic  information  may  lead  people  to  invest  money  for  something  that  they  cannot 
really afford, and that may not be worth the money invested. 

1.24. Protection of vulnerable groups 

Special attention  should  also  be  made  to  gender  aspects  because  the  collection  takes  place 
within the delivery process. The pressure to perform the collection to satisfy a pressing request 
from the parents may be heavier than when the cord blood collection is a systematic procedure 
in the context of donation. It might then distract the attention of the practitioners from care of 
mother and child. 

1.25. Reliability of the bank 

Commercial cord blood banks offer long-term storage but they might go bankrupt or at any time 
stop their activities.  That  could be  detrimental  to  the customers’  interest,  should  they  not  get 
what they think they have paid for. 

1.26. Recruitment of donors 

Public banks need a great diversity of samples representing as many HLA types as possible in 
order to be able to find a suitable match for any recipient. However, if the number of private 
cord blood banks proliferates and their success increases, public banks could be deprived of 
potential  donors  who  will  prefer  to  have  the  newborn's  cord  blood  stored  for  autologous  use 
rather than to donate it. Therefore one may fear that public banks may have more difficulty to 
collect enough samples to reach the necessary critical mass.  

18

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On the other hand, if public cord blood banks are sufficiently supplied with diversified types of 
blood,  including  the  rare  ones,  and  if  there  is  a  good  networking  of  existing  banks  and 
development  of  registries,  any  individual  will  have  a  reasonable  chance  to  find  a  compatible 
donor and to have access to the transplants necessary for his/her treatment in case of need.  

1.27. Fairness of access to healthcare 

The  use  of  one’s  own  cord  blood  cells  is  currently  highly  hypothetical,  but  if  in  the  future 
regenerative  medicine  developed  in  such  a  way  that  using  autologous  stem  cells  became 
possible, then the fact to have one’s own cord blood being stored at birth could increase the 
chance  of  having  access  to  new  therapies.  This  would  depend  on  the  suitability  of  the 
autologous cord blood sample for the particular therapy needed. Not everyone may be able to 
afford the costs of storage. In that case, access would be related to financial resources. 

19

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  OPINION 

The  ethical aspects of human  tissue banking  in  general  have been  addressed  in  the  opinion 
no. 11 of the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science and new  Technologies  on 21  July 1998. 
The statements made in this opinion n° 11 31 are also valid for cord blood banking. There are 
however  also  specific  ethical  aspects  of  cord  blood  banking  on  which  is  the  focus  of  this 
opinion, with a special attention to commercial banking for autologous use. 

The Group submits the following opinion:  

2.1.  

The legitimacy of commercial cord blood banks for autologous use should be questioned 
as  they  sell  a  service,  which  has  presently,  no  real  use  regarding  therapeutic  options. 
Thus they promise more than they can deliver. The activities of such banks raise serious 
ethical criticisms.  

While  some  members  of  the  Group  consider  that  this  activity  should  be  banned,  the 
majority of the Group considers that the activities of these banks should be discouraged 
but that a strict ban would represent an undue restriction on the freedom of enterprise and 
the  freedom  of  choice  of  individuals/couples.  These  banks  should  operate  under  strict 
conditions. 

2.2. 

2.3. 

The Group notes that at least one Member State has already forbidden such commercial 
cord blood banks. Such banks could be considered illegal and the contracts voidable or 
unenforceable in other Member States. If commercial cord blood banks are allowed by a 
State,  such  activity  must  be  subject  to  strict  regulation.  Such  regulation  should  include 
previous  licensing  by  the  competent  State  Authority  and  close  supervision  of  the 
procedures followed both in the public and the private domain. 

2.4.  

If  commercial  cord  blood  banks  are  allowed,  appropriate  information  should  be  given  to 
the consumers willing to use their services, including the fact that the likelihood that the 
sample may be used to treat one’s child is currently negligible, that the future therapeutic 
possibilities are of a very hypothetical nature and that up until now there is no indication 
that the present research will lead to specific therapeutic applications of one's own cord 
blood cells. Therefore, information has to be particularly explicit that the auto conservation 
has  little  value  in  the  current  state  of  scientific  knowledge.  This  information  should  be 
made clear on all media, including Internet, and in any contracts linking commercial banks 
to their customers. 

31 see point 1.20 

20

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
2.5.  

Any kind of advertising made by commercial cord blood banks in the media, including on 
the Internet, must be adequately controlled by public authorities.  

2.6.  

Commercial cord blood banks have to observe the same quality standards as any other 
tissue bank. Therefore, the EGE welcomes the Directive of the European Parliament and 
of the Council adopted on 2nd March 2004 on "setting standards of quality and safety for 
the  donation,  procurement,  testing,  processing,  preservation,  storage  and  distribution  of 
human  tissues  and  cells",  which  provides  for  a  legal  European  framework,  namely  in 
terms  of  authorization,  licensing,  accreditation,  inspections,  controls,  promotions  and 
publicity and staff experience. 

2.7.  

Given the possibility of termination of business or bankruptcy of a commercial cord blood 
bank, information should be provided to the customers and insurances should guarantee 
the  continuity  of  the  storage  and  the  transfer  of  the  samples  to  another  bank,  or  the 
indemnity of the customers. 

2.8.   

The  collection  of  cord  blood  must  not  disturb  the  process  of  delivery  and  should  not 
present any risks for the mother and child. 

2.9.  

At present, in the exceptional cases where cord blood storage for autologous use may be 
justified  for  families  at  risk  of  specific  diseases  or  with  rare  HLA  types,  it  should  be 
proposed to them that storage should be by public cord blood banks in order to ensure fair 
access to healthcare services to everybody needing it. 

2.10.  

Considering  that  the  European  population  is  increasingly  multi-ethnical,  and  in  order  to 
allow a fair access to transplantation for any citizen whatever his/her ethnic origin, specific 
measures  should  be  taken  by  public  authorities  to  have  enough  donation  from  different 
ethnic groups with different HLA patterns so that for any patient needing a transplantation, 
an appropriate donor could be found.  

2.11. 

In  the  future,  should  the development get to  the point  where  the use of one’s own  cord 
blood cells may be of value, the storage should not be a service left to commercial banks 
but should be taken over by the public sector in order to ensure fair access to healthcare 
services for everybody.   

21

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.12.  

Support  for  public  cord  blood  banks  for  allogeneic  transplantations  should  be  increased 
and long term functioning should be assured. However cord blood banks are of limited use 
as long as networks and registries are not also supported. Indeed, in order to make sure 
that  any  patient  needing  transplantation  will  find  a  suitable  sample,  the  development  of 
networks between banks and registries of donors is essential to be able to find rapidly a 
matching donor and they should be encouraged and supported. 

2.13.  

A wide European debate on the increasing role of the market in the healthcare system and 
its  advantages  and  disadvantages  should  allow  European  citizens  to  be  aware  of  the 
present  trends  and  their  implications,  in  particular  on  the  issues  raised  in  the  present 
opinion. 

22

 
 
 
 
AVIS  DU  GROUPE  EUROPÉEN  D’ÉTHIQUE 

DES  SCIENCES  ET  DES  NOUVELLES  TECHNOLOGIES 

AUPRÈS  DE  LA  COMMISSION  EUROPÉENNE 

N°19 
Texte original en anglais  

16 mars 2004 

********************************************************************************* 

ASPECTS ÉTHIQUES DES BANQUES DE SANG DU CORDON OMBILICAL 

Référence:  

Demande de M. Romano Prodi, Président de la Commission européenne 

Rapporteurs:   Dr. P. Puigdomenech Rosell et Prof. G. Virt 

********************************************************************************* 

Le Groupe européen d’éthique des sciences et des nouvelles technologies (GEE), 

vu la demande d’avis sur les banques privées de sang de cordon présentée au GEE le 24 août 
2001 par M. Romano Prodi, Président de la Commission européenne ; 

vu  le  traité  sur  l’Union  européenne,  et  notamment  l’article 6  des  dispositions  communes  de 
celui-ci  relatif  au  respect  des  droits  fondamentaux,  ainsi  que  l’article 152  du  traité CE  sur  la 
santé publique, et notamment le paragraphe 4, point a), de celui-ci concernant les substances 
d'origine humaine ; 

vu  la  charte  des  droits  fondamentaux  de  l'Union  européenne,  approuvée  par  le  Conseil 
européen de Biarritz le 14 octobre 2000 et proclamée solennellement à Nice par le Parlement 
européen, le Conseil et la Commission le 7 décembre 2000, et notamment son article 1er sur la 
«dignité humaine», son article 3 sur le «droit à l’intégrité de la personne», son article 8 sur la 
«protection  des  données  à  caractère  personnel»  et  son  article 38  sur  la  «protection  des 
consommateurs» ; 

vu la directive du Parlement européen et du Conseil relative à l’établissement de normes de 
qualité et de sécurité pour le don, l’obtention, le contrôle, la transformation, la conservation, le 
stockage et la distribution des tissus et cellules humains adoptée le 2 mars 2004 ; 

vu la directive  95/46/CE du Parlement européen et du Conseil du 24 octobre 1995 relative à la 
protection des personnes physiques à l'égard du traitement des données à caractère personnel 

23

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 et à la libre circulation de ces données32 ; 

vu la convention du Conseil de l’Europe sur les droits de l'homme et la biomédecine signée le 
4 avril 1997  à  Oviedo,  et  notamment  son  article 5  sur  le  «consentement  éclairé»  et  son 
article 21  sur  l’«interdiction  du  profit»,  ainsi  que  le  protocole  additionnel  à  ladite  convention 
relatif  à  la  transplantation  d’organes  et  de  tissus  d'origine  humaine,  ouvert  à  la  signature  le 
24 février 2001 ; 

vu  la  déclaration  universelle  sur  le  génome  humain  et  les  droits  de  l’homme  adoptée  par 
l’UNESCO le 11 novembre 1997 ; 

vu  les  différentes  lois  et  réglementations  en  vigueur  dans  certains  États  membres  en  ce  qui 
concerne le sang de cordon ; 

vu  les  avis  rendus  par  les  autorités  nationales  en  la  matière,  et  notamment  l’avis  n° 74  du 
Comité consultatif d’éthique pour les sciences de la vie et de la santé du 12 décembre 2002 
relatif  aux  banques  de  sang  de  cordon  ombilical  en  vue  d’une  utilisation  autologue  ou  en 
recherche (France)33, la communication de l'Ordre des médecins belges aux gynécologues et 
médecins  généralistes34,  l’avis  du  comité  consultatif  scientifique  du  Royal  College  of 
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (Royaume-Uni) d’octobre 200135, l’avis du Conseil supérieur 
d’hygiène belge du 7 décembre 2001 concernant la révision de la réglementation des banques 
de tissus36, ainsi que les recommandations de l’American Academy of Paediatrics (États-Unis) 
du 14 juillet 199937 ; 

vu  l’avis  n° 11  du  GEE  du  21 juillet 1998  sur  les  aspects  éthiques  des  banques  de  tissus 
humains et l’avis n° 15 du GEE du 14 novembre 2000 sur les aspects éthiques de la recherche 
sur les cellules souches humaines et leur utilisation38 ; 

vu  les  auditions  des  experts  et  des  services  de  la  Commission  qui  se  sont  déroulées  les 
16 septembre 2003, 18 novembre 2003 et 16 décembre 2003 à Bruxelles et le 20 octobre 2003 
à Rome ; 

ayant entendu les rapporteurs, le Dr. P. Puigdomenech Rosell et le Prof. G. Virt, 

32 Journal officiel L 281 du 23.11.1995, p. 31 à 50. 
33 Internet : http://www.ccne-ethique.fr/francais/start.htm. 
34 Internet : http://www.ordomedic.be/braf/sangcordon.htm.  
35 Internet : http://www.rcog.org.uk/print.asp?PageID=430&Type=main.  
36 Internet : http://www.health.fgov.be/CSH_HGR/Francais/Avis/Avis_Banques_Tissus.htm. 
37 Internet : http://www.cordblood.med.ucla.edu/experts.html.  
38 Internet : http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/index_fr.htm.  

24

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1. CONSIDÉRANT CE QUI SUIT: 

CONTEXTE DE LA DEMANDE 

L’avis rendu par le Groupe au sujet des aspects éthiques des banques de sang de cordon fait 
suite  à  une  demande  formulée  par  le  Président  Prodi  en  2001.  Des  membres  du  Parlement 
européen ont également émis des craintes concernant les banques commerciales de sang de 
cordon  dans  des  questions39  posées  à  la  Commission  européenne.  Ces  craintes  sont 
notamment liées au fait que de futurs parents ont reçu des promesses quant aux avantages 
que  présente  une  greffe  de  sang  de  cordon  pour  le  traitement  d’un  certain  nombre  de 
maladies, promesses visant à les convaincre de conserver contre rétribution le sang de cordon 
de leur enfant afin de pouvoir l’utiliser si ce dernier ou un membre de sa famille contractait l’une 
de  ces  maladies,  alors  qu’il  n'existe  à  ce  jour  aucune  preuve  médicale  de  la  validité  d’un tel 
traitement en pareil cas.  

INTRODUCTION 

Depuis 1988, il a été démontré que les cellules souches hématopoïétiques présentes dans le 
sang  du  cordon  ombilical  pouvaient  être  utilisées  pour  des  greffes  allogéniques  en  vue  du 
traitement de différentes maladies génétiques, malignités du sang et déficiences immunitaires 
comme  la  leucémie.  Après  transplantation,  les  cellules  souches  hématopoïétiques  peuvent 
repeupler la moelle osseuse du patient et constituer une source de cellules sanguines. Il s’agit 
actuellement d’une solution alternative à la greffe de moelle osseuse à laquelle il est de plus en 
plus souvent recouru. 

Pour  que  des  cellules  de  sang  de  cordon  soient  disponibles  en  vue  de  greffes,  plusieurs 
banques  ont  été  constituées  au  niveau  mondial.  Ces  banques  sont  gérées  soit  par  des 
hôpitaux,  soit  par  des  organisations  à  but  non  lucratif,  qui  collectent  les  échantillons  de 
donneurs  et  les  fournissent  lorsque  les  cellules  sont  nécessaires  en  vue  d’une  greffe. 
Récemment,  des  firmes  privées  ont  proposé  à  de  futurs  parents  de  conserver  le  sang  du 
cordon  ombilical  de  leur  nouveau-né  pour  son  usage  propre  ou  celui  de  parents  proches.  Il 
existe différents types de banques de sang de cordon: les banques privées ou publiques, avec 
ou sans but lucratif. 

Dans le présent avis, le Groupe a examiné: 1) les banques publiques (à but non lucratif), qui 
conservent les cellules provenant du sang de cordon de donneurs et les mettent à disposition 
lorsqu’une  greffe  est  prescrite  à  un  patient  en  situation  non  apparentée,  et  2)  les  banques 
privées, qui proposent aux parents un service commercial consistant à conserver les cellules 
en vue d’un usage ultérieur pour leur(s) enfant(s). 

39 Question écrite E-1079/01 de Ria Oomen-Ruijten (JO C 340 E du 4.12.2001, p. 166) et question écrite 
E-3677/02 de Bart Staes (JO C 137 E du 12.6.2003, p. 238). 

25

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
DÉFINITIONS 

Aux fins du présent avis, on entend par: 

a)  «sang de cordon», le sang placentaire résiduel prélevé sur le cordon ombilical; 

b)  «cellules  souches»,  des  cellules  pouvant  à  la  fois  se  reproduire  et  se  différencier  en 

plusieurs types de cellules; 

c)  «cellules souches progénitrices», des cellules dont la progéniture finale n’est constituée 

que d’un seul type cellulaire; 

d)  «cellules  souches  hématopoïétiques»,  des  cellules  donnant  naissance  aux  cellules 

présentes dans le sang; 

e)  «cellules  pluripotentes»,  cellules  capables  de  donner  naissance  à  tous  les  types  de 

cellules présents dans l’organisme; 

f)  «types  HLA  (Human  Leukocytic  Antigen)»,  les  types  déterminés  par  des  protéines 
présentes à la surface des leucocytes, qui permettent la reconnaissance des cellules de 
chaque individu. La réussite d’une greffe requiert des types HLA identiques ou similaires; 

g)  «greffe autologue»,  le fait de greffer à un patient ses propres cellules; 

h)  «greffe allogénique», le fait de greffer des cellules provenant d’un donneur à une autre 

personne. 

26

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTEXTE SCIENTIFIQUE 

1.1. Caractéristiques du sang de cordon ombilical 

On a constaté que le sang de cordon ombilical était riche, non seulement en cellules sanguines 
normales,  mais  également  en  cellules  souches  hématopoïétiques.  Ces  cellules  souches  ne 
sont  présentes  qu’en  nombre  limité  dans  le  sang  périphérique  normal  de  l'adulte.  Après 
transplantation,  les  cellules  souches  hématopoïétiques  peuvent  repeupler  la  moelle  osseuse 
du patient et fournir de la sorte une source de cellules souches. 

Une  caractéristique  importante  des  cellules  de  sang  de  cordon  consiste  en  leur  immaturité 
immunologique. Les cellules souches hématopoïétiques provenant du sang de cordon sont par 
conséquent  moins  susceptibles  d’induire  des  réactions  immunologiques  lorsqu’elles  sont 
transplantées que des cellules souches hématopoïétiques issues de la moelle épinière. 

De  plus,  des  expériences  menées  en  laboratoire  ont  démontré  que  les  cellules  souches  de 
sang de cordon pouvaient se différencier en un certain nombre de types cellulaires différents, 
ce qui pourrait déboucher dans le futur sur de nouveaux usages thérapeutiques potentiels. 

1.2.  Avantages  des  cellules  de  sang  du  cordon  ombilical  par  rapport  aux 
cellules de la moelle osseuse 

La collecte d’unités de sang de cordon ombilical étant simple et non invasive pour le donneur, 
le nombre de donneurs potentiels est plus élevé que pour les dons de la moelle épinière. 

Les unités de sang de cordon sont conservées à l’avance et, partant, rapidement disponibles 
en cas de besoin, tandis que la moelle épinière doit être prélevée sur le donneur juste avant la 
greffe, ce qui implique toujours un risque de refus de dernière minute. 

Le type HLA ne doit pas correspondre parfaitement en cas d’allogreffe de cellules de sang de 
cordon,  étant  donné  que  celles-ci  sont  moins  susceptibles  que  les  cellules  de  la  moelle 
osseuse d’induire des réactions immunologiques. 

1.3. Utilisations actuelles du sang de cordon  

Le  sang  du  cordon  peut  constituer  une  alternative  à  la  greffe  de  moelle  osseuse  dans  le 
traitement des  patients souffrant de troubles sanguins et immunitaires nécessitant une source 
de cellules souches hématopoïétiques.  

Aujourd’hui,  il  est  recouru  au  sang  de  cordon  pour  le  traitement  de  la  leucémie,  des 
lymphomes, de l’anémie aplastique et des troubles sanguins héréditaires.  

Le sang de cordon est également utilisé actuellement comme source de cellules souches pour 
la recherche. 

27

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.4. Greffe allogénique 

Dans toutes les utilisations actuelles du sang de cordon qui ont été citées plus haut, les greffes 
sont  de  nature  allogénique  et  les  cellules  utilisées  proviennent  de  donneurs.  Une  greffe 
autologue  ne  serait  pas  indiquée  en  cas  de  maladie  génétique,  les  cellules  du  patient 
présentant  le  même  défaut  génétique,  ou  de  leucémie,  les  cellules  du  patient  pouvant  elles 
aussi acquérir un caractère malin. Une greffe allogénique comporte toujours un risque de rejet 
du tissu greffé par l’organisme. Il est par conséquent crucial de procéder au typage HLA afin 
d’obtenir une correspondance maximale entre le donneur et le receveur, de façon à minimiser 
les effets de rejet et à optimiser les chances de réussite thérapeutique. 

Les différences HLA résiduelles entre le donneur et le receveur peuvent induire une réaction 
immunologique  limitée.  Dans  le  traitement  de  la  leucémie,  cette  réaction  du  greffon  contre 
l’hôte est bénéfique et contribue à la destruction des cellules leucémiques. 

1.5. Limitations de l’utilisation des cellules de sang de cordon 

Pour être utiles en vue de la réalisation de greffes, les échantillons doivent contenir un nombre 
de  cellules  suffisant  en  fonction  du  poids  du  patient;  c’est  la  raison  pour  laquelle  ce  sont 
principalement  les  jeunes  patients  de  faible  poids  qui  peuvent  bénéficier  de  ce  type  de 
transplantation.  Néanmoins,  l’expérience  récente  montre  qu'il  est  possible  de  combiner 
plusieurs échantillons afin de traiter également des adultes40. En outre, les recherches sur les 
méthodes d’expansion cellulaire se poursuivent activement afin de surmonter le problème du 
nombre  restreint de  cellules  contenues dans  les échantillons  de  sang  de  cordon,  de  façon à 
permettre un traitement plus systématique des adultes. 
À ce jour, entre 2 500 et 3 000 greffes de cellules de sang de cordon ont été pratiquées dans le 
monde41.  Les  études  montrent  que  les  taux  de  survie  sont plus  élevés  chez  les  enfants  que 
chez les adultes. 

1.6. Greffe autologue 

La plupart des indications de greffes autologues concernent des adultes souffrant d’une aplasie 
liée à une chimiothérapie ou à une radiothérapie. Le but de la greffe est de repeupler la moelle 
osseuse du patient avec ses propres cellules souches hématopoïétiques, qui constitueront une 
source  de  cellules  sanguines.  Les  greffes  de  ce  type  n’exigent  pas  que  les  propres  cellules 
souches de sang de cordon du patient aient été stockées lors de sa naissance. Elles peuvent 
en  effet  être  pratiquées  en  prélevant  les  cellules  souches  du  sang  périphérique  du  patient 
préalablement à la thérapie, après stimulation par un facteur de croissance. En conséquence, il 
n’existe  à  ce  jour  pratiquement  aucune  indication  de  conservation  de  sang  de  cordon  à  la 
naissance en vue d’une greffe autologue ultérieure.  

La probabilité qu’une greffe autologue soit nécessaire a été estimée à une chance sur 20 000 
environ au cours des 20 premières années de la vie42. On peut toutefois citer des exceptions.  

40 Rapport du Dr. J. Gunning, «  A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking » (juin 2003) 
41 Audition du Professeur Gluckman le 18 novembre 2003. 
42 Annas, NEJM 2000; 340 :1521. 

28

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Dans  le  cas  de  types  HLA  rares,  ou  dans  une  famille  exposée  à  un  risque  de  leucémie 
spécifique, il peut être indiqué de conserver le sang de cordon des nouveau-nés afin que des 
cellules soient disponibles pour l'un des membres de la famille en cas de besoin. L'objectif est 
donc  de  permettre  une  greffe  allogénique  intra-familiale,  plutôt  qu’un  usage  strictement 
autologue.  Jusque  janvier 2003,  la  littérature  scientifique  n’avait  fait  mention  que  de  cinq 
greffes  autologues  réalisées  dans  le  cadre  du  traitement  d’un  neuroblastome,  d’une  anémie 
aplastique ou d’un rétinoblastome43.   

1.7. État actuel de la recherche 

Ces  dernières  années,  la  recherche  sur  les  cellules  souches  s’est  rapidement  développée. 
Les activités dans ce domaine portent sur la différenciation des cellules souches pluripotentes 
en  types  de  cellules  spécifiques  pouvant  être  utilisées  pour  le  traitement  de  maladies 
chroniques  comme  la  maladie  de  Parkinson,  les  diabètes  et  le  cancer,  ou  dans  le  cas 
d’infarctus  cardiaques  au  moyen  de  cellules  souches  humaines.  L’utilité  de  ces  cellules 
souches  n’a  cependant  pas  été  clairement  démontrée.  Les  cellules  souches  d’origine 
embryonnaire  soulèvent  de  nombreux  problèmes  éthiques,  de  même  que  des  problèmes 
d’ordre  scientifique.  Le  sang  de  cordon  constitue  une  autre  source  intéressante  pour  la 
recherche sur les cellules souches. 

La possibilité d’utiliser les propres cellules souches de sang de cordon d’un individu à des fins 
de  médecine  régénératrice  est  actuellement  purement  hypothétique.  La  recherche  dans  ce 
domaine  n’en  est  qu’à  ses  tout  premiers  balbutiements.  Pour  que  cela  devienne  réalité,  il 
faudrait: 

• 
• 
• 

• 

pouvoir contrôler la différenciation des cellules souches; 
démontrer l’efficacité et la sécurité d’une telle thérapie; 
être  capable  de  conserver  des  cellules  souches de  sang  de  cordon pendant  plusieurs 
dizaines d’années; 
être capable de multiplier des cellules souches de sang de cordon. 

Même si ces conditions étaient réunies, il n’est pas certain qu’il serait préférable d’utiliser les 
propres  cellules  de  sang  de  cordon  du  patient  plutôt  que  sa  propre  moelle  osseuse  ou  les 
cellules allogéniques d’un donneur compatible. 

Il est par conséquent hautement hypothétique que les cellules de sang de cordon conservées 
en vue d’un usage autologue présentent une quelconque valeur à l’avenir.  

43 Rapport du Dr. J. Gunning, «A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking» (juin  2003). 

29

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1.8. Collecte de sang de cordon 

Durant ou immédiatement après la naissance, il est possible de collecter le sang résiduel du 
cordon ombilical et du placenta. Ce prélèvement constitue une procédure simple sur le plan 
technique qui ne présente, à condition d’être effectué avec soin, aucun risque prévisible pour 
la santé de la mère ou de l’enfant en cas d’accouchement normal. En Europe, la technique la 
plus couramment utilisée consiste à prélever le sang du cordon ombilical alors que le placenta 
se  trouve  toujours  dans  l’utérus;  on  peut  également  attendre  l’expulsion  du  placenta  pour 
placer celui-ci dans une structure stérile et prélever ensuite le sang par ponction veineuse. La 
première technique est plus invasive et risque d’interférer avec les soins dispensés à la mère 
après la délivrance, alors que la seconde exige du personnel supplémentaire spécifiquement 
formé à cet effet et présente un plus grand risque de contamination. Le sang de cordon peut 
également être prélevé durant un accouchement par césarienne. 

Le sang collecté pour être donné à des banques publiques est prélevé dans certains services 
de maternité, où ce type de collecte est pratiqué sur une base régulière, selon des procédures 
bien établies, par du personnel expérimenté. Toutefois, en cas de conservation autologue, le 
personnel de la maternité qui est chargé de collecter le sang peut n’avoir aucune expérience 
préalable  de  cette  technique.  Les  banques  commerciales  de  sang  de  cordon  fournissent 
simplement  des  trousses  de  prélèvement  aux  futurs  parents,  qui  les  transmettent  à  l’équipe 
obstétrique. 

1.9. Conservation et qualité du sang de cordon 

Après avoir été collecté, le sang de cordon est réduit de volume, congelé à un taux contrôlé et 
conservé dans de l ‘azote liquide à – 196°C. 

L’expérience  actuelle  montre  que  les  cellules  peuvent  être  utilisées  en  vue  d’une  greffe 
pendant au moins 15 ans. 

Avant de procéder à la conservation, il convient d’effectuer un contrôle qualitatif du sang. Les 
unités de sang de cordon sont examinées afin de déceler d’éventuelles maladies infectieuses 
préalablement à la conservation, de façon à limiter les risques de contamination. Pour prévenir 
tout  risque  d’infection,  il  convient  de  faire  subir  à  la  mère  un  test  de  dépistage  du  VIH,  de 
l’hépatite, etc., lors de la collecte, ainsi que plusieurs mois après celle-ci. En cas de don à des 
fins allogéniques, y compris au sein d’une même famille, il faut procéder à un typage HLA de 
l’échantillon. Ce typage est nécessaire pour pouvoir déterminer l’échantillon compatible avec 
le receveur. 

Actuellement, pour être cliniquement utile, l’échantillon doit contenir un nombre minimum de 
cellules;  si  ce  nombre  n’est  pas  atteint,  il  ne  présente  pour  le  moment  aucun  intérêt.  En 
conséquence,  plus  de  la  moitié  des  unités  de  sang  de  cordon  doit  être  jetée44  (la  dose 
cellulaire minimale à transplanter devrait être de 2,0 x 107/kg avant congélation45). La situation 
pourrait  être  différente  si  les  échantillons  de  différents  donneurs  sont  combinés  ou  si  l’on 
parvient à développer des techniques d’expansion cellulaire. 

44 Rapport du Dr. J. Gunning, «A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking» (juin  2003). 
45 Audition du Prof. Gluckman le 18 novembre 2003. 

30

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1.10. Banques de sang de cordon ombilical 

Il existe une centaine de banques de sang de cordon dans le monde46, actuellement réparties 
approximativement de la façon suivante: 40 % en Europe, 30 % aux États-Unis et au Canada, 
20 % en Asie et 10 % en Australie. Il n’existe aucune banque de ce type en Afrique. 

Environ 75  %  de  ces  banques  sont des  banques  publiques ou privées  sans  but  lucratif,  qui 
proposent des services à la collectivité. Elles conservent des échantillons provenant de dons 
en vue de la réalisation de greffes ou à des fins de recherche. Elles conservent également du 
sang  de  cordon  pour  une  utilisation  intra-familiale  lorsqu’il  existe  un  risque  connu  au  sein 
d’une famille possédant un groupe HLA rare. 

Les  25 %  restants  sont  des  banques  commerciales,  qui  proposent  en  tant  que  service  la 
conservation de cellules de sang de cordon à des fins autologues au profit de leurs clients. En 
Europe, on trouve de telles banques notamment en Allemagne, en Autriche, en Belgique, aux 
Pays-Bas, en Pologne et au Royaume-Uni47. 

1.11. Nécessité d’une grande diversité de cellules de sang de cordon 

Il  est  nécessaire  de  disposer  d’une  grande  diversité  de  cellules  présentant  des  types 
génétiques et HLA différents et provenant de populations diverses, de façon à pouvoir trouver 
un donneur acceptable pour toute personne nécessitant une greffe. La probabilité de trouver 
un  donneur  acceptable  est  nettement  inférieure  dans  le  cas  de  certaines  populations 
ethniques. Il est par exemple beaucoup plus facile de trouver un donneur compatible pour un 
patient  d’origine  caucasienne  que  pour  un  patient  d’origine  africaine,  étant  donné  que  la 
plupart des banques sont établies dans des pays occidentaux, et que les donneurs sont plus 
fréquemment recrutés au sein de la population caucasienne. 

1.12. Réseaux et registres 

Des  réseaux  de  banques  et  de  registres  ont  été  mis  en  place  à  l’échelon  mondial  pour 
permettre le partage et l’échange d’échantillons. Une telle coopération entre les banques est 
nécessaire si l’on veut disposer d’un choix de donneurs aussi large que possible. En général, 
les données relatives aux échantillons de sang conservés sont fournies par les registres qui 
contenaient initialement des informations sur les donneurs de moelle osseuse. Le plus grand 
registre international concernant la moelle osseuse et le sang de cordon est le Bone Marrow 
Donors  Worldwide  (BMDW)48.  Il  s’agit  d’une  collaboration  volontaire  entre  des  registres  de 
donneurs de moelle osseuse et des banques de sang de cordon, dont l'objet est de fournir des 
informations centralisées et anonymes sur les phénotypes HLA et autres données pertinentes 
relatives à des donneurs de moelle osseuse et des unités de sang de cordon en situation non 
apparentée.  Tous  les  registres  ayant trait  au  sang  de cordon  qui  participent  au  BMDW  sont 
tenus  de  se  conformer  aux  lignes  directrices  de  l’Association  mondiale  des  donneurs  de 
moelle (WMDA - World Marrow Donor Association)49, qui préconise la définition et la  

46 Rapport du Dr. J. Gunning, «A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking» (juin  2003). 
47 Rapport du Dr. J. Gunning, «A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking» (juin  2003). 
48 Internet: http://www.bmdw.org.  
49 Internet: http://www.worldmarrow.org.  

31

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
normalisation des aspects éthiques, techniques, médicaux et financiers des greffes de cellules 
souches  hématopoïétiques  à  l’échelle  internationale.  Les  attributions  du  WDMA  ont  été 
étendues aux registres de sang de cordon. En 2003, le registre BMDW contenait des données 
sur quelque 130 000 échantillons de 34 banques différentes du monde entier. 

1.13. Le réseau européen 

La  NETCORD  Foundation50  a  été  créée  en  1998  dans  le  but  de  promouvoir  l’utilisation  du 
sang de cordon ombilical en vue de greffes allogéniques de cellules souches. Cet organisme 
sans but lucratif, qui encourage la mise en place de banques de sang de cordon ombilical de 
qualité élevée, a publié des statuts et des lignes directrices afin de continuer à encourager la 
réalisation  d’études  et  la  recherche  sur  la  collecte,  le  traitement,  la  caractérisation,  la 
préservation  et  l’expansion  ex  vivo  de  sang  de  cordon  dans  le  but,  essentiellement, 
d’améliorer  la  qualité  de  tels  composants  pour  la  thérapie  cellulaire  clinique  au  niveau 
international.  Cet  organisme  regroupe  16 banques  de  12  pays  différents,  ce  qui  représente 
actuellement  près  de  72 000  unités  de  sang  de  cordon,  soit  plus  de  la  moitié  des  unités 
conservées dans le monde51. 

Afin  de  faciliter  les  recherches  d’unités  de  sang  de  cordon  par  les  centres  de  greffe, 
NETCORD  a  également  instauré  un  programme  de  recherche  en  ligne,  baptisé  « Virtual 
Office ». Les centres de greffe soumettent des demandes de recherche au « Virtual Office », 
ce  qui  leur  permet  de  ne  plus  devoir  consulter  les  nombreuses  bases  de  donnés  des 
différentes  banques  de  sang  de  cordon  et  d’obtenir  un  seul  rapport  unifié  de  recherche  sur 
toutes les unités reprises dans le répertoire NETCORD. 

Afin de garantir une qualité élevée et uniforme de l’ensemble des unités de sang de cordon 
figurant dans son répertoire, NETCORD a défini, en collaboration avec la Foundation for the 
Accreditation  of  Cellular  Therapy  (FACT),  des  normes  de  qualité  sur  la  collecte,  la 
cryoconservation,  la  conservation  et  la  mise  à  disposition  d’unités.  Toutes  les  banques 
NETCORD  doivent  obtenir  l’agrément  de  la  FACT  et,  partant,  se  conformer  aux  normes 
qualitatives FACT/NETCORD.  

1.14. La recherche en Europe 

La Commission européenne finance, en partenariat avec les États membres, des projets de 
recherche par le biais de ses programmes-cadres de recherche et de développement. 
Un projet de recherche baptisé EUROCORD a été lancé en 1996 par le European Group for 
Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT)52.  L’EBMT est un organisme sans but lucratif dont 
l’ambition est de permettre aux scientifiques et aux médecins concernés par la transplantation 
clinique  de  moelle  osseuse  de  partager  leur  expérience  et  de  mener  des  études  en 
collaboration.  Il  entend  promouvoir  tous  les  aspects  liés  à  la  greffe  de  cellules  souches 
hématopoïétiques  provenant  de  tous  types  et  sources  de  donneurs,  y  compris  la  recherche 
fondamentale et clinique, l’enseignement, la normalisation, le contrôle qualitatif et l’agrément 
des procédures de greffe. 

50 Internet: http://www.netcord.org.  
51 Audition du Prof. Wernet, président de NETCORD, le 18 novembre 2003. 
52 Internet : http://www.ebmt.org.  

32

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Au nombre des objectifs d’EUROCORD figure la création d’un registre européen des patients 
ayant reçu une greffe de sang de cordon. EUROCORD travaille en étroite collaboration avec 
les banques et registres NETCORD. 

Ces  objectifs  sont  conformes  aux  recommandations  formulées  dans  l’avis  n° 11  du  Groupe 
européen  d’éthique  concernant  la  nécessité  d’encourager  l’organisation  d’enquêtes  sur  les 
pratiques  liées  aux  banques  de  tissus  et  d’en  tirer  des  enseignements  sur  les  perspectives 
thérapeutiques, diagnostiques et de recherche offertes par les tissus humains. 

33

 
 
 
CONTEXTE LÉGAL 

La plupart des pays européens ne possèdent pas de législation spécifique sur les banques de 
sang  de  cordon.  En  fait,  leurs  pratiques  en  la  matière  diffèrent.  Seuls  quelques-uns  d’entre 
eux, dont l’Italie, ont édicté des règles spécifiques à ce sujet. 

Lorsqu’il  existe  des  réglementations  sur  les  tissus  humains  ou  le  sang  humain  en  général, 
comme en France, le sang de cordon est considéré comme un tissu et non comme du sang, 
étant donné que ce sont les cellules progénitrices hématopoïétiques présentes dans le sang 
de cordon qui sont importantes pour les greffes. Ainsi, par exemple, la directive du Parlement 
européen et du Conseil relative à l'établissement de normes de qualité et de sécurité pour le 
don,  l'obtention,  le  contrôle,  la  transformation,  la  conservation,  le  stockage  et  la  distribution 
des  tissus  et  cellules  humains  adoptée  le  2  mars  2004  porte  sur  les  cellules  progénitrices 
hématopoïétiques, mais exclut le sang et autres produits sanguins. On peut également citer à 
titre  d’exemple  le  protocole  additionnel  à  la  convention  sur  les  droits  de  l’homme  et  la 
biomédecine  relatif  à  la  transplantation  d’organes  et  de  tissus  d'origine  humaine,  qui 
s’applique aux tissus et cellules, y compris les cellules souches hématopoïétiques, mais non 
au sang et à ses produits dérivés. 

1.15. La Communauté européenne 

Le traité instituant la Communauté européenne53 dispose dans son article 152, paragraphe 4, 
point a), que «le Conseil  … contribue à la réalisation des objectifs visés au présent article en 
adoptant des mesures fixant des normes élevées de qualité et de sécurité des organes et 
substances d’origine humaine, du sang et des dérivés du sang; ces mesures ne peuvent 
empêcher un État membre de maintenir ou d’établir des mesures de protection plus strictes.». 

Un cadre légal a été adopté en vue de la mise en oeuvre de normes élevées de qualité.  

Citons  tout  d’abord  la  directive 2002/98/CE  du  27 janvier   200354  établissant  des  normes  de 
qualité  et  de  sécurité  pour  la  collecte,  le  contrôle,  la  transformation,  la  conservation  et  la 
distribution du sang humain et des composants sanguins, qui ne s’applique toutefois pas aux 
cellules souches hématopoïétiques. 

Ensuite, la directive du Parlement européen et du Conseil relative à l'établissement de normes 
de qualité et de sécurité pour le don, l'obtention, le contrôle, la transformation, la conservation, 
le stockage et la distribution des tissus et cellules humains adoptée le 2 mars 2004 s’applique 
aux  banques  de  sang  de  cordon,  les  cellules  souches  hématopoïétiques  étant  en  effet 
considérées comme des tissus. Les greffes de tissus et de cellules offrent de plus en plus de 
possibilités accrues en matière de traitement de maladies jusqu’ici incurables. L’objectif de la 
directive est de garantir la qualité et la sûreté des tissus et des cellules au niveau européen, 
notamment pour prévenir tout risque de contamination.  

53  Les 
textes  des 
search_treaties.html.  
54 Journal officiel L 33 du 8/2/2003, p. 30 à 40. 

traités  peuvent  être  consultés  sur 

l’Internet:  http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/en/search/ 

34

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
Bien  que  la  directive  ne  mentionne  pas  spécifiquement  les  banques  de  sang  de  cordon 
commerciales  ou  privées  à  but  lucratif,  elle  leur  est  également  applicable.  Cela  signifie  par 
conséquent que les établissements de ce type sont également tenus d’appliquer les normes de 
qualité  et  de  sécurité  énoncées  dans  la  directive,  notamment  en  matière  de  formation  du 
personnel ou d’agrément. 

La Communauté européenne n’est toutefois pas compétente en ce qui concerne les mesures 
nationales  relatives  au  don  ou  à  l’utilisation  médicale  d’organes  et  de  sang.  En  effet, 
l’article 152,  paragraphe 5,  du  traité  instituant  la  Communauté  européenne  dispose  que 
«l’action  de  la  Communauté  dans  le  domaine  de  la  santé  publique  respecte  pleinement  les 
responsabilités  des  États  membres  en  matière  d’organisation  de  fourniture  de  services  de 
santé et de soins médicaux. En particulier, les mesures visées au paragraphe 4, point a), ne 
portent pas atteinte aux dispositions nationales relatives aux dons d'organes et de sang ou à 
leur utilisation à des fins médicales».  

Il  convient  toutefois  de noter  que  l’article 12 de  la directive  dispose que «les  États  membres 
prennent les mesures nécessaires pour encourager les dons volontaires et non rémunérés de 
tissus  et  cellules  humains  en  vue  de  garantir  que,  dans  la  mesure  du  possible,  ceux-ci 
proviennent de ces dons», qu’ils «font rapport à la Commission sur ces mesures» et que «sur 
la  base  de  ces  rapports,  la  Commission  informe  le  Parlement  européen  et  le  Conseil  des 
mesures complémentaires nécessaires qu'elle entend prendre à l'échelle communautaire». Elle 
prévoit  également  que  «les  États  membres  encouragent  le  caractère  non  lucratif  des 
opérations pratiquées pour l'obtention de tissus et de cellules». 

En  ce  qui  concerne  le  devoir  d’information,  l’article 28,  paragraphe d),  fait  référence  aux 
informations à fournir dans le cadre du don de cellules et/ou de tissus. 

Enfin,  le  respect  des  droits  fondamentaux  est  cité  dans  les  considérants  de  la  directive,  qui 
mentionnent également les avis du GEE. 

1.16. Le Conseil de l’Europe 

L’article   21  de  la  convention  sur  les  droits  de  l’homme  et  la  biomédecine55  du  Conseil  de 
l’Europe  (convention  d’Oviedo)  dispose  que  «le  corps  humain  et  ses  parties  ne  doivent  pas 
être, en tant que tels, source de profit». 

Aux  termes  de  l’article 2  du  protocole  additionnel  à  cette  même  convention56  relatif  à  la 
transplantation  d'organes  et  de  tissus  d'origine  humaine,  ouvert  à  la  signature  le  24 janvier  
2002,  «les  dispositions  du  présent  protocole  applicables  aux  tissus  s’appliquent  aussi  aux 
cellules, y compris aux cellules souches hématopoïétiques».  

Le Comité européen de la santé du Conseil de l’Europe a adopté un projet de recommandation 
sur les banques de sang de cordon ombilical destiné à un usage autologue. Au moment de 

55 Le texte de la convention peut être consulté sur l’Internet: 
http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/fr/treaties/html/164.htm. 
56 Le texte du protocole additionnel à la Convention relatif à la transplantation peut être consulté sur l’Internet: 
http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/fr/Treaties/Html/186.htm. 

35

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 l’adoption de cet avis la recommandation n’a cependant pas encore été adoptée par le Conseil 
des Ministres. Ses recommandations aux États membres sont les suivantes: 

1.  «Si des banques de sang de cordon ombilical sont créées, elles devraient l'être sur la 
base de dons volontaires et altruistes destinés à la transplantation allogénique et à la 
recherche. 

2.  La  création  de  banques  de  sang  de  cordon  destiné  à  un  usage  autologue  et  la 
promotion  du  don  pour  une  utilisation  autologue  ne  devraient  pas  être  encouragées 
par les États membres ou leurs services de santé. 

3.  Des  informations  précises  devraient  être  fournies  à  la  population  au  sujet  des 

avantages et des inconvénients des banques de sang de cordon. 

4.  Si des banques de sang de cordon destiné à un usage autologue sont créées, toute 
publicité ou information fournie aux familles devra être précise, et le consentement au 
stockage du sang de cordon ombilical pleinement éclairé. 

5.  Les  banques  de  sang  de  cordon  destiné  à  un  usage  autologue  créées  doivent 
satisfaire  aux  critères  de  qualité  et  de  sécurité  définis  par  le  Guide  du  Conseil  de 
l'Europe sur la sécurité et l'assurance de qualité des organes, tissus et cellules.» 

1.17. Le cadre légal français 

Bien qu’il n’existe pas de réglementation spécifique concernant le sang de cordon ombilical, il y 
a tout lieu de penser que les dispositions du code de la santé publique relatives aux tissus et 
aux cellules lui seraient applicables, ce qui signifie que le sang de cordon ombilical ne peut être 
prélevé  que  par  des  établissements  bénéficiant  d'une  autorisation  administrative,  et  ce 
uniquement à des fins thérapeutiques ou scientifiques.  

D’une part, bien que la création et le fonctionnement de banques commerciales privées en vue 
de  l’autoconservation  de  sang  de  cordon  ne  soient  pas  expressément  interdits,  de  telles 
banques  ne  semblent  pas  satisfaire  aux  principes  et  règles  énoncés  par  le  code  de  santé 
publique.  D’autre  part,  selon  le  droit  civil  des  contrats  et  selon  la  déontologie  médicale,  la 
validité ou la force obligatoire des contrats par lesquels les parents sont encouragés à accepter 
le prélèvement et la conservation de sang de cordon pour leur enfant, compte tenu notamment 
de l’absence d’intérêt médical et d’utilité thérapeutique actuelle ou future, sont discutables. 

En décembre  2002, le Comité consultatif national d'éthique pour les sciences de la vie et de la 
santé  (CCNE)  a  rendu  un  avis  sur  les  banques  de  sang  de  cordon  ombilical  en  vue  d’une 
utilisation autologue ou en recherche (avis n°  74)57. 

57 Le texte de l’avis peut être consulté sur l’Internet: http://www.ccne-ethique.fr/english/start.htm. 

36

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Le  CCNE  conclut  que,  bien  que  l’interdiction  des  banques  privées  ne  puisse  être 
recommandée, il convient d’attirer l’attention sur un certain nombre de risques: 

•  «le  danger  le  plus  grave  est  pour  la  société  dans  la  mesure  où  l’instauration  de  telles 
banques  est  de  nature  à  s’opposer  au  principe  de  solidarité,  sans  lequel  il  n’y  a  pas  de 
survie possible pour une société quelle qu’elle soit.»; 

•  «de telles banques suscitent des utopies et déguisent un but mercantile sous le prétexte 

de rendre service à l'enfant»; 

• 

•  si  une  utilisation  autologue  s'avérait  utile,  les  principes  de  justice  et  d’équité  devraient 
primer, et la conservation autologue devrait devenir une pratique routinière et être prise en 
charge par les instances publiques; 
l’utilité d’une conservation autologue et son coût pourraient constituer une provocation pour 
les pays les plus pauvres; 
lors de l’accouchement, la mère et l’enfant pourraient ne pas bénéficier de toute l’attention 
et des soins requis; 
la  publicité  des  banques  privées  pourrait  avoir  une  incidence  sur  les  sentiments 
qu’éprouvent les parents, tels que la crainte et la culpabilité, même s’il convient de préciser 
qu’à  ce  jour,  une  conservation  autologue  ne  se  justifie  aucunement  d’un  point  de  vue 
scientifique; 

• 

• 

•  si  la  gestion  d’une  banque  autologue  était  confiée  à  l’État,  le  coût  élevé  de  la  prise  en 

charge d’une technique actuellement inutile serait contraire à l'éthique. 

le  CCNE 

En  conclusion, 
le 
développement  de  banques  publiques  conservant  le  sang  de  cordon  ombilical  à  des  fins 
allogéniques. 

instances  publiques  de  promouvoir 

recommande  aux 

1.18. La situation en Belgique 

Le 7 décembre 2001, le Conseil supérieur d’hygiène belge a rendu un avis sur la révision de la 
réglementation des banques de tissus58. Ses recommandations concernant le cordon, le sang 
de cordon et les cellules dérivées sont notamment les suivantes:  

•  «le cordon et les cellules du sang du cordon font partie de la législation des tissus et 

cellules; 

•  des standards de qualités pour les banques de cordons doivent être élaborés; 
• 

les  usages  thérapeutiques  autologues  à  des  fins  préventives  différées  doivent  être 
interdits».  

Le  Conseil  supérieur  d’hygiène  énumère,  dans  son  annexe II,  les  conditions  d’agrément  et 
d’autorisation des activités liées aux banques de tissus ou de cellules. Il prévoit en particulier 
que «chaque banque de tissus ou de cellules doit être agréée par le Ministre après un rapport 
du service compétent et après l’avis du Conseil supérieur de l’hygiène. Cet agrément ne peut 
être accordé que pour des (…) organismes à but non lucratif». 

Un  décret  royal  est  actuellement  préparé  par  le  ministère  de  la  santé  publique59  afin  de 
disposer d’une réglementation plus claire concernant les banques de sang de cordon ombilical. 

58 Internet : http://www.health.fgov.be/CSH_HGR/Francais/Avis/Avis_Banques_Tissus.htm.  
59  Internet : http://www.lachambre.be/QRVA/pdf/50/50K0156.pdf , p. 120. 

37

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Ce projet de décret dispose que toute banque de tissus devra être agréée par le ministère de 
la santé publique. Il propose que cet agrément ne soit accordé qu'à des organismes à but non 
lucratif. Il interdit aussi clairement l'utilisation de cellules de sang de cordon ombilical à des fins 
préventives d'intention différée, ainsi que toute discrimination visant à avantager une personne 
dans  l’accès  aux  possibilités  thérapeutiques  des  tissus  d’origine  humaine,  toute  forme  de 
publicité et la poursuite d’un but lucratif.  

1.19. Le droit italien60 

Le  ministère  de  la  santé  a  adopté  le  30 décembre 2002  une  ordonnance  portant  sur  des 
mesures urgentes en ce qui concerne les cellules souches du sang de cordon ombilical. Celle-
ci  remplace  l’ordonnance  adoptée  le  11 janvier 2002.  Elle  a  été  publiée  au  Journal  officiel 
italien  (Gazzetta  Ufficiale)  n° 27  du  3 février 2003  et  a  une  durée  de  validité  d’un  an.  Elle 
prévoit ce qui suit: 

•  les  banques  de  sang  de  cordon  ne  sont  autorisées  qu’en  tant  que  structures  de 

conservation publiques; 

•  chaque  banque  doit  également  obtenir  l’agrément  du  gouvernement  de  la  région  dans 

laquelle elle est installée;  

•  les banques privées sont interdites; 
•  l’importation et l’exportation de sang de cordon doivent être autorisées par le ministère de la 

santé; 

•  ces dispositions sont jugées nécessaires en raison du fait que les thérapies recourant à des 

cellules souches issues de sang de cordon ombilical sont toujours à l’étude. 

60 Internet : http://www.cittadinolex.kataweb.it/Article/0,1519,22470|99,00.html.  

38

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
CONTEXTE ÉTHIQUE 

1.20. Les principes éthiques fondamentaux 

Plusieurs  principes  et  valeurs  éthiques  fondamentaux  peuvent  être  considérés  comme 
pertinents aux fins du présent avis: 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

le principe du respect de la dignité et de l’intégrité humaines, qui étaie le principe de 
non-commercialisation du corps humain; 
le  principe  d’autonomie  ou  le  droit  à  l’autodétermination  sur  la  base  d’informations 
exhaustives et correctes; 
les  principes  de  justice  et  de  solidarité  en  ce  qui  concerne  l’accès  équitable  aux 
services de soins de santé; 
le principe de bienfaisance, ou l’obligation de faire le bien d’autrui, en particulier dans 
le domaine des soins de santé; 
le  principe  de  non-malfaisance,  ou  l’obligation  de  ne  pas  nuire  à  autrui,  y  compris 
l’obligation  de  protéger  les  groupes  et  individus  vulnérables  et  de  respecter  la  vie 
privée et la confidentialité; 
le  principe  de  proportionnalité,  qui  implique  un  équilibre  entre  les  moyens  et  les 
objectifs. 

Il  existe  également  certains  conflits  de  valeurs.  Les  valeurs  de  liberté  et  de  libre  entreprise 
peuvent s’opposer aux principes de solidarité et de justice, en vertu desquels l'accès aux soins 
de  santé  devrait  être  garanti  sur  une  base  équitable  en  fonction  de  besoins  réalistes,  ainsi 
qu'au principe de protection des groupes vulnérables. 

1.21. Questions éthiques concernant les banques de tissus 

Les implications éthiques des banques de sang de cordon dans le cas d’échantillons ayant fait 
l’objet d’un don en vue de greffes allogéniques ou à des fins de recherche sont identiques à 
celles de toute banque de tissus. Cette question a déjà été abordée dans l’avis n° 11 du GEE 
sur les aspects éthiques des banques de tissus humains (21 juillet 1998). Les valeurs éthiques 
mises en exergue dans cet avis sont les suivantes: intégrité du corps, respect de la vie privée 
et confidentialité des données, promotion de la solidarité, caractère équitable de l’accès aux 
soins de santé et enfin, information et consentement des donneurs. 

En  ce  qui  concerne  le  sang  de  cordon  ombilical,  il  est  indiqué  dans  l’avis  n° 11  que  «les 
informations données à la femme ou au couple devraient clairement expliciter ces nouvelles 
possibilités thérapeutiques, tout en insistant cependant sur leur caractère encore tout à fait 
expérimental».  De  même,  «les activités des banques de tissus devraient être en principe 
réservées à des établissements publics de santé ou à d’autres organismes à but non lucratif», 
mais  «les banques de tissus créées par les industries doivent être soumises aux mêmes 
contraintes d’agrément et de contrôle que celles fonctionnant dans le cadre d’organismes 
sans but lucratif».  Le  GEE  insiste  sur  l’impératif  éthique  de  protection  de  la  santé  par  des 
règles  de  qualité  et  de  sécurité  appropriées  et  préconise  un  cadre  légal  européen  en  la 
matière; enfin, il recommande que l’Union européenne organise «des enquêtes périodiques au 
niveau des États membres pour recueillir et diffuser des informations sur les activités relatives 

39

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aux tissus humains, depuis leur prélèvement jusqu’à leur distribution, sur l’organisation des 
banques de tissus, notamment leur caractère lucratif ou non, …». 

1.22. Aspects spécifiques des banques de sang de cordon conservé à des 
fins autologues 

Les banques de sang de cordon conservé pour une éventuelle utilisation autologue ultérieure 
suscitent  des  craintes  supplémentaires  sur  le  plan  éthique.  Jusqu’ici,  les  banques  de  tissus 
s’appuyaient  sur  des  dons  gracieux  destinés  au  traitement  d'autres  personnes  ou  à  la 
recherche.  Ces  banques,  en  ce  qu’elles  impliquent  un  acte  de  solidarité  ou  de  générosité, 
contribuent  à  la  cohésion  sociale,  alors  que  les  banques  commerciales  de  sang  de  cordon 
poursuivent  un  but  lucratif.  Cela  traduit  une  évolution  plus  générale  d’un  système  de  santé 
basé  sur  la  solidarité  et  motivé  par  des  considérations  de  santé  publique,  système  qui  a 
caractérisé  l’Europe  au  cours  des  dernières  décennies,  à  un  système  de  soins  de  santé 
financé par le secteur privé. 

Les  services  que  ces  banques  proposent  aux  parents  contre  rétribution  ne  peuvent  être 
utilisés de façon réaliste dans un avenir prévisible. Proposés et fournis par des médecins, ils 
pourraient poser un problème de confiance. 

1.23. Information des consommateurs/citoyens 

Les citoyens pourraient être tentés de profiter de toutes les possibilités offertes en matière de 
santé,  et  ce  même  si  elles  ne  sont  pas  validées.  En  outre,  la  grossesse  et  la  naissance 
constituent  des  événements  durant  lesquels  les  femmes  et  les  parents  peuvent  se  sentir 
vulnérables.  Cette vulnérabilité  et  le  sentiment  de  culpabilité  des  parents  souhaitant  tout 
mettre en œuvre pour le bien de leur enfant, sentiments dus à des informations erronées ou 
trop  optimistes,  pourraient  inciter  des  personnes  à  consacrer  de  l’argent  à  quelque  chose 
qu'elles ne peuvent pas réellement s'offrir et qui peut ne pas valoir les sommes ainsi investies. 

1.24. Protection des groupes vulnérables 

Il  convient  également  de  porter  une  attention  particulière  aux  aspects  liés  au  genre,  étant 
donné  que  la  collecte  se  déroule  durant  l'accouchement.  Les  pressions  exercées  pour  que 
cette  collecte  soit  réalisée  de  façon  à  répondre  à  une  demande  pressante  des  parents 
peuvent  être  plus  fortes  que  lorsque  la  collecte de  sang de  cordon  constitue une  procédure 
systématique s’inscrivant dans un contexte de dons. Elles risquent de détourner l'attention des 
médecins des soins à dispenser à la mère et à l'enfant. 

1.25. Fiabilité des banques 

Les banques commerciales de sang de cordon proposent une conservation à long terme, mais 
elles peuvent faire faillite ou cesser leurs activités à tout moment, ce qui risque de causer un 
préjudice  aux  consommateurs,  qui  pourraient  ne  pas  recevoir  ce  pour  quoi  ils  pensent  avoir 
payé. 

40

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.26. Recrutement de donneurs 

Les banques publiques ont besoin d’une grande diversité d’échantillons représentant le plus 
grand nombre possible de types HLA afin de pouvoir trouver un donneur compatible pour tout 
bénéficiaire. Toutefois, si les banques privées voient leur nombre et leur succès augmenter, 
les banques publiques pourraient ne plus trouver de donneurs potentiels, qui préféreront que 
le sang de cordon de leur nouveau-né soit conservé à des fins autologues plutôt que d'en faire 
don.  On  peut  donc  craindre  que  les  banques  publiques  puissent  éprouver  davantage  de 
difficultés à collecter suffisamment d’échantillons pour atteindre la masse critique nécessaire.   

Par ailleurs, si les banques publiques de sang de cordon reçoivent suffisamment de types de 
sang différents, y compris les types rares, et si le réseau de banques existantes est adéquat et 
que  les  registres  se  développent,  tout  individu  aura  une  chance  raisonnable  de  trouver  un 
donneur  compatible et d’avoir  accès aux  greffes nécessaires  pour  son  traitement  en  cas de 
besoin.  

1.27. Caractère équitable de l'accès aux soins de santé 

L’utilisation  par  un  patient  de  ses  propres  cellules  de  sang  de  cordon  est  actuellement  très 
hypothétique, mais si la médecine régénératrice devait se développer à l’avenir de telle sorte 
que l'utilisation de cellules souches autologues devienne possible, le fait de conserver le sang 
de cordon d’un nouveau-né à sa naissance pourrait augmenter les chances de celui-ci d'avoir 
accès à de nouvelles thérapies. Cela serait fonction de l’adéquation de l’échantillon de sang 
de cordon prélevé à des fins autologues avec la thérapie spécifique requise. Tout le monde 
n'est pas capable de supporter le coût d'une telle conservation. En pareil cas, l’accès serait lié 
aux ressources financières. 

41

 
 
 
 
 
 
2. AVIS 

Les  aspects  éthiques  des  banques  de  tissus  humains  en  général  ont  été  traités  dans  l’avis 
n° 11  du  Groupe  européen  d’éthique  des  sciences  et  des  nouvelles  technologies  du 
21 juillet 1998.  Les  constatations  faites  dans  cet  avis61  sont  également  valables  pour  les 
banques de sang de cordon. Ces dernières soulèvent cependant aussi des questions éthiques 
spécifiques; celles-ci sont traitées dans le présent avis, qui accorde une attention particulière 
aux banques commerciales de sang de cordon à usage autologue. 

Le Groupe émet l’avis suivant:  

2.1.  

2.2. 

2.3. 

2.4.  

Il convient de s’interroger sur la légitimité des banques commerciales de sang de cordon 
à  usage  autologue,  en  ce  qu’elles  proposent  un  service  qui,  à  ce  jour,  ne  présente 
aucune utilité réelle en termes de possibilités thérapeutiques. Ces banques promettent 
donc plus qu’elles ne peuvent offrir. Leurs activités suscitent de graves critiques sur le 
plan éthique.  

Bien que certains membres du Groupe considèrent qu’il y a lieu d’interdire les activités 
de ce type de banques, la majorité estime qu’il faudrait les décourager, une interdiction 
formelle  constituant  une  restriction  indue  à  la  liberté  d’entreprise  et  de  choix  des 
individus/couples. Il convient que ces activités soient soumises à des conditions strictes. 

Le Groupe note qu’un État membre au moins a déjà interdit les banques commerciales 
de  sang  de  cordon.  Ces  établissements  pourraient  être  considérés  comme  illégaux  et 
les  contrats,  comme  nuls  ou  non  exécutoires  dans  d’autres  États  membres.  Si  les 
banques  commerciales  de  sang  de  cordon  sont  autorisées  par  un  État  membre,  leurs 
activités doivent être  régies  par une  réglementation  stricte,  prévoyant  l’octroi  préalable 
de  licences  par  l'instance  nationale  compétente  et  une  supervision  étroite  des 
procédures mises en œuvre tant dans le secteur public que dans le secteur privé. 

Si les banques commerciales de sang de cordon sont autorisées, il convient de fournir 
des  informations  appropriées  aux  consommateurs  qui  souhaitent  recourir  à  leurs 
services, en précisant notamment que la probabilité que l’échantillon puisse être utilisé 
pour  soigner  leur  enfant  est,  à  l'heure  actuelle,  négligeable,  que  les  possibilités 
thérapeutiques futures revêtent un caractère très hypothétique et qu’il n’existe à ce jour 
aucune 
la  recherche  actuelle  débouchera  sur  des  applications 
thérapeutiques  spécifiques  de  cellules  de  sang  de  cordon  à  des  fins  autologues.  Les 
informations  doivent  par  conséquent  être  particulièrement  explicites  sur  le  fait  que 
l’autoconservation  présente  peu  d'intérêt  en 
l’état  actuel  des  connaissances 
scientifiques. Ces informations doivent être fournies dans tous les médias, y compris sur 
Internet, et figurer dans tout contrat liant les banques commerciales à leurs clients. 

indication  que 

61 Voir le point 1.20. 

42

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
2.5.  

2.6.  

2.7.  

2.8.   

2.9.  

2.10.  

2.11. 

Toute forme  de  publicité émanant  de  banques  commerciales  de  sang  de  cordon  dans 
les médias, y compris sur Internet, doit faire l’objet d’un contrôle adéquat de la part des 
autorités publiques.  

Les  banques  commerciales  de  sang  de  cordon  doivent  observer  les  mêmes  normes 
qualitatives  que toute autre banque de tissus. Le GEE salue par conséquent la directive 
du  Parlement  européen  et  du  Conseil  adoptée 
le  2  mars  2004  concernant 
«l’établissement de normes de qualité et de sécurité pour le don, l’obtention, le contrôle, 
la  transformation,  la  conservation,  le  stockage  et  la  distribution  des  tissus  et  cellules 
humains», qui prévoit un cadre juridique européen, notamment en termes d’autorisation, 
d’octroi  de  licences,  d’agrément,  d’inspections,  de  contrôles,  de  promotion  et  de 
publicité, ainsi que d’expérience du personnel. 

Étant donné le risque de cessation d'activités ou de faillite des banques commerciales 
de  sang  de  cordon,  il  convient  que  les  consommateurs  soient  informés  et  que  des 
assurances garantissent la continuité de la conservation et le transfert des échantillons 
vers une autre banque ou le dédommagement des intéressés. 

La collecte de sang de cordon ne doit pas perturber le déroulement de l’accouchement, 
ni ne présenter aucun risque pour la mère et l’enfant. 

Actuellement, dans les cas exceptionnels où la conservation du sang de cordon à des 
fins  autologues  peut  se  justifier  pour  des  familles  présentant  un  risque  de  maladies 
spécifiques  ou  des  types  HLA  rares,  il  convient  de  proposer  à  ces  familles  que  la 
conservation  du  sang  de  cordon  soit  prise  en  charge  par  des  banques  publiques,  de 
façon à garantir un accès équitable aux services de soins de santé à toute personne qui 
en a besoin. 

Considérant que la population européenne est de plus en plus multiethnique, et afin de 
permettre  un  accès équitable  aux greffes pour  tout  citoyen quelle que  soit  son origine 
ethnique, il convient que les instances publiques prennent des mesures spécifiques afin 
de  disposer  de  suffisamment  de  dons  provenant  de  groupes  ethniques  différents  et 
présentant  des  types  HLA  différents,  de  sorte  qu’il  soit  possible,  pour  tout  patient 
nécessitant une greffe, de trouver un donneur approprié.  

À l’avenir, si la situation évoluait de telle sorte que l'utilisation autologue des cellules de 
sang de cordon d’un individu présente un intérêt, la conservation de ce sang ne devrait 
pas être un service confié à des banques commerciales, mais devrait être assurée par le 
secteur public, de façon à garantir à tous un accès équitable aux soins de santé.   

43

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.12.  

2.13.  

Il convient d’intensifier le soutien apporté aux banques publiques de sang de cordon 
aux  fins  de  greffes  allogéniques  et  de  garantir  leur  fonctionnement  à  long  terme. 
Toutefois,  l’utilisation  des  banques  de  sang  de  cordon  demeurera  limitée  aussi 
longtemps que les réseaux et les registres ne seront pas également encouragés. En 
effet, pour que tout patient nécessitant une greffe soit assuré de trouver un échantillon 
compatible, il est essentiel de développer les réseaux de banques et de registres de 
donneurs  afin  d’être  en  mesure  de  trouver  rapidement  un  donneur  compatible;  il 
convient par conséquent de promouvoir et d’aider de tels réseaux et registres. 

Un vaste débat de portée européenne sur le rôle croissant du marché dans le système 
des soins de santé, ainsi que sur ses avantages et inconvénients, devrait permettre de 
sensibiliser  les  citoyens  européens  aux  tendances  actuelles  et  à  leurs  implications, 
notamment pour ce qui est des questions soulevées dans le présent avis.  

Le Groupe européen d’éthique des sciences et des nouvelles technologies 
Le Président: Göran Hermerén 

Les membres: 

Nicos C. Alivizatos 

Inez de Beaufort 

Rafael Capurro 

Yvon Englert 

Catherine Labrusse-Riou  

Anne McLaren 

Linda Nielsen  

Pere Puigdomenech Rosell 

Stefano Rodota 

Günter Virt  

Peter Whittaker 

44

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STELLUNGNAHME DER EUROPÄISCHEN GRUPPE FÜR ETHIK 

DER NATURWISSENSCHAFTEN UND DER NEUEN 

TECHNOLOGIEN BEI DER EUROPÄISCHEN KOMMISSION 

Nr. 19   
Original: Englisch 

16.März 2004 

******************************************************************************** 

ETHISCHE ASPEKTE VON NABELSCHNURBLUTBANKEN  

Bezug:   
Berichterstatter:  

Anfrage von Romano Prodi, Präsident der Europäischen Kommission 
Dr. P. Puigdomenech Rosell und Prof. G. Virt 

******************************************************************************** 

Die Europäische Gruppe für Ethik in Naturwissenschaften und neuen Technologien (EGE), 

gestützt  auf  das  von  Romano  Prodi,  Präsident  der  Europäischen  Kommission,  am 
24. August 2001  an  die  EGE  gerichtete  Anfrage  um  Stellungnahme  über  private 
Nabelschnurblutbanken; 

gestützt  auf  den  Vertrag  über  die  Europäische  Union,  insbesondere  auf  Artikel 6  der 
Gemeinsamen  Bestimmungen  über  die  Achtung  der  Grundrechte,  und  auf  Artikel 152  EG-
Vertrag  über  das  Gesundheitswesen, 
insbesondere  Absatz 4  Buchstabe a)  betreffend 
Substanzen menschlichen Ursprungs; 

gestützt  auf  die  vom  Europäischen  Rat  in  Biarritz  am  14. Oktober 2000  angenommene  und 
vom  Europäischen  Parlament,  vom  Rat  und  von  der  Kommission  am  7. Dezember 2000  in 
Nizza feierlich verkündete Charta der Grundrechte der Europäischen Union, insbesondere auf 
Artikel 1  über  die  "Menschenwürde",  Artikel 3  über  das  "Recht  auf  Unversehrtheit",  Artikel 8 
über den "Schutz personenbezogener Daten" und Artikel 38 über "Verbraucherschutz"; 

gestützt  auf  die  Richtlinie  des  Europäischen  Parlaments  und  des  Rates  zur  Festlegung  von 
Qualitäts-  und  Sicherheitsstandards  für  die  Spende,  Beschaffung,  Testung,  Verarbeitung, 
Konservierung, Lagerung und Verteilung von menschlichen Geweben und Zellen vom 2 März 
2004; 

45

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gestützt  auf  die  Richtlinie  95/46/EG  des  Europäischen  Parlaments  und  des  Rates  vom 
24. Oktober 1995 zum Schutz  der Individuen bei der Verarbeitung personenbezogener Daten 
und zum freien Datenverkehr62; 

gestützt auf das Übereinkommen des Europarates über Menschenrechte und Biomedizin, das 
am  4. April 1997  in  Oviedo  unterzeichnet  wurde,  insbesondere  auf  Artikel 5  über  die 
"Einwilligung nach Aufklärung" und Artikel 21 über das "Verbot finanziellen Gewinns" und das 
am  24. Februar 2001  zur  Zeichnung  aufgelegte  Zusatzprotokoll  über  die  Transplantation  von 
Organen und Geweben menschlichen Ursprungs; 

gestützt  auf  die  am  11. November  1997  von  der  UNESCO  verabschiedete  Allgemeine 
Erklärung über das menschliche Genom und die Menschenrechte; 

gestützt  auf  die  verschiedenen  Gesetze  und  Vorschriften  einzelner  Mitgliedstaaten  über 
Nabelschnurblut; 

gestützt  auf  die  von  den  nationalen  Stellen  zu  diesem  Thema  vorgelegten  Stellungnahmen, 
für  Gesundheits-  und 
namentlich  die  Stellungnahme  Nr. 74  des  Nationalen  Ethikrats 
Biowissenschaften  (National  Consultative  Ethics  Committee)  vom  12. Dezember 2002  über 
Nabelschnurblutbanken  für  autologe  Verwendung  oder  für  Forschungszwecke  (Frankreich)63, 
die  Erklärung  der  belgischen  Ärztekammer  für  Gynäkologen  und  Allgemeinmediziner64,  die 
Stellungnahme  des  Wissenschaftlichen  Beirats  des  Royal  College  of  Obstetricians  and 
Gynaecologists 
vom  Oktober  200165,  die  Stellungnahme  des  belgischen 
Gesundheitsrates  vom  7. Dezember 2001  über  die  Änderung  der  Rechtsvorschriften  über 
Gewebebanken66  und  die  Empfehlungen  der  American  Academy  of  Paediatrics  vom 
14. Juli 199967;  

(VK) 

gestützt auf die bereits veröffentlichten Stellungnahmen der EGE Nr. 11 vom 21.07.1998 über 
ethische  Aspekte  von  Datenbanken  mit  menschlichem  Gewebe  und  Nr. 15  vom  14.11.2000 
über ethische Aspekte der Erforschung und Verwendung menschlicher Stammzellen68;; 

gestützt  auf  die  Anhörungen  von  Sachverständigen  und  Kommissionsdienststellen  vom 
16. September 2003,  18. November 2003  und  16. Dezember 2003  in  Brüssel  sowie  vom 
20. Oktober 2003 in Rom; 

nach Anhörung der Berichterstatter Dr. P. Puigdomenech Rosell und Prof. G. Virt; 

62 ABl. L 281 vom 23.11.1995, S. 31. 
63 http://www.ccne-ethique.fr/english/start.htm.
64 http://www.ordomedic.be/braf/sangcordon.htm. 
65 http://www.rcog.org.uk/print.asp?PageID=430&Type=main. 
66 http://www.health.fgov.be/CSH_HGR/Francais/Avis/Avis_Banques_Tissus.htm. 
67 http://www.cordblood.med.ucla.edu/experts.html. 
68 http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm. 

46

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1.  IN ERWÄGUNG NACHSTEHENDER GRÜNDE: 

HINTERGRUND  DER ANFRAGE 

Diese Stellungnahme über die ethischen Aspekte von Nabelschnurblutbanken wird auf Antrag 
von  Kommissionspräsident  Prodi  (2001)  vorgelegt.  Bedenken  hinsichtlich  kommerzieller 
Nabelschnurblutbanken  wurden  auch 
in  Anfragen69  der  Mitglieder  des  Europäischen 
Parlaments  an  die  Europäische  Kommission  zum  Ausdruck  gebracht.  Bedenken  bestehen 
hinsichtlich  der  Tatsache,  dass  werdende  Eltern  mit  Versprechungen  über  die  Vorteile  von 
Nabelschnurbluttransplantationen  zur  Behandlung  einiger  Krankheiten  dafür  gewonnen 
wurden, Nabelschnurblut von Neugeborenen gegen Bezahlung in einer Zellbank zu lagern, um 
es für die Behandlung von Krankheiten des Kindes oder eines seiner Familienangehörigen zu 
verwenden, obwohl es nach dem derzeitigen medizinischen Wissensstand keinerlei Nachweis 
für die Wirksamkeit der Behandlung gibt.  

EINLEITUNG 

ist  bekannt,  dass  die 

Seit  1988 
im  Nabelschnurblut  vorhandenen  hämatopoetischen 
Stammzellen  bei  einigen  Erbkrankheiten,  schweren  Blut-  und  Immunkrankheiten,  z. B. 
Leukämie, 
für  die  allogene  Transplantation  verwendet  werden  können.  Nach  der 
Transplantation können die hämatopoetischen Stammzellen beim Patienten eine Repopulation 
des  Knochenmarks  bewirken  und  als  Grundlage  für  die  Produktion  von  Blutzellen  dienen. 
Dieses  Verfahren  findet  als  Alternative  zur  Knochenmarktransplantation  immer  häufiger 
Anwendung.  

um 

wurden 

Zellbanken 

eingerichtet, 

Nabelschnurstammzellen 

Weltweit 
für 
Transplantationszwecke  zur  Verfügung  zu  haben.  Krankenhäuser  oder  Organisationen  ohne 
Gewinnorientierung  führen  diese  Zellbanken,  sammeln  die  Proben  von  den  Spendern  und 
stellen die Zellen bereit, wenn Transplantationsbedarf besteht. 
In  jüngster  Zeit  bieten  private  Unternehmen  werdenden  Eltern  die  Konservierung  von 
Nabelschnurblut  von  Neugeborenen  für  die  eigene  Nutzung  oder  die  Nutzung  durch  nahe 
Verwandte. Es können verschiedene Arten von Nabelschnurblutbanken unterschieden werden: 
private oder öffentliche, mit oder ohne Gewinnorientierung. 

In  dieser  Stellungnahme  hat  die  Gruppe  folgende  Blutbanken  untersucht:  1.  öffentliche 
Blutbanken (ohne Gewinnorientierung), die Nabelschnurstammzellen von Spendern lagern und 
diese bereitstellen, wenn eine Transplantation an einen nicht verwandten Patienten angeordnet 
wird, und 2. private Blutbanken, die Eltern eine kommerzielle Dienstleistung anbieten, um die 
Zellen zu konservieren und in der Zukunft für ihr Kind oder ihre Kinder zu verwenden. 

69 Schriftliche Anfrage E-1079/01 von Ria Oomen-Ruijten (ABl. C 340 E vom 04.12.2001, S. 166) und Schriftliche 
Anfrage E-3677/02 von Bart Staes (ABl. C 137 E vom 12.06.2003, S. 238). 

47

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
DEFINITIONEN 

Für die Zwecke dieser Stellungnahme gelten folgende Definitionen: 

a)  "Nabelschnurblut": Plazenta-Restblut aus der Nabelschnur des Neugeborenen; 

b)  "Stammzellen":  Zellen,  die  sowohl  sich  selbst  vermehren  als  auch  in  unterschiedliche 

Zellarten ausdifferenzieren können; 

c)  "Progenitor-Stammzellen": Zellen, die nur einen einzigen Zelltyp bilden; 

d)  "hämatopoetische Stammzellen": Zellen, aus denen Blutzellen entstehen; 

e)  "pluripotente Stammzellen": Zellen, die sämtliche Zelltypen des Körpers bilden können;  

f) 

"HLA-(Humanes  Leukozyten-Antigen)-Typen"  werden  von  den  auf  der  Oberfläche  der 
Leukozyten  vorhandenen  Proteinen  bestimmt,  die  es  ermöglichen,  die  Zellen  des 
Individuums  zu  erkennen.  Identische  oder  ähnliche  HLA-Typen  sind  Voraussetzung  für 
eine erfolgreiche Transplantation. 

g)  "autologe Transplantation": Transplantation von patienteneigenen Zellen;  

h)  "allogene  Transplantation":  Transplantation  von  Zellen  von  einem  Spender  in  einer 

anderen Person. 

48

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WISSENTSCHAFTLICHER  HINTERGRUND 

1.1. Merkmale von Nabelschnurblut 

Es  wurde  festgestellt,  dass  Nabelschnurblut  nicht  nur  reich  an  normalen  Blutzellen,  sondern 
auch  an  hämatopoetischen  Stammzellen  ist.  Im  normalen  peripheren  Blut  von  Erwachsenen 
kommen diese Stammzellen lediglich in unbedeutender Anzahl vor. Nach der Transplantation 
können  die  hämatopoetischen  Stammzellen  beim  Patienten  eine  Repopulation  des 
Knochenmarks bewirken und als Grundlage für die Produktion von Blutzellen dienen. 

Ein  wichtiges  Merkmal  der  Nabelschnurblutstammzellen  ist  ihre  immunologische  Unreife. 
Daher  ist  die  Wahrscheinlichkeit  immunologischer  Reaktionen  nach  einer  Transplantation  bei 
hämatopoetischen Stammzellen aus dem Nabelschnurblut geringer als bei hämatopoetischen 
Stammzellen aus dem Knochenmark.  

Darüber  hinaus  wurde  in  Laborversuchen  nachgewiesen,  dass  Nabelschnurstammzellen  in 
eine  Reihe  unterschiedlicher  Zelltypen  ausdifferenzieren  können;  dies  könnte  künftig  neue 
therapeutische Anwendungen ermöglichen.  

Vorteile 

1.2. 
Knochenmarkstammzellen 

von  Nabelschnurstammzellen 

im 

Vergleich 

zu 

Nabelschnurblut kann  leicht und ohne invasive Eingriffe für den Spender gewonnen werden. 
Daher ist die Zahl potenzieller Spender höher als bei der Entnahme aus dem Knochenmark. 

Nabelschnurbluteinheiten  werden  im  vorhinein  gelagert  und  stehen  daher  bei  Bedarf  zeitnah 
zur Verfügung. Dagegen muss das Knochenmark dem Spender kurz vor der Transplantation 
entnommen  werden,  und  das  Risiko  des  Widerrufs  der  Einwilligung  in  letzter  Minute  ist  nie 
ganz auszuschließen.  

Bei der allogenen Transplantation von Nabelschnurstammzellen muss der HLA-Typ nicht exakt 
übereinstimmen,  da  diese  Stammzellen  im  Vergleich  zu  Knochenmarkstammzellen  mit 
geringerer Wahrscheinlichkeit immunologische Reaktionen auslösen.  

1.3. Gegenwärtige Nutzung von Nabelschnurblut  

Bei der Behandlung von Patienten mit Bluterkrankungen oder gestörten Immunfunktionen, die 
eine  Transplantation  hämatopoetischer  Stammzellen  erfordern,  kann  die  Verwendung  von 
Nabelschnurblut eine Alternative zur Knochenmarktransplantation bieten.  

Gegenwärtig  wird  Nabelschnurblut  zur  Behandlung  von  Leukämie,  Lymphomen,  aplastischer 
Anämie und genetisch bedingten Bluterkrankungen eingesetzt. 

Nabelschnurblut  wird  außerdem  für  die  Gewinnung  von  Stammzellen  für  die  Forschung 
herangezogen. 

49

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.4. Allogene Transplantation 

Bei allen vorstehend beschriebenen gegenwärtigen Einsatzmöglichkeiten von Nabelschnurblut 
erfolgt  eine  allogene  Transplantation,  und  die  Stammzellen  werden  einem  Spender 
entnommen.  Die  Nutzung  autologer  Transplantationen  wäre  bei  Erbkrankheiten  oder  bei 
Leukämie  nicht  zweckdienlich,  da  die  Zellen  des  Patienten  denselben  genetischen  Defekt 
aufweisen bzw. ebenfalls bösartig werden können. Bei der allogenen Transplantation besteht 
immer das Risiko von Abwehrreaktionen des Organismus gegen das transplantierte Gewebe. 
Will man die bestmögliche HLA-Übereinstimmung zwischen Spender und Empfänger erzielen, 
ist daher die HLA-Typisierung unverzichtbar, um die Abwehrreaktionen auf ein Mindestmaß zu 
beschränken und beste Chancen für den therapeutischen Erfolg zu gewährleisten.  

Die  verbleibenden  HLA-Differenzen  zwischen  Spender  und  Empfänger  können  geringe 
immunologische  Reaktionen  auslösen.  Bei  der  Behandlung  von  Leukämie 
ist  diese 
Abstoßungsreaktion  des  Empfängers  gegen  das  Transplantat  vorteilhaft  und  trägt  zur 
Zerstörung der Leukämiezellen bei.  

1.5. Grenzen der Nutzung von Nabelschnurblutstammzellen 

Um  für  eine  Transplantation  geeignet  zu  sein,  müssen  die  Blutproben  eine  dem  Gewicht 
entsprechende  ausreichende  Anzahl  von  Zellen  enthalten.  Daher  kann  dieses 
Transplantationsverfahren  vornehmlich  bei  jungen  Patienten  mit  geringem  Körpergewicht 
eingesetzt  werden.  Die  jüngsten  Erfahrungen  zeigen  jedoch,  dass  es  möglich  ist,  zur 
Behandlung  von  Erwachsenen  mehrere  Blutproben  zusammenzuführen.  Desweiteren  wird 
derzeit intensiv an Zellexpansionsverfahren geforscht, um das Problem der begrenzten Anzahl 
der 
lösen.  Dadurch  würde  eine 
in  Nabelschnurblutproben  enthaltenen  Zellen  zu 
systematischere Behandlung von Erwachsenen ermöglicht.  
Bisher  wurden  weltweit 
von 
2 500 
Nabelschnurblutzellen  durchgeführt70.  Den  Studien  zufolge  haben  Kinder  eine  höhere 
Überlebensrate als Erwachsene. 

Transplantationen 

zwischen 

3 000 

und 

1.6. Autologe Transplantation 

Die  Mehrheit  der  Indikationen  für  autologe  Transplantationen  wird  für  Erwachsene  in  der 
Aplasiephase nach einer Chemo- oder Radiotherapie gestellt. Ziel der Transplantation ist die 
Repopulation  des  Knochenmarks  des  Patienten  mit  eigenen  hämatopoetischen  Stammzellen 
zur Bildung von Blutzellen. Für diese Form der autologen Transplantation ist die Einlagerung 
eigener  Nabelschnurblutstammzellen  bei  der  Geburt  nicht  erforderlich.  Tatsächlich  können 
solche Transplantationen durchgeführt werden, indem vor der Therapie dem peripherem Blut 
des  Patienten  nach  Stimulation  durch  einen  Wachstumsfaktor  Stammzellen  entnommen 
werden.  Daher  können  gegenwärtig  so  gut  wie  keine  Indikationen  zur  Einlagerung  von 
Nabelschnurblut  bei  der  Geburt  mit  Blick  auf  eine  künftige  autologe  Transplantation  gestellt 
werden.  
Die Wahrscheinlichkeit der Notwendigkeit einer autologen Transplantation wurde für die ersten 
20 Lebensjahre auf etwa 1:20 000 geschätzt71.  

70 Anhörung von Prof. Gluckman am 18. November 2003. 
71 Annas, NEJM 2000, 340, S. 1521. 

50

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Es gibt jedoch Ausnahmen. Bei seltenen HLA-Typen oder bei Familien mit erhöhtem Risiko für 
bestimmte  Leukämieformen  kann  es  zweckdienlich  sein,  Nabelschnurblut  von  Neugeborenen 
einzulagern,  um  im  Falle  der  Erkrankung  eines  Familienangehörigen  auf  die  notwendigen 
Zellen  zurückgreifen  zu  können.  Hier  ist  der  Zweck  jedoch  eher  eine  intrafamiliäre  allogene 
Transplantation  als  eine  autologe  Nutzung  im  engeren  Sinne.  In  der  wissenschaftlichen 
Literatur wurde bis Januar 2003 lediglich über 5 autologe Transplantationen für die Behandlung 
von Neuroblastomen, aplastischer Anämie und Retinoblastomen72 berichtet.  

1.7. Aktuelle Forschungsarbeiten 

In  den  letzten  Jahren  hat  die  Stammzellenforschung  einen  rasanten  Aufschwung  erfahren. 
Forschungsthema  ist  unter  anderem  die  Differenzierung  pluripotenter  Stammzellen  zu 
spezifischen Zelltypen, die für die Behandlung chronischer Erkrankungen wie z. B. Parkinson, 
Diabetes,  Krebs  oder  Herzinfarkt  durch  den  Einsatz  humaner  Stammzellen  genutzt  werden 
könnten. Bisher konnte jedoch kein eindeutiger Nachweis über den Nutzen dieser Stammzellen 
erbracht werden. 
Im  Zusammenhang  mit  embryonalen  Stammzellen  werden  zahlreiche  ethische  und  einige 
wissenschaftliche  Bedenken  geäußert.  Nabelschnurblut  ist  eine  weitere  wertvolle  Möglichkeit 
der Erforschung von Stammzellen. 

Gegenwärtig stellt die Nutzung der eigenen Nabelschnurblutstammzellen in der regenerativen 
Medizin  lediglich  eine  hypothetische  Möglichkeit  dar.  Die  Forschung  auf  diesem  Gebiet 
befindet  sich  erst 
frühen  Stadium.  Um  eine  Realisierung  dieser 
Forschungsansätze zu ermöglichen, müssten folgende Voraussetzungen gegeben sein: 

in  einem  sehr 

•  Die Steuerung der Differenzierung von Stammzellen müsste möglich sein. 
•  Der Nachweis über die Wirksamkeit und Sicherheit einer solchen Therapie müsste geführt 

werden. 

•  Die  Lagerung  von  Nabelschnurblutstammzellen  müsste  über  Jahrzehnte  hinweg  möglich 

sein. 

•  Die Vermehrung von Nabelschnurblutstammzellen müsste ermöglicht werden. 

Selbst wenn diese Voraussetzungen geschaffen werden, folgt daraus nicht zwingend, dass die 
Nutzung des körpereigenen Nabelschnurblutes der Nutzung des eigenen Knochenmarks oder 
allogener  Stammzellen  von  Spendern  mit  einem  hohen  Übereinstimmungsgrad  vorzuziehen 
wäre.  

Daher  wird  man  hinsichtlich  der  Frage,  ob 
für  autologe  Zwecke  eingelagerte 
Nabelschnurblutstammzellen  in  der  Zukunft  irgendeinen  Wert  haben  werden,  vorerst  nur 
spekulieren können.  

72 Bericht "A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking" (Weltweite Studie über Nabelschnurblutbanken) von 
Dr. J. Gunning (Juni 2003). 

51

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1.8. Gewinnung von Nabelschnurblut 

Während  oder  unmittelbar  nach  der  Geburt  kann  aus  der  Nabelschnur  und  der  Plazenta 
Restblut gewonnen werden. Das Blut wird durch ein technisch einfaches Verfahren gewonnen, 
das bei sorgfältiger Durchführung bei einer normalen Entbindung keine vorhersehbaren Risiken 
für die Gesundheit von Mutter und Kind birgt. In Europa wird bei dem am weitesten verbreiteten 
Verfahren  das  Nabelschnurblut  entnommen,  während  sich  die  Plazenta  noch  im  Uterus 
befindet;  bei  einem  anderen  Verfahren  wird  bis  nach  der  Geburt  der  Plazenta  gewartet, 
anschließend  die  Plazenta    steril  aufbewahrt  und  schließlich  das  Blut  mittels  Venenpunktion 
gewonnen.  Das  erste  Verfahren  ist  mit  einem  größeren  Eingriff  verbunden  und  kann 
möglicherweise die Versorgung der Mutter nach der Entbindung beeinträchtigen, das letztere 
erfordert  zusätzliches  und  speziell  ausgebildetes  Personal  und  birgt  ein  größeres 
Kontaminierungsrisiko.  Nabelschnurblut  kann  auch  während  einer  Kaiserschnittgeburt 
gewonnen werden. 

Einige  Entbindungskliniken  verfügen  über  erfahrenes  Personal,  das  regelmäßig  und  unter 
Beachtung klar definierter Verfahren das für eine Spende an öffentliche Blutbanken bestimmte 
Blut gewinnt. Bei der Lagerung für autologe Zwecke ist es jedoch unter Umständen möglich, 
dass  das  in  der  betreffenden  Entbindungsklinik  mit  der  Gewinnung  des  Blutes  betraute 
Personal keinerlei diesbezügliche Erfahrungen aufweist. Kommerzielle Nabelschnurblutbanken 
verteilen einfach Entnahme-Kits an die werdenden Eltern, welche diese an die Geburtshelfer 
weiterreichen. 

1.9. Lagerung und Qualität von Nabelschnurblut 

Nach der Gewinnung wird das Volumen des Nabelschnurblutes reduziert, das Blut kontrolliert 
eingefroren und in flüssigem Stickstoff bei – 196°C gelagert. 

Nach  dem  derzeitigen  Kenntnisstand  können  die  Zellen  mindestens  15  Jahre  lang  für 
Transplantationszwecke verwendet werden.  

Vor  der  Einlagerung  hat  eine  Qualitätskontrolle  zu  erfolgen.  Ferner  wird  ein  Screening  der 
Nabelschnurbluteinheiten  nach  einigen  ansteckenden  Infektionskrankheiten  durchgeführt,  um 
das  Risiko  einer  Infektionsübertragung  zu  senken.  Der  Schutz  vor  Infektionen  erfordert  die 
Testung  der  Mutter  auf  HIV,  Hepatitis  etc.  zum  Zeitpunkt  der  Gewinnung  des  Blutes  sowie 
einige  Monate  danach.  Bei  Spenden  zum  Zweck  der  allogenen  Verwendung,  einschließlich 
innerhalb  des  intrafamiliären  Bereichs,  muss  eine  HLA-Typisierung  der  Probe  durchgeführt 
werden. Der HLA-Typ ist erforderlich, um die Probe zu ermitteln, die mit den Merkmalen des 
Empfängers übereinstimmt.  

Damit die Probe klinisch verwertet werden kann, muss sie zum gegenwärtigen Zeitpunkt eine 
Mindestzahl von Zellen enthalten; unterhalb dieser Quote ist sie derzeit völlig wertlos.  

52

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Daher  muss  über  die  Hälfte  der  Nabelschnurbluteinheiten  entsorgt  werden73  (die  für  die 
Transplantation  vorgesehene  Mindestzelldosis  sollte  2,0  x  107/kg  vor  dem  Einfrieren 
betragen74).  Dieser  Wert  könnte  sich  ändern,  wenn  Proben  verschiedener  Spender 
zusammengeführt werden oder wenn es gelingt, Zellexpansionsverfahren zu entwickeln. 

1.10. Nabelschnurblutbanken 

Gegenwärtig gibt es weltweit rund 100 Nabelschnurblutbanken75. Die geografische Verteilung 
stellt sich etwa wie folgt dar. 40 % in Europa, 30 % in den USA und Kanada, 20 % in Asien, 
10 % in Australien, in Afrika keine.  

75 %  der  Nabelschnurblutbanken  sind  öffentliche  oder  private  Zellbanken  ohne 
Gewinnorientierung,  die  gemeinwohlorientierte  Dienstleistungen  anbieten.  Sie 
lagern 
Blutproben  von  Spendern  zu  Transplantations-  oder  Forschungszwecken.  Sie  lagern  ferner 
Nabelschnurblut  für  die  intrafamiliäre  Nutzung  bei  bekannten  Risiken  in  Familien  mit  einer 
seltenen HLA-Gruppe. 

Bei  25 %  der  Nabelschnurblutbanken  handelt  es  sich  um  kommerzielle  Anbieter,  deren 
Dienstleistung  die  Konservierung  von  Nabelschnurblut 
für  die  autologe  Verwendung  
zugunsten  ihrer  Kunden  ist.  In  Europa  verfügen  lediglich  Österreich,  Deutschland,  die 
Niederlande, Polen und das Vereinigte Königreich über kommerzielle Blutbanken76. 

1.11. Notwendigkeit einer großen Vielfalt von Nabelschnurstammzellen 

Um  einen  geeigneten  Spender  für  jeden  denkbaren  Empfänger  finden  zu  können,  ist  eine 
möglichst  große  Vielfalt  von  Stammzellen  mit  unterschiedlichen  Geno-  und  HLA-Typen  aus 
verschiedenen Populationen erforderlich. Die Wahrscheinlichkeit, einen geeigneten Spender zu 
finden, ist für einige Ethnien wesentlich niedriger. Es ist beispielsweise viel einfacher, für einen 
Patienten kaukasischer Abstammung einen geeigneten Spender zu finden als für eine Person 
afrikanischer  Abstammung,  da  die  meisten  Zellbanken  in  westlichen  Ländern  eingerichtet 
wurden und die Spender häufiger aus der kaukasischen Population stammen. 

1.12. Netzwerke und Register 

Weltweit wurden Netzwerke von Banken und Register geschaffen, um Proben austauschen zu 
können.  Diese  Zusammenarbeit  zwischen  den  Banken  ist  erforderlich,  um  die  größtmögliche 
Auswahl  an  Spendern  zu  haben.  Generell  werden  die  Daten  über  die  gelagerten  Blutproben 
von  denselben  Registern  geführt,  die  zuvor  die  Informationen  über  Knochenmarkspender 
geführt haben. Das größte internationale Knochenmark- und Nabelschnurblut-Register ist Bone  

73 Bericht "A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking" (Weltweite Studie über Nabelschnurblutbanken) von 
Dr. J. Gunning (Juni 2003). 
74 Anhörung von Prof. Gluckman am 18. November 2003. 
75 Bericht "A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking" (Weltweite Studie über Nabelschnurblutbanken) von 
Dr. J. Gunning (Juni 2003). 
76 Bericht "A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking" (Weltweite Studie über Nabelschnurblutbanken) von 
Dr. J. Gunning (Juni 2003). 

53

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Marrow  Donors  Worldwide  (BMDW)77.  Mit  diesem  Kooperationsprojekt  auf  freiwilliger  Basis 
verfolgen  die  Knochenmarkspenderegister  und  die  Nabelschnurblutbanken  das  Ziel, 
zentralisierte und anonymisierte Informationen über HLA-Phänotypen und andere einschlägige 
Daten  über  nicht 
verwandte  Knochenmarkspender  und  Nabelschnurbluteinheiten 
bereitzustellen. Alle am BMDW beteiligten Nabelschnurblut-Register müssen die Richtlinien der 
World Marrow Donor Association (WMDA)78 einhalten, die die Definition und Normioerung der 
ethischen, 
internationalen 
Transplantation hämatopoetischer Stammzellen fördert. Das Mandat der WMDA wurde nun auf 
Nabelschnurblut-Register ausgedehnt. Im Jahr 2003 enthielt das BMDW-Register Daten über 
rund 130 000 Proben in etwa 34 verschiedenen öffentlichen Banken weltweit. 

technischen,  medizinischen  und 

finanziellen  Aspekte  der 

1.13. Das Europäische Netzwerk 

Die NETCORD-Stiftung79 wurde 1998 gegründet, um die Nutzung von Nabelschnurblut für die 
allogene  Stammzelltransplantation  zu  fördern.  Hierbei  handelt  es  sich  um  eine  Einrichtung 
ohne  Gewinnorientierung,  die  die  Gründung  von  Nabelschnurblutbanken  mit  hoher  Qualität 
unterstützt  und  Satzungen  und  Richtlinien  veröffentlicht  hat,  um  Studien-  und 
Forschungsarbeiten über die Gewinnung, Verarbeitung, Charakterisierung, Konservierung und 
Ex-vivo-Expansion  von  plazentarem  Restblut  weiter  zu  fördern.  Primäres  Ziel  ist  die 
Verbesserung  der  Qualität  solcher  Komponenten 
für  die  klinische  Zelltherapie  auf 
internationaler  Ebene.  Beteiligt  sind  16  Banken  aus  12  Ländern  in  der  ganzen  Welt,  die 
zusammen über rund 72 000 Nabelschnurbluteinheiten und damit über mehr als die Hälfte der 
weltweit in Banken gelagerten Proben verfügen80.  

Um  Transplantationszentren  die  Suche  nach  Nabelschnurbluteinheiten  zu  erleichtern,  hat 
NETCORD ferner unter der Bezeichnung Virtual Office ein Online-Suchprogramm eingerichtet. 
Transplantationszentren  können  nun  eine  Suchanfrage  an  das  Virtual  Office  richten  und 
müssen  nicht  mehr  mehrere  Datenbanken  der  verschiedenen  Nabelschnurblutbanken 
abfragen;  sie  erhalten  einen  einzigen  einheitlichen  Suchbericht  über  alle  im  NETCORD-
Verzeichnis enthaltenen Einheiten.  

Um  eine  hohe  und  einheitliche  Qualität  aller  Nabelschnurbluteinheiten  im  NETCORD-
Verzeichnis  zu  gewährleisten,  hat  NETCORD  in  Zusammenarbeit  mit  der  Foundation  for  the 
Accreditation  of  Cellular  Therapy 
für  die  Gewinnung, 
Kryokonservierung,  Lagerung  und  Freigabe  von  Bluteinheiten  festgelegt.  Alle  NETCORD-
Banken  müssen  eine  Zulassung  von  FACT  erhalten  und  daher  die  FACT/NETCORD-
Qualitätsstandards einhalten.  

(FACT)  Qualitätsstandards 

1.14. Forschung in Europa 

Die  Europäische  Kommission 
Forschungsprojekte im Rahmen der Rahmenprogramme für Forschung und Entwicklung. 

finanziert  partnerschaftlich  mit  den  Mitgliedstaaten 

77 http://www.bmdw.org. 
78 http://www.worldmarrow.org. 
79 https://www.netcord.org. 
80 Anhörung von Prof. Wernet, Vorsitzender von NETCORD, vom 18. November 2003. 

54

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1996 wurde von der Europäischen Gruppe für Blut- und Knochenmarktransplantation (EBMT)81 
ein Forschungsprojekt mit der Bezeichnung EUROCORD auf den Weg gebracht. Die EBMT ist 
eine  Einrichtung  ohne  Gewinnorientierung,  die  den 
im  Bereich  der  klinischen 
Knochenmarktransplantation 
tätigen  Wissenschaftlern  und  Ärzten  den  Austausch  von 
Erfahrungen  und  die  Entwicklung  gemeinsamer  Studienprojekte  ermöglichen  soll.  Die 
Einrichtung  strebt  die  Förderung  aller  Aspekte  im  Zusammenhang  mit  der  Transplantation 
hämatopoetischer  Stammzellen  aus  allen  Spenderquellen  und  von  allen  Spendertypen  an, 
einschließlich Grundlagen- und klinische Forschung, Bildung, Normung, Qualitätskontrolle und 
Zulassung von Transplantationsverfahren.  

Zu  den  Zielen  von  EUROCORD  zählt  die  Schaffung  eines  Europäischen  Registers  von 
Patienten,  die  ein  Nabelschnurbluttransplantat  erhalten  haben.  EUROCORD  arbeitet  eng  mit 
den NETCORD-Banken und -Registern zusammen. 

Diese  Zielsetzungen  entsprechen  den  Empfehlungen  der  Stellungnahme  Nr. 11  der 
Europäischen  Gruppe  für  Ethik  über  die  Notwendigkeit  der  Förderung  von  Erhebungen  über 
Verfahren  im  Zusammenhang  mit  Gewebebanken  und  der  Nutzung  der  Erhebungen  zur 
Bereitstellung  von  Informationen  über  die  sich  durch  menschliche  Gewebe  bietenden 
Perspektiven für Therapie, Diagnose und Forschung.  

81 http://www.ebmt.org  

55

 
 
 
 
                                                 
RECHTLICHER HINTERGRUND 

für 
Die  meisten  europäischen  Länder  haben  keine  speziellen  Rechtsvorschriften 
Nabelschnurblutbanken  und  verfahren  nach  unterschiedlichen  Praktiken.  Nur  ganz  wenige 
Länder, darunter Italien, haben spezielle Vorschriften zu diesem Thema verabschiedet. 

Sofern  es  –  wie  z. B.  in  Frankreich  –  Vorschriften  über  menschliches  Gewebe  oder 
menschliches  Blut  generell  gibt,  wird  Nabelschnurblut  als  Gewebe  und  nicht  als  Blut 
angesehen, da die im Nabelschnurblut enthaltenen hämatopoetischen Progenitor-Stammzellen 
für  die  Transplantation  bedeutsam  sind.  Beispielsweise  deckt  zwar  die  Richtlinie  von  2  März 
2004  des  Europäischen  Parlaments  und  des  Rates  zur  Festlegung  von  Qualitäts-  und 
Sicherheitsstandards  für  die  Spende,  Beschaffung,  Testung,  Verarbeitung,  Lagerung  und 
Verteilung  von  menschlichen  Geweben  und  Zellen  hämatopoetische  Vorläuferzellen  ab, 
ist  das 
jedoch  Blut  und  sonstige  Blutprodukte  aus.  Ein  weiteres  Beispiel 
schließt 
Zusatzprotokoll  zum  Übereinkommen  über  Menschenrechte  und  Biomedizin  über  die 
Transplantation  von  Organen  und  Geweben  menschlichen  Ursprungs,  das  für  Gewebe  und 
Zellen,  einschließlich  hämatopoetischer  Stammzellen,  jedoch  nicht  für  Blut  und  Blutderivate 
gilt.  

1.15. Europäische Gemeinschaft 

Artikel 152  Absatz 4  Buchstabe a)  des  Vertrags  zur  Gründung  der  Europäischen 
Gemeinschaft82 sieht vor: "Der Rat trägt […] mit folgenden Maßnahmen zur Verwirklichung der 
zur  Festlegung  hoher  Qualitäts-  und 
Ziele  dieses  Artikels  bei:  Maßnahmen 
Sicherheitsstandards für Organe und Substanzen menschlichen Ursprungs sowie für Blut und 
Blutderivate;  diese  Maßnahmen  hindern  die  Mitgliedstaaten  nicht  daran,  strengere 
Schutzmaßnahmen beizubehalten oder einzuführen." 

Um hohe Qualitätsstandards umzusetzen, wurde ein Rechtsrahmen verabschiedet.  

Zunächst  ist  die  Richtlinie  2002/98/EG  vom  27. Januar 200383  betreffend  die  Qualitäts-  und 
Sicherheitsstandards für die Gewinnung, Lagerung und Verteilung von menschlichem Blut und 
Blutbestandteilen zu erwähnen; sie gilt jedoch nicht für Blutstammzellen. 

Zweitens gilt die Richtlinie betreffend die Sicherheit und Qualität von menschlichen Zellen und 
Geweben 
für  Nabelschnurblutbanken,  da  hämatopoetische  Stammzellen  als  Gewebe 
eingestuft werden.  

für  die 
Gewebe-  und  Zelltransplantationen  bieten  zunehmend  bessere  Möglichkeiten 
Behandlung bisher unheilbarer Krankheiten. Mit der Richtlinie soll die Qualität und Sicherheit 
menschlicher  Gewebe  und  Zellen  auf  europäischer  Ebene  sichergestellt  werden,  um 
insbesondere der Übertragung von Krankheiten vorzubeugen.  

82 Der Wortlaut der Verträge kann unter der folgenden Adresse konsultiert werden: http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/de/ 
search/search_treaties.html. 
83 ABl. L 033 vom 08.02.2003, S. 30. 

56

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Die  Richtlinie gilt  auch für kommerzielle  oder  gewinnorientierte  Nabelschnurblutbanken, auch 
wenn  diese  nicht  eigens  erwähnt  werden.  Das  bedeutet  also,  dass  diese  Arten  von 
Einrichtungen  ebenfalls  die  in  der  Richtlinie  festgelegten  Qualitäts-  und  Sicherheitsstandards 
anwenden müssen, namentlich in Bezug auf die Ausbildung des Personals oder die Zulassung.  

Die  Europäische  Gemeinschaft  ist  jedoch  nicht  zuständig,  wenn  einzelstaatliche  Regelungen 
betreffend  die  Spende  oder  die  medizinische  Verwendung  von  Organen  und  Blut  erlassen 
werden.  Tatsächlich  sieht Artikel 152  Absatz 5  des  Vertrags  zur  Gründung  der  Europäischen 
Gemeinschaft  vor:  "Bei  der  Tätigkeit  der  Gemeinschaft  im  Bereich  der  Gesundheit  der 
für  die  Organisation  des 
Bevölkerung  wird  die  Verantwortung  der  Mitgliedstaaten 
Gesundheitswesens  und  die  medizinische  Versorgung 
in  vollem  Umfang  gewahrt. 
Insbesondere  lassen  die  Maßnahmen  nach  Absatz 4  Buchstabe a  die  einzelstaatlichen 
Regelungen  über  die  Spende  oder  die  medizinische  Verwendung  von  Organen  und  Blut 
unberührt."  

[treffen],  um 

Es ist jedoch festzustellen, dass in Artikel 12 festgelegt wird, dass "die Mitgliedstaaten […] die 
erforderlichen  Maßnahmen 
freiwillige  und  unentgeltliche  Spenden  von 
menschlichen Geweben und Zellen anzuregen und so sicherzustellen, dass diese so weit wie 
möglich  durch  solche  Spenden  beschafft  werden,"  dass  "die  Mitgliedstaaten  […]  der 
Kommission über diese Maßnahmen […] Bericht" erstatten und dass "auf der Grundlage dieser 
Berichte  […]  die  Kommission  das  Europäische  Parlament  und  den  Rat  über  erforderliche 
zusätzliche  Maßnahmen, die  sie  auf  Gemeinschaftsebene  zu  treffen  beabsichtigt",  informiert. 
Ferner ist vorgesehen, dass "die Mitgliedstaaten anregen, dass die Beschaffung von Geweben 
und Zellen ohne  Gewinnorientierung erfolgt“. 

Was  die  Informationspflicht  angeht,  werden  in  Artikel 28  Buchstabe d)  die  Informationen 
genannt, die im Rahmen der Spende von Zellen und/oder Geweben zu  geben sind.  

Schließlich wird in den Erwägungsgründen der Richtlinie die Achtung der Grundrechte erwähnt. 
In den Erwägungsgründen wird auch auf die Stellungnahmen der EGE hingewiesen. 

1.16. Europarat 

Artikel 21  des  Übereinkommens  des  Europarats  über  Menschenrechte  und  Biomedizin84 
(Übereinkommen von Oviedo) sieht vor, dass "der menschliche Körper und Teile davon […] als 
solche nicht zur Erzielung eines finanziellen Gewinns verwendet werden" dürfen. 

Artikel 2  des  am  24. Januar 2002  zur  Zeichnung  aufgelegten  Zusatzprotokolls  zu  diesem 
Übereinkommen85  über  die  Transplantation  von  Organen  und  Geweben  menschlichen 
Ursprungs,  sieht  vor,  dass  "die  für  Gewebe  anwendbaren  Bestimmungen  dieses  Protokolls 
auch für Zellen, einschließlich hämatopoetischer Stammzellen, gelten".  

84 Der Wortlaut des Übereinkommens kann unter folgender Adresse konsultiert werden: 
http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/en/treaties/html/164.htm. 
85 Der Wortlaut des Zusatzprotokolls zum Übereinkommen über Transplantation kann unter folgender Adresse 
konsultiert werden:http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/en/treaties/html/186.htm 

57

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Das Ministerkomitee des Europarates nahm den Entwurf einer Empfehlung über Blutbanken für 
autologe  Verwendung  an.  Darin  werden  den  Mitgliedstaaten  die  folgenden  Empfehlungen 
unterbreitet: 

1.  Wenn 

Nabelschnurblutbanken 

die 
Nabelschnurblutspenden  auf  altruistischer  und  freiwilliger  Basis  erfolgen  und  für 
allogene Transplantation und verwandte Forschungsgebiete genutzt werden. 

eingerichtet 

werden, 

müssen 

2.  Spenden für autologe Verwendung und die Einrichtung von Nabelschnurblutbanken für 
deren 
von 

den  Mitgliedstaaten 

und 

autologe 
Gesundheitssystemen nicht unterstützt werden.  

Verwendung 

sollten 

3.  Die Bevölkerung sollte über die Vor- und Nachteile von Nabelschnurblutbankenkorrekt 

und präzise unterrichtet werden. 

4.  Werden  Nabelschnurblutbanken 

für  autologe  Verwendungszwecke  eingerichtet, 
müssen die Publizitäts- und Informationsmaßnahmen für Familien korrekt und präzise 
sein,  und  die  Einwilligung  für  die  Einlagerung  von  Nabelschnurblut  muss  nach 
entsprechender vollständiger Aufklärung eingeholt werden.  

5.  Blutbanken  für  autologe  Verwendung,  die  eingerichtet  werden,  müssen  dieselben 
Qualitäts-  und  Sicherheitsstandards  erfüllen,  die  in  dem  Leitfaden  des  Europarates 
über  Sicherheit  und  Qualitätssicherung  für  Organe,  Gewebe  und  Zellen  aufgeführt 
sind." 

1.17. Französischer Rechtsrahmen 

Obwohl es keine spezielle Regelung für Nabelschnurblut gibt, steht es außer Frage, dass die 
im Gesetz über das öffentliche Gesundheitswesen enthaltenen Vorschriften über Gewebe und 
Zellen hier Anwendung finden. Dies bedeutet, dass Nabelschnurblut allein für therapeutische 
oder wissenschaftliche Zwecke und nur von Einrichtungen entnommen werden darf, die zuvor 
eine entsprechende Genehmigung der Behörden erhalten haben.  

Einerseits  sind  zwar  die  Einrichtung  und  der  Betrieb  privater  kommerzieller  Banken  für  die 
Konservierung des Nabelschnurblutes für autologe Zwecke nicht ausdrücklich verboten, doch 
erfüllen diese Banken offenbar nicht die Grundsätze und Vorschriften des Gesetzes über das 
öffentliche Gesundheitswesen. Andererseits könnte unter dem Blickwinkel des Vertragsrechts 
und  der  ärztlichen  Standesregeln  und  insbesondere  unter  Berücksichtigung  des  derzeit  und 
künftig fehlenden medizinischen Nutzens die Gültigkeit und Durchsetzbarkeit von Verträgen in 
Frage  gestellt  werden,  die  Eltern  dazu  veranlassen,  Nabelschnurblut  für  ihr  Kind  entnehmen 
und konservieren zu lassen.  

Im  Dezember 2002  gab  der  französische  Nationale  Ethikbeirat  für  Gesundheits-  und 
Biowissenschaften  (CCNE)  eine  Stellungnahme  zu  Nabelschnurblutbanken  für  autologe  oder 
für Forschungszwecke ab (Stellungnahme Nr. 74)86. 

86 Der Wortlaut der Stellungnahmen kann unter folgender Adresse konsultiert werden: http://www.ccne-ethique.fr/ 
english/start.htm. 

58

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
                                                 
Der  CCNE  kommt  zu  dem  Schluss,  dass  er  zwar  nicht  die  Empfehlung  aussprechen  kann, 
private Banken zu verbieten, jedoch folgende Gefahren verstärkte Aufmerksamkeit verdienen: 

• 

• 

"Die größte Gefahr für die Gesellschaft besteht darin, dass die Einrichtung solcher Banken 
geeignet  ist,  das  Prinzip  der  Solidarität  zu  untergraben,  ohne  das  keine  Gesellschaft 
überleben kann". 
"Diese Banken wecken utopische Hoffnungen und verschleiern ein kommerzielles Projekt, 
das sich hinter der Unterstützung von Kindern verbirgt". 

•  Erweist  sich  die  autologe  Verwendung  als  nützlich,  sollten  die  Grundsätze  von 
Gerechtigkeit und Gleichheit vorherrschen; die Einlagerung für autologe Zwecke sollte zur 
Regel werden, wobei öffentliche Behörden die Verantwortung übernehmen. 

•  Die Nutzlosigkeit der Einlagerung für autologe Zwecke und die damit verbundenen Kosten 

könnten eine Provokation für die ärmsten Länder darstellen. 

•  Zum  Zeitpunkt  der  Geburt  könnte  die  Aufmerksamkeit  für  und  die  Betreuung  von  Mutter 

und Kind beeinträchtigt werden.  

•  Die Werbung privater Banken könnte sich elterliche Gefühle wie Angst und Schuld zunutze 
machen,  obwohl  deutlich  gemacht  werden  sollte,  dass  es  gegenwärtig  keinerlei 
wissenschaftliche Rechtfertigung für eine Einlagerung für autologe Zwecke gibt. 

•  Sollte  die  Geschäftsführung  einer  autologen  Bank  dem  Staat  überlassen  werden,  wären 
die  hohen  Kosten  für  eine  derzeit  nutzlose  Technik  vom  ethischen  Standpunkt  aus 
unvertretbar. 

Abschließend  empfiehlt  der  CCNE  den  öffentlichen  Behörden,  die  Entwicklung  öffentlicher 
Banken zu fördern, die Nabelschnurblut für allogene Zwecke lagern. 

1.18. Rechtslage in Belgien 

Der belgische Gesundheitsrat legte am 7. Dezember 2001 eine Stellungnahme zur Änderung 
der  Rechtsvorschriften  über  Gewebebanken  vor87.  Darin  werden  insbesondere  für  die 
Nabelschnur, das Nabelschnurblut und die daraus gewonnenen Zellen folgende Empfehlungen 
ausgesprochen:  

• 

"Die  Nabelschnur  und  die  Nabelschnurblutzellen  unterliegen  den  Rechtsvorschriften 
für Gewebe und Zellen. 

•  Für Nabelschnurblutbanken müssen Qualitätsstandards ausgearbeitet werden. 
•  Die  therapeutische  autologe  Verwendung  mit  dem  Ziel  der  vorausschauenden 

Prävention sollte verboten werden".  

II  der  Stellungnahme 

In  Anhang 
listet  der  Gesundheitsrat  die  Bedingungen  für  die 
Genehmigung der Tätigkeiten im Zusammenhang mit Zell- und Gewebebanken auf. Vor allem 
wird festgelegt, dass "jede Zell- oder Gewebebank vom Minister nach Vorlage eines Berichts 
des zuständigen Dienstes und einer Stellungnahme des Gesundheitsrates genehmigt werden 
muss, und dass diese Genehmigung lediglich für (…) Einrichtungen ohne Gewinnorientierung 
erteilt werden kann". 

Das Ministerium für öffentliche Gesundheit88 erarbeitet derzeit ein Königliches Dekret, mit dem 
die Rechtsvorschriften für Nabelschnurblutbanken klarer abgefasst werden sollen.  

87 http://www.health.fgov.be/CSH_HGR/Francais/Avis/Avis_Banques_Tissus.htm. 
88 http://www.lachambre.be/QRVA/pdf/50/50K0156.pdf , S. 120. 

59

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Der  Dekretentwurf  sieht  vor,  dass  alle  Gewebebanken  vom  Gesundheitsministerium 
zugelassen  werden  müssen.  In  dem  Königlichen  Dekret  wird  vorgeschlagen,  die  Zulassung 
allein  für  Einrichtungen  ohne  Gewinnorientierung  zu  erteilen.  In  dem  Dekretentwurf  werden 
ferner  eindeutig  die  Verwendung  von  Nabelschnurblutzellen  mit  dem  Ziel  der 
vorausschauenden  Prävention,  jegliche  Diskriminierung,  mit  der  ein  bevorzugter  Zugang 
einzelner  Personen  zu 
in  Verbindung  mit  Geweben 
menschlichen Ursprungs angestrebt wird, sowie jede Form der Werbung und die kommerzielle 
Forschung verboten.  

therapeutischen  Möglichkeiten 

1.19. Das italienische Gesetz89 

Am 30. Dezember 2002 wurde eine Verordnung des Gesundheitsministeriums über dringliche 
Maßnahmen betreffend Stammzellen aus Nabelschnurblut verabschiedet und die Verordnung 
vom  11. Januar 2002  ersetzt.  Sie  wurde  im  italienischen  Amtsblatt  (Gazzeta  Ufficiale)  Nr. 27 
vom 3. Februar 2003 veröffentlicht und gilt für ein Jahr. Sie enthält folgende Bestimmungen: 

•  Nabelschnurblutbanken 

werden 
Konservierungssystems zugelassen. 

allein 

im 

Rahmen 

eines 

öffentlichen 

•  Jede Bank muss von der zuständigen Regionalregierung genehmigt werden. 
•  Private Banken sind verboten. 
•  Die  Ein-  oder  Ausfuhr  von  Nabelschnurblut  muss  vom  Gesundheitsminister  genehmigt 

werden. 

•  Diese  Bestimmungen  werden  als  notwendig  erachtet,  da  Therapien  mit  Stammzellen  aus 

Nabelschnurblut derzeit noch erforscht werden. 

89 http://www.cittadinolex.kataweb.it/Article/0,1519,22470|99,00.html. 

60

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
ETHISCHER HINTERGRUND 

1.20. Grundlegende ethische Prinzipien 

Es gibt mehrere grundlegende ethische Prinzipien und Werte, die für diese Stellungnahme von 
Bedeutung sind: 

•  Der Grundsatz der Achtung der Würde und der Unversehrtheit des Menschen, der den 

Grundsatz der Nichtkommerzialisierung des menschlichen Körpers bekräftigt; 

•  Der  Grundsatz  der  Autonomie  oder  das  Recht  auf  Selbstbestimmung  auf  der 

Grundlage vollständiger und korrekter Informationen; 
•  Die  Grundsätze  von  Gerechtigkeit  und  Solidarität 
gleichberechtigten Zugang zu Gesundheitsdiensten; 

im  Hinblick  auf  einen 

•  Der  Grundsatz  des  Wohltuns,  also  die  Verpflichtung,  Gutes  zu  tun,  insbesondere  im 

Bereich der Gesundheitswesens; 

•  Der Grundsatz der Non-Malefizienz oder des Nichtschadensprinzips, einschließlich der 
Verpflichtung  zum  Schutz  von  gefährdeten  Gruppen  und  Einzelpersonen  und  zur 
Achtung der Privatsphäre und der Vertraulichkeit von Daten;  

•  Der  Grundsatz  der  Verhältnismäßigkeit,  der  ein  Gleichgewicht  zwischen  Mittel  und 

Zweck impliziert. 

Es gibt auch einige Wertekonflikte. Die Werte Freiheit und freies Unternehmertum können mit 
den  Grundsätzen  von  Solidarität  und  Gerechtigkeit,  gemäß  denen  der  Zugang  zur 
Gesundheitsversorgung  auf  gerechte  Weise  und  auf  der  Grundlage  realistischer  Bedürfnisse 
gewährleistet  sein  sollte,  sowie  mit  dem  Grundsatz  des  Schutzes  gefährdeter  Gruppen 
kollidieren.  

1.21. Ethische Bedenken im Hinblick auf Gewebebanken 

Für  Nabelschnurblutbanken  stellen  sich  bei  der  Spende  von  Proben 
für  allogene 
Transplantationen oder für Forschungszwecke dieselben ethischen Fragen wie für jede andere 
Gewebebank.  Dieses  Thema  wurde  bereits  in  der  EGE-Stellungnahme  Nr. 11  über  ethische 
Aspekte  von  Datenbanken  mit  menschlichem  Gewebe  (21. Juli 1998)  behandelt.  In  dieser 
Stellungnahme  werden  folgende  ethische  Werte  hervorgehoben:  körperliche  Unversehrtheit, 
Achtung  der  Privatsphäre  und  Vertraulichkeit  von  Daten,  Förderung  der  Solidarität, 
gleichberechtigter  Zugang zur  Gesundheitsversorgung  sowie  Aufklärung und  Einwilligung  der 
Spender.  

In  Bezug  auf  Nabelschnurblut  heißt  es  in  der  Stellungnahme  Nr. 11,  dass  "die  Frauen  oder 
Paaren gegebenen Informationen geeignet sein müssen, diese in der Zukunft möglichen neuen 
Behandlungsformen  zu  erläutern,  wobei  zugleich  hervorzuheben  ist,  dass  sie  sich  noch  in 
einem  sehr  frühen  Versuchsstadium  befinden".  In  der  Stellungnahme  wird  ferner  folgende 
Auffassung vertreten: "Prinzipiell sollten die Tätigkeiten einer Gewebebank Einrichtungen des 
Gesundheitswesens  oder  Organisationen  ohne  Erwerbszweck  vorbehalten  sein",  jedoch 
"sollten von Wirtschaftsunternehmen betriebene Gewebebanken den gleichen Zulassungs- und 
fordert 
Kontrollvorschriften  unterliegen  wie  nicht  kommerzielle  Banken".  Die  Gruppe 
nachdrücklich die Einhaltung des ethischen Imperativs, Gesundheit durch geeignete Qualitäts- 
und Sicherheitsvorschriften zu schützen, fordert einen europäischen Rechtsrahmen auf diesem  

61

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gebiet und empfiehlt schließlich, dass "die Europäische Union regelmäßige Erhebungen in den 
Mitgliedstaaten fördern sollte, um Daten über Verfahren im Zusammenhang mit menschlichem 
Gewebe  –  von  der  Beschaffung  über  die  Verteilung  bis  hin  zur  Organisation  von 
Gewebebanken – und insbesondere im Hinblick auf den Aspekt der Gewinnorientierung oder 
der Nicht-Erwerbcharakter zu gewinnen und zu verbreiten…".  

1.22.  Spezielle  Bedenken  im  Zusammenhang  mit  Nabelschnurblutbanken 
für autologe Verwendung 

Nabelschnurblutbanken, deren Blutproben für eine künftige autologe Verwendung vorgesehen 
sind, geben zu  zusätzlichen ethischen Bedenken Anlass. Bisher beziehen Gewebebanken ihre 
Proben für die Behandlung Dritter oder für Forschungszwecke unentgeltlich von Spendern, und 
der damit verbundene Akt der Solidarität oder Großzügigkeit leistet einen Beitrag zur Stärkung 
des  sozialen  Zusammenhalts.  Dagegen  sind  kommerzielle  Nabelschnurblutbanken 
gewinnorientiert organisiert. Darin spiegelt sich eher eine generelle Umstellung von einem auf 
Solidarität  gegründeten  und  durch  Erwägungen  hinsichtlich  der  Gesundheit  der  Bevölkerung 
geleiteten  Gesundheitswesen,  durch  das  sich  Europa 
letzten  Jahrzehnten 
in  den 
ausgezeichnet hat, hin zu einem privat finanzierten Gesundheitssystem.  

In absehbarer Zukunft haben die von diesen Banken angebotenen Dienste, für die Eltern zur 
Kasse gebeten werden, keinerlei Aussicht auf eine Umsetzung in die Praxis. Werden sie von 
Ärzten vorgeschlagen und unterstützt, könnte dies eine Vertrauenskrise nach sich ziehen. 

1.23. Information für Verbraucher/Bürger 

Die  Bürger  könnten  versucht  sein,  alle  im  Gesundheitssektor  angebotenen  Möglichkeiten 
auszunutzen,  selbst  wenn  diese  nicht  validiert  sind.  Darüber  hinaus  sind  Frauen  /  Eltern 
während Schwangerschaft und Geburt besonders verletzlich. Diese Verletzlichkeit wird durch 
irreführende  oder  allzu  optimistische  Informationen  dahingehend  ausgenutzt,  daß  den  Eltern, 
die  alles  Menschen  mögliche  zum  Wohl  ihres  Kindes  unternehmen  möchten,  derartige 
Schuldgefühle vermittelt werden, dass sie sich veranlasst sehen, Geld für etwas auszugeben, 
das sie sich nicht wirklich leisten können und das möglicherweise das Geld nicht wert ist.  

1.24. Schutz gefährdeter Gruppen 

Geschlechtsspezifischen  Aspekten  sollte  besonderes  Augenmerk  gewidmet  werden,  da  die 
Entnahme  der  Probe  während  des  Geburtsvorgangs  stattfindet.  Der  Druck  zur  Durchführung 
der  Entnahme,  mit  der  einem  dringenden  Wunsch  der  Eltern  entsprochen  werden  soll,  kann 
schwerer  lasten,  als  wenn  die  Gewinnung  des  Nabelschnurblutes  systematisch  im  Rahmen 
einer Spende erfolgt. In diesem Fall kann die Aufmerksamkeit des Arztes von der Versorgung 
der Mutter und des Kindes abgelenkt werden. 

62

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.25. Verlässlichkeit der Bank 

Kommerzielle  Nabelschnurblutbanken  bieten  eine  längerfristige  Lagerung  an,  sie  können 
jedoch jederzeit in Konkurs gehen oder ihren Betrieb einstellen. Dies könnte die Interessen der 
Kunden  beeinträchtigen,  wenn  sie  nicht  die  Leistung  erhalten,  für  die  gezahlt  zu  haben 
glaubten. 

1.26. Gewinnung von Spendern 

Öffentliche  Banken  benötigen  eine  große  Vielfalt  von  Proben  mit  so  vielen  HLA-Typen  wie 
möglich,  um  für  jeden  Empfänger  eine  geeignete,  übereinstimmende  Probe  zu  finden.  Steigt 
die  Zahl  privater  Nabelschnurblutbanken  jedoch  sprunghaft  an  und  haben  diese  zunehmend 
Erfolg, könnten öffentliche Banken potenzielle Spender verlieren, die dann die Einlagerung des 
Nabelschnurbluts  ihrer  Neugeborenen  für  autologe  Verwendung  einer  Spende  vorziehen 
werden.  Daher  steht  zu  befürchten,  dass  sich  öffentliche  Banken  bei  der  Gewinnung  einer 
ausreichenden  Zahl  von  Proben,  die  für  das  Erreichen  der  kritischen  Masse  erforderlich  ist, 
größeren Schwierigkeiten gegenübersehen.  

Wenn  andererseits  öffentliche  Nabelschnurblutbanken  über  eine  ausreichende  Zahl 
verschiedener und auch seltener Bluttypen verfügen, ein effizientes Netzwerk der bestehenden 
Banken  vorhanden  ist  und  Register  eingerichtet  werden,  wird  jeder  Patient  eine  vernünftige 
Chance haben, einen kompatiblen Spender zu finden und bei Bedarf Zugang zu dem für seine 
Behandlung notwendigen Transplantaten zu erhalten.  

1.27. Gleichberechtigter Zugang zur Gesundheitsversorgung 

Über  die  Verwendung  eigener  Nabelschnurstammzellen  kann  derzeit  nur  spekuliert  werden. 
Sollte  sich  jedoch  die  regenerative  Medizin  in  Zukunft  dahingehend  entwickeln,  dass  die 
autologe Verwendung von Stammzellen möglich wird, könnten die Chancen für einen Zugang 
zu  neuen  Therapieformen  steigen,  wenn  das  eigene  Nabelschnurblut  bei  der  Geburt 
eingelagert  wurde.  Dies  würde  von  der  Eignung  der  autologen  Nabelschnurblutprobe  für  die 
entsprechende erforderliche Therapie abhängen. Unter Umständen können nicht alle Personen 
die Kosten der Lagerung tragen. In diesem Fall würde der Zugang zu neuen Therapieformen 
vom finanziellen Spielraum des Einzelnen bestimmt.  

63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. STELLUNGNAHME 

Die  ethischen  Aspekte  im  Zusammenhang  mit  Datenbanken  mit  menschlichem  Gewebe 
insgesamt wurden bereits in der Stellungnahme Nr. 11 der Europäischen Gruppe für Ethik in 
Naturwissenschaften  und  neuen  Technologien  vom  21. Juli 1998  behandelt.  Die  in  dieser 
Stellungnahme90  getroffenen  Aussagen  sind  auch  für  Nabelschnurblutbanken  gültig.  Es  gibt 
jedoch  im  Hinblick  auf  Nabelschnurblutbanken  spezielle  ethische  Aspekte,  die  im  Mittelpunkt 
der  vorliegenden  Stellungnahme  stehen,  wobei  besonderes  Augenmerk  auf  kommerzielle 
Banken für autologe Verwendung gelegt wird. 

Die Gruppe gibt die folgende Stellungnahme ab:  

2.1.  

2.2. 

2.3. 

2.4.  

Die  Rechtmäßigkeit  kommerzieller  Nabelschnurblutbanken  für  autologe  Verwendung 
sollte hinterfragt werden, da diese eine Dienstleistung verkaufen, die zum gegenwärtigen 
Zeitpunkt hinsichtlich therapeutischer Möglichkeiten keinen wirklichen Nutzen hat. Daher 
versprechen  sie  mehr  als  sie  leisten  können.  Die  Tätigkeiten  solcher  Banken  geben 
Anlass zu ernst zu nehmender ethischer Kritik.  

Zwar sind einige Mitglieder der Gruppe der Auffassung, dass die Tätigkeit dieser Banken 
verboten  werden  sollte, die  Mehrheit der  Gruppe  ist  jedoch der  Ansicht,  dass  man  die 
Tätigkeit  dieser  Banken  lediglich  einschränken  sollte,  da  ein  striktes  Verbot  eine 
unangemessene  Beschränkung  des  freien  Unternehmertums  und  der  Wahlfreiheit  von 
Einzelpersonen/Paaren  darstellen  würde.  Diese  Banken  sollte  unter  strengen  Auflagen 
betrieben werden. 

Die  Gruppe  stellt 
fest,  dass  mindestens  ein  Mitgliedstaat  diese  kommerziellen 
Nabelschnurblutbanken  bereits  verboten  hat.  Die  Banken  könnten  als  unrechtmäßig 
in  anderen 
angesehen  werden,  und  die  Verträge  könnten  anfechtbar  oder 
Mitgliedstaaten  nicht  durchsetzbar  sein.  Erteilt  ein  Staat  die  Genehmigung 
für 
kommerzielle Nabelschnurblutbanken, muss deren Tätigkeit streng reguliert werden. Die 
Regulierung  sollte  eine  vorherige  Zulassung  durch  die  zuständige  staatliche  Behörde 
und  eine  sorgfältige  Überwachung  der  sowohl  im  öffentlichen  als  auch  im  privaten 
Bereich angewendeten Verfahren umfassen.  

Werden kommerzielle Nabelschnurblutbanken genehmigt, sollten den Verbrauchern, die 
deren Dienste in Anspruch nehmen möchten, angemessene Informationen an die Hand 
gegeben werden. Sie sollten z. B. darüber unterrichtet werden, dass es nach heutigem 
Wissensstand  sehr  unwahrscheinlich  ist,  dass  die  Probe  zur  Behandlung  der  eigenen 
Kinder verwendet werden könnte, dass über die künftigen therapeutischen Möglichkeiten 
nur  spekuliert  werden  kann  und  dass  es bisher  keinerlei  Hinweis  darauf gibt, dass  die 
therapeutischen  Anwendungen  mit  eigenen 
aktuelle  Forschung  zu  spezifischen 

90 Vgl. Punkt 1.20. 

64

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
2.5.  

2.6.  

2.7.  

2.8.  

2.9.  

2.10.  

Nabelschnurblutstammzellen  führen  wird.  Daher  muss  ganz  deutlich  gemacht  werden, 
dass der Nutzen der Konservierung für autologe Verwendung nach dem gegenwärtigen 
Kenntnisstand  der  Forschung  von  geringem  Wert  ist.  Diese  Informationen  sollten  über 
alle Medien, einschließlich des Internets, bekannt gemacht und in alle Verträge zwischen 
Banken und ihren Kunden aufgenommen werden.  

Jegliche  Werbung  kommerzieller  Nabelschnurblutbanken  in  den  Medien,  einschließlich 
des Internets, muss durch die öffentlichen Behörden angemessen kontrolliert werden.  

Kommerzielle  Nabelschnurblutbanken  müssen  dieselben  Qualitätsstandards  wie  alle 
anderen  Gewebebanken  einhalten.  Daher  begrüßt  der  EGE  die  am  2  März  2004 
verabschiedete Richtlinie des Europäischen Parlaments und des Rates zur Festlegung 
von  Qualitäts-  und  Sicherheitsstandards  für  die  Spende,  Beschaffung,  Testung, 
Verarbeitung, Konservierung, Lagerung und Verteilung von menschlichen Geweben und 
Zellen,  die  einen  europäischen  Rechtsrahmen,  namentlich  für  die  Genehmigung, 
Zulassung,  Akkreditierung,  Inspektion,  Kontrolle,  Förderung  und  Werbung  sowie  die 
Erfahrung des Personals solcher Banken schafft.  

Da  nie  ausgeschlossen  werden  kann,  dass  eine  kommerzielle  Nabelschnur-Blutbank 
den  Betrieb  einstellt  oder  Konkurs  anmeldet,  sollten  die  Kunden  diesbezüglich 
unterrichtet werden, und die Kontinuität der Lagerung und der Übertragung der Proben 
an  eine  andere  Bank  bzw. die  Entschädigung des  Kunden  sollte durch entsprechende 
Versicherungen gewährleistet werden. 

Die Gewinnung von Nabelschnurblut darf den Geburtsprozess nicht beeinträchtigen und 
sollte mit keinerlei Risiken für Mutter und Kind verbunden sein. 

Gegenwärtig sollte in den Ausnahmefällen, in denen die Lagerung von Nabelschnurblut 
für autologe Verwendung bei Familien mit erhöhtem Risiko für spezifische Krankheiten 
oder mit seltenen HLA-Typen gerechtfertigt ist, diesen Familien vorgeschlagen werden, 
die  Lagerung  in  öffentlichen  Nabelschnurblutbanken  vornehmen  zu  lassen,  um  einen 
gleichberechtigten Zugang aller zu Gesundheitsdiensten zu gewährleisten. 

In  Anbetracht  der  Tatsache,  dass  die  europäische  Bevölkerung  zunehmend  multi-
ethnisch  strukturiert  ist,  und  um  einen  gleichberechtigten  Zugang  aller  Bürger, 
unabhängig von ihrer ethnischen Herkunft, zu Transplantationsdiensten zu ermöglichen, 
sollten  die  öffentlichen  Behörden  spezifische  Maßnahmen  ergreifen,  um  ausreichende 
Spenderproben  verschiedener  ethnischer  Gruppen  mit  unterschiedlichen  HLA-Mustern 
zu erhalten, damit für jeden Patienten, der eine Transplantation benötigt, ein geeigneter 
Spender gefunden werden kann.  

65

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Für  den  Fall,  dass  die  medizinische  Entwicklung  an  den  Punkt  gelangt,  dass  die 
Verwendung  der  eigenen  Nabelschnur-Blutzellen  von  Nutzen  sein  könnte,  sollte  die 
Lagerung  künftig  nicht  kommerziellen  Banken  überlassen,  sondern  vom  öffentlichen 
Sektor  übernommen  werden,  um  einen  gleichberechtigten  Zugang  aller  zu 
Gesundheitsdiensten sicherzustellen.  

für 

öffentliche 

Unterstützung 

Nabelschnurblutbanken 

Die 
allogene 
Transplantationszwecke  sollte  verstärkt  und  ihr  Betrieb  langfristig  gesichert  werden. 
Nabelschnurblutbanken  sind  jedoch  von  begrenztem  Nutzen,  solange  Netzwerke  und 
Register nicht ebenfalls unterstützt werden. Um sicherzustellen, dass jeder Patient, der 
eine Transplantation benötigt, eine geeignete Probe findet, ist in der Tat die Entwicklung 
von  Banken-Netzwerken  und  Spender-Registern  von  entscheidender  Bedeutung,  um 
das zügige Auffinden eines geeigneten Spenders mit übereinstimmenden Merkmalen zu 
ermöglichen. Daher sollten Netzwerke und Register gefördert und unterstützt werden. 

für 

2.11. 

2.12.  

2.13.  

Eine  breit  angelegte europäische  Debatte  über  die  zunehmende  Rolle  des  Marktes  im 
Gesundheitssystem  und  die  damit  verbundenen  Vor-  und  Nachteile  sollte  es  den 
europäischen Bürgern erlauben, sich über die gegenwärtigen Entwicklungen und deren 
in  dieser  Stellungnahme 
Auswirkungen, 
angesprochenen Themen, zu informieren.  

im  Hinblick  auf  die 

insbesondere 

Die Europäische Gruppe für Ethik in Naturwissenschaften und neuen Technologien 
Der Vorsitzende: Göran Hermerén 

Die Mitglieder: 

Nicos C. Alivizatos 

Inez de Beaufort 

Rafael Capurro 

Yvon Englert 

Catherine Labrusse-Riou  

Anne McLaren 

Linda Nielsen  

Pere Puigdomenech Rosell 

Stefano Rodota 

Günter Virt  

Peter Whittaker 

66

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
"A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking" 

by 

Dr Jennifer GUNNING, 

Consultant in Bioethics and Science Affairs 

June 2003 

A Study initiated by the EGE and funded by DG RTD 91  

91 Contract N°. SAS5-CT-2002-30038 – Directorate General Research 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
A WORLDWIDE STUDY 

OF

UMBILICAL CORD CELL BANKING 

Undertaken on behalf of the European Commission 
By 
Dr Jennifer Gunning 
Consultant in Bioethics and Science Affairs 

 
A WORLDWIDE STUDY 
OF 
UMBILICAL CORD CELL BANKING 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jennifer Gunning PhD 
Consultant in Bioethics and Science Affairs 
15 St James's Square 
Bath BA1  2TR 
UK 

Tel/Fax: +44 1225 316629 
Email: gunning@cf.ac.uk 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74 

75 

76 

77 

79 

83 

93 

101 

107 

111 

129 

135 

145 

CONTENTS 

Acknowledgements 

List of abbreviations 

Remit 

Executive Summary 

1.  Introduction 

2. Current state of umbilical cord 

  blood banking 

3. Cord blood banking networks, 
registries and organisations 

4. Certification and accreditation 

5. Survey of umbilical cord banks 

6. Umbilical cord cell banking by 

country 

7.  Public banking and private 

banking: costs and conflicts 

8.  Bibliography 

9.  Annexes 

73

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

In  preparing  this  report  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  help  of    Susan  Armitage, 
Director of the London Cord Blood Bank and Professor Peter Wernet and Dr Gesine 
Kögler  of  the  Jose Carreras  Cord  Blood  Bank  in  Düsseldorf.    In  particular,  I  would 
like to thank Dr Kögler for providing the pictures used in the cover of this report and 
of  unrestricted  somatic  stem  cells  used  in  the  text.    I  would  like  to  thank  Mr  Frank 
Schott of VITA 34 for providing the table of cord cell transplants from private banks 
Bone  Marrow  Donors  Worldwide  for  allowing  me  to  use  material  from  their  2001 
Annual Report.  Paul Boylan, Attorney at Law, provided me with information on the 
American  patents  case.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  those  cord  blood  banks  which 
replied  to  my  questionnaire  and  particularly  those  respondents  who  answered 
additional questions.  Thanks are also due to  Professors Eliane Gluckman,  Koji Ono, 
Norio  Higuchi  and  JJ  Nietfeld  for  their  help,  together  with  Dr  Fran  Verter  whose 
Parents’ Guide website was invaluable.  

Jennifer Gunning 
June 2003 

74

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 

AABB 
ABMDR 
ADISCO 
ASBMT 
BMDW 
CBU 
CDC 
CMS 
COBLT 
CRIR 
EBMT 
ERCB 
FACT 
GLP 
GMP 
GRACE 
GTP 
GVHD  
HCT/P’s 
HLA 

American Association of Blood Banks 
Australian Bone Marrow Donor Registry 
Associazione Donatrici Italiane Sangue di Cordone Ombelicale 
American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation 
Bone Marrow Donors Worldwide 
Cord Blood Unit(s) 
Centers for Disease Control 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Cord Blood Transplantation Study 
Caitlin Raymond International Registry 
European Group for Bone Marrow Transplantation 
Emilia Romagna Cord Blood Bank 
Foundation for the Accreditation of Cellular Therapy 
Good Laboratory Practice 
Good Manufacturing Practice 
Gruppo per la Raccolta e Amplificazione della Cellule Ematopoietiche 
Good Tissue Practice 
Graft Versus Host Disease 
Human Cellular and Tissue-based Products 
Human Leucocyte Antigens (human major histocompatibility 
complex) 
Haematopoietic Stem Cells 
Investigational New Drug 
Institutional Review Board 
International Society for Cellular Therapy (formerly ISHAGE) 
International Society of Hematotherapy and Graft Engineering 
International Standards Organisation 
Joint Accreditation Committee (of EBMT) 
Japanese Cord Blood Bank Network 
London Cord Blood Bank 
Medicines Control Agency (UK) 
National Marrow Donor Program (USA) 

HSC 
IND 
IRB 
ISCT 
ISHAGE 
ISO 
JACIE 
JCBBN 
LCBB 
MCA 
NMDP 
RANZCOG  Royal Australia and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and 

REDMO 
RFSP 
TGA 

Gynaecologists 
Unrelated Bone Marrow Donor Registry (Spain)  
Réseau Français de Sang Placentaire 
Therapeutic Good Administration (Australia) 

75

 
 
 
 
 
REMIT 

For a number of years different organisations have been active in the banking of 
umbilical cord cells.  Umbilical cord blood contains stem cells which are similar to 
the cells found in human bone marrow.  These cells are now stored for two main 
reasons:  either for the benefit of other patients who could benefit from a stem cell 
transplant or for the individual donor at a later stage in his or her life (autologous 
transplantation).  The objective of this study is to understand the extent of these 
practices, the way they are organised and their economic impact. 

In meeting this objective the remit of the study was to gather information on umbilical 
cord cell banks and banking activities, either performed by private for-profit 
organisations or by non-profit organisations, providing the following information: 

- 

- 

- 

the main banks operating in the world, how they are operated, what type of 
services they offer; 
some examples of umbilical cell banks in Europe with more details of the way 
they operate, their financial setting, their facilities, and their type of 
clients/patients; 
elements concerning the market for such services and the regulatory and 
legislative context. 

It is hoped that this information has been provided in this report.  The way in which 
the information has been presented was developed,  in the light of experience, as the 
study progressed and other relevant issues became apparent.  The terms umbilical 
cord blood bank and umbilical cord cell banks have been used interchangeably 
throughout the report. 

76

 
 
 
 
 
   
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

•  The  first  successful  cord  cell  transplant  to  a  sibling  with  Fanconi’s  anaemia 
took place in 1988.  The proven utility of cord blood led to the establishment 
of  cord  blood  banks.    The  first  private  and  public  banks  were  established  in 
1992.  There are now nearly 100 cord blood banks worldwide. 

•  Early  transplants  were  to  siblings  but  with  the  establishment  of  public  cord 
blood banks unrelated cord cell transplants were enabled first in children and 
then to a lesser extent, in adults. 

•  There  is  a  tension  between  private  cord  blood  banks,  which  store  blood  for 
autologous  or  family  use,  and  public  banks,  which  store  blood  for  unrelated 
use.  There is an inference that private banks are taking out of circulation cord 
blood units which might otherwise be used for unrelated recipients.   It is not 
clear that this is the case since public banks restrict their collection to a local 
network  of  hospitals  and  it  is  difficult  for  women  outside  their  target 
population  to  donate.    Private  banks  have  no  such  restrictions.    But  a  recent 
study  found  that  women  in  antenatal  clinics  had  very  little  knowledge  about 
cord  blood  banking  although  86%  of  those  questioned  would  have  been 
willing to donate altruistically;  14% would have elected to bank privately. 

•  Umbilical  cord  blood  would  seem  to  be  a  largely  untapped  resource  which 
could  be  routinely  collected.    However,  public  cord  banking  is  costly  to 
maintain  and  will  remain  so  as  long  as  only  1-3%  of  stored  units  are 
transplanted.  It has been estimated that, for current unrelated use, a worldwide 
stock of 100,000  cord blood units would be  needed.  This target has already 
been exceeded.  However, cord blood cells can be used to treat an increasing 
number of diseases and demand may rise. 

•  Umbilical  cord  blood  units  have  a  number  of  advantages  over  bone  marrow 

where haematopoietic stem cell grafts are needed. 

o  They  are  more  accessible  because  units  recorded  in  cord  blood 
registries  are  readily  available  from  cord  blood  banks  whereas  bone 
marrow donor registries only hold details of potential donors; 

o  cord  blood  cells  are  immunologically  ‘naïve’  so  graft-versus-host 

o 

disease is reduced 
it  is,  therefore,  possible  to  use  cord  blood  cells  that  are  not  an  exact 
tissue match. 

•  Umbilical  cord  blood  is  some  ten  times  richer  in  haematopoietic  stem  cells 
than bone marrow but the volume collected is smaller.  Success and speed of 
engraftment  is  related  to  the  number  of  stem  cells  transplanted.    Cord  blood 
has, as a result, been more suitable for paediatric than adult use but advances 
in  cell  expansion  technology  mean  that  cord  blood  units  may  become  more 
suitable  for  adult  use  in  the  future.    Until  then,  cord  cell  transplants  may 
continue to be regarded as experimental by many physicians. 

77

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Cord  blood  has  been  found  to  be  a  source  of  pluripotent  stem  cells  that  will 
differentiate into a number of different cell types;  neuronal, muscle, bone and 
endothelial.    Biotechnology  companies  are  already  pursuing  research  into 
unrestricted  somatic  stem  cells  from  cord  blood  as  a  potentially  exploitable 
resource  for  the  development  of  cell  therapies  and  envisage  a  $30  billion 
market before the end of the decade. 

•  There is little statutory regulation of cord blood banking where standards are 
mostly  ensured  through  a  number  of  voluntary  accreditation  schemes.    Most 
cord blood banking standards have been developed by bone marrow transplant 
organisations or by blood services.  This situation is likely to change in future 
both in Europe and the United States where human tissue banking regulations 
are likely to come into force.  These will be more rigorous for banks storing 
tissue for unrelated use than those storing material only for autologous use but 
some  common  standards  are  likely  to  be  imposed.    Some  countries,  notably 
Australia and Germany, impose GMP standards. 

•  A  number  of  cord  blood  banking  networks, organisations and registries exist 
around  the  world.    These  are  intended  to  facilitate  communication  and 
searching  and  maintain  quality  standards.    There  is  some  overlap  in 
membership and duplication of interest and effort. 

•  The  costs of cord  blood banking  are  high  and may  put some public  banks  at 
risk if they do not receive adequate public funding.  Private banks may take a 
number of years to break even and risk closure if they do not acquire a critical 
mass of stored units.  Where public banks have  encountered difficulties their 
inventories remain on the cord blood registries;  parents banking their child’s 
cord  blood  privately  do  so  at  their  own  risk  unless  they  insure  against  the 
eventuality to cover the costs of moving the unit to another bank. 

• 

In  addition  to  setting  up  and  maintenance  costs,  which  are  common  to  both 
public and private banks, as are basic processing costs, public banks also have 
to bear the cost of tissue typing and molecular tests until units are released for 
transplant.  These costs, together with the costs of confirmatory tests, are then 
paid by public health services or medical insurance. 

•  The patenting of the processing and storage procedures for cord blood banking 
in  the  United  States  and  Europe  has  threatened  cord  blood  banks  with  the 
additional cost of having to operate under licence.  In April 2003, after a four 
year legal battle, the European patent was revoked.  The US patents still stand 
with  the  patent  holder  pursuing  a  law  suit  for  patent  infringement  against  a 
number of banks.  A trial is scheduled for October 2003. 

•  The  issues  of  consent,  ownership  and  confidentiality  may require discussion.  
New tissue banking regulations will require traceability but it is essential that 
cord  blood  units  are  anonymised  before  release.    There  is  also  the  issue  of 
whether  donors  should  be  informed  of  positive  results  of  disease  testing  or 
genetic abnormalities that appear in other tests. 

78

 
 
 
 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 

Background 

The first recorded use of umbilical cord blood was in 1963, when it was used in the 
treatment  of  a  patient  with  lymphangiosarcoma1.    But  it  was  the  successful 
transplantation of cord blood into a patient with Fanconi’s anaemia in 19882 that was 
the  landmark  case  which  indicated  that  cord  blood  might  be  a  viable  alternative  to 
bone marrow in the treatment of haematopoietic disorders, particularly in children. 

Historically, bone marrow transplantation  has been used in the treatment of patients 
with  blood  and  immune  disorders  requiring  a  source  of  haematopoietic  stem  cells 
(HSC).    Until  recently,  the  blood  remaining  in  the  placenta  and  umbilical  cord 
following the birth of a baby was discarded as a waste product.  However, it has been 
determined that umbilical cord blood is some ten times richer than bone marrow in its 
proportion  of  progenitors  of  haematopoietic  stem  cells3.    Moreover,  lymphocytes  in 
cord  blood  appear  to  be  less  immunologically  active  than  those  found  in  bone 
marrow4  and  the  incidence  of  graft  versus  host  disease  (GVHD)  was  lower.    These 
factors  make  cord  blood  an  attractive  alternative  to  bone  marrow  for  a  number  of 
conditions  and,  following  the  report  of  the  1988  case,  cord  blood  banks  were 
established first in the USA and Europe and now there are many such banks world-
wide both in the public and private sectors.  

Advantages and disadvantages of using cord blood 

Advantages 

•  Cord  blood  units  (CBU)  are  more  rapidly  available  than  bone  marrow.    Bone 
marrow  is  obtained  from  volunteer  donors  who  are  recruited  by  blood  and 
transplantation  services  and  other  organisations.    Donor  details,  including 
ethnicity, HLA and blood type, are held in registers.  If a transplant is needed by a 
patient,  their  clinician  will  search  the  bone  marrow  registries  for  a  match.    The 
volunteer  will  then  be  approached  for  a  bone  marrow  donation  and  tests  for 
disease  and  other  exclusion  criteria  will  be  carried  out.    This  process  is  time 
consuming  and  it  may  take  many  weeks  before  a  suitable  donation  becomes 
available,  if  at  all,  for  the  critically  ill  patient.    There  is  always  a  risk  that  the 
volunteer  will  change  their  mind  about  donating.    Cord  blood  units  are  stored 
frozen  after  thorough  testing  for  contamination  and  specified  diseases,  such  as 
Hepatitis B and C and HIV, and there is no risk of last minute consent refusal. 

•  Cord  blood  is  less  risky  to  collect.    The  collection  of  cord  blood  following 
delivery  is  a  harmless  process  that  does  not  affect  the  mother  or  her  newborn.  

1 Ende M, Lymphangiosarcoma: Report of a Case, Pac Med Surg, 1966;74:80-82 
2  Gluckman  E,  Broxmeyer  HE,  Auerbach  AD,  et  al.,  Haematopoietic  reconstitution  in  a  patient  with 
Fanconi  anaemia  by  means  of  umbilical-cord  blood  from  an  HLA  identical  sibling,  N  Eng  J  Med, 
1989;321: 1174-1178 
3 Broxmeyer HE, Douglas GW, Hangoe G, et al., Human umbilical cord blood as a potential source of 
transplantable haematipoietic stem progenitor cells, Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 1989: 86:3828-3832 
4 Cohen SBA, Madrigal JA, Immunological and functional differences between cord and peripheral 
blood, Bone Marrow Transplant, 1998:21 (suppl 3): S9-S12 

79

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Cord blood can, therefore, be collected at no risk to the donor and stored, frozen, 
until needed.  The harvesting of bone marrow is an invasive process that can cause 
some  risk  and  discomfort  to  the  donor.    Bone  marrow  is  therefore  not  collected 
until it is needed. 

•  The number of potential donors is high.  Recruitment of cord blood donors from 
antenatal clinics is relatively easy and only a very small number of women, from 
amongst those who might be willing to donate, is ever approached.  Potential bone 
marrow donors are not so readily identifiable although many will be blood donors. 

•  There  is  a  decreased  risk  of  GVHD.    The  cells  in  cord  blood  appear  to  be  more 
‘naive’ than their counterparts in bone marrow because of the immune immaturity 
of  the  newborn.    It  has  also  been  shown  been  shown  that  the  low  number  or 
absence of  CD8+ natural killer (NK) T cells in cord blood may also be a relevant 
factor5. 

•  Cord blood units do not have to be a perfect HLA match because of the reduced 
incidence  of  GVHD.    This  means  that  it  is  possible  to  use  unrelated  and 
mismatched  donors6,7.    While  sibling  donors  were  used  in  early  cord  blood 
transplants, the establishment of cord blood banks means that it has been possible 
increasingly to use unrelated donors. 

•  The risk of transmission of infectious disease is diminished for cord blood because 
all  CBU  are  screened  for  disease  and  any  infected  or  contaminated  units 
discarded. 

Disadvantages 

•  The  time  to  platelet  engraftment  is  prolonged  in  the  transplantation  of  cord 
blood  in  comparison  to  bone  marrow8.    This  study  also  showed  that 
engraftment time was strongly related to cell dose. 

•  The cell dose of CBU is generally insufficient for adults.  Although cord blood 
is  enriched  in  HSC  its  volume  is  less  than  is  collected  from  bone  marrow.   
This makes CBU more suited to paediatric use.  Clinical experience has shown 
that to successfully treat an adult the nucleated cell dose in the CBU must be at 
least 1.5 – 2.0x107 per kilogram body weight9,10 and it has been shown that a 

5 Kim YJ, Broxmeyer HE. CD8+ NKT cells, low in cord blood, preferentially require 4-1BB rather 
than CD28 for costimulation [abstract] Blood . 96(suppl 1, pt 1), 240a abstract 1031 
6 Wagner JE, Rosenthal J, Sweetman R et al., Successful transplantation of HLA matched and HLA 
mismatched umbilical cord blood from unrelated donors:  analysis of engraftment and acute graft 
versus host disease, Blood. 1996; 88:795-802 
7 Gluckman E, Roahc V, Bayer-Chammard A et al., Outcome of cord blood transplantation from 
related and unrelated donors, N EnglJ Med. 1997;  337:373-378 
8 Rubinstein P, Carrier C, Scaradovou A, et al., Outcomes among 562 recipients of placental-blood 
transplants from unrelated donors, N Engl J Med,. 1998; 22:1565-1577 
9 Ballen K, Broxmeyer HE, McCullough J, et al., Current Status of Cord Blood Banking and 
Transplantation in the United States and Europe, Biology of Blood and Marrow Transplantation. 2001; 
7:635-645 

80

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
cord  blood  nucleated  cell  dose  of  0.37x108  per  kilo  increased  the  speed  and 
probability  of  engraftment  (E  Gluckman  personal  communication).    The 
Düsseldorf NetCord bank has had a policy of collecting only units larger than 
80ml since 1997.  In these units the median number of nucleated cells was 10 
± 5x108 per unit and only 25% of the units contained enough cells to engraft 
patients of 50-70 kilograms.  To overcome this problem multiple units of cord 
blood have been transplanted but usually only one CBU engrafts.  Cord blood 
has a higher potential for in vitro proliferation than adult bone marrow11 and, 
currently,  a  considerable  body  of  research  is  being  undertaken  into  cell 
expansion to overcome the cell dose problem.  Most of this research is being 
validated  in  mouse  models12,13  but  some  expanded  units  have  already  been 
used in the human clinical context as part of a trial14,15.   Eurocord III, funded 
by the EU under the Cell Factory area of FP5, will carry out an evaluation of 
umbilical  cord  blood  transplant  engraftment  using  ex  vivo  haematopoietic 
progenitors/stem  cell  expansion.    The  study  will  collect  and  compare 
techniques  of  ex  vivo  stem  cell  expansion;    interact  with  biotechnology 
companies to procure cytokines and other reagents for clinical use;  compare  
pre-clinical  animal  models  in  mice  and  sheep  and  then  design  clinical 
protocols  for  ex  vivo  expansion  of  cord  blood  stem  cells  and  multiple 
transplants.    The  results  will  be  analysed  and  compared  with  the  Eurocord 
database registry. 

•  There is a risk that hereditary disorders, undiagnosed in the donor at birth, may 

be transmitted to the recipient.    

10 Gluckman E, Rocha V, Chastang C on behalf of Eurocord-Cord Blood Transplant Group,  Cord 
blood hematopoietic stem cells: biology and transplantation, Haematology, American Society of 
Hematology, Washington DC, pp. 1-14, 1998 
11 Piacibello W, Sanavio F, Garetto L, et al., Extension self-renewal of hum primitive hematopoietic 
stem cells from cord blood. Blood. 1997;89:2644-2653 
12 Ohishi K, Varnum-Finney B, Bernstein ID, Delta-1 enhances marrow and thymus repopulating 
ability of human CD34(+) CD38(-) cord blood cells, J Clin Invest. 2002; 110(8): 1165-74 
13 Encabo A, Mateu E, Carbonell-Uberos F, Minana MD, CD34+CD38- is a good predictive marker 
of cloning ability and expansionpotential of CD34+ cord blood cells.Transfusion. 2003; 43(3): 383-9. 
14 Jaroscak J, Martin PL, Waters-Pick B, et al., A phase 1 trial of augmentation of unrelated cord blood 
transplantation with ex vivo expanded cells . [abstract] Blood. 1998; 92: 646a (suppl 1, part 1). 
15 Stiff P, Pecora A, Parthasarathy M, et al., Umbilical cord transplants in adults using a combination of 
unexpanded and ex vivo expanded cells: preliminary observations. [abstract] Blood. 1998; 92: 646a 
(suppl 1, part 1). 

81

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
2. CURRENT STATE OF UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD BANKING 

Following the report of the first successful transplant of umbilical cord blood in 1988 
there was a call for the establishment of cord blood banks.  This and other early cord 
blood  transplants  were  carried  out  using  CBU  from  siblings  and  it  appears  that  the 
first cord blood banks to be established initially collected family donations.  The first 
cord  blood  banks  were  founded  in  1992,  two  in  the  USA  and  one  in  Europe.    The 
Cord  Blood  Registry,  established  by  Dr  T  Harris  as  a  pilot  programme  in  part 
sponsored by the American Cancer Society, claims to be the first family cord blood 
bank  in  the  world.    It  is  now  one  of  the  world’s  largest  private  cord  blood  banking 
organisations, storing over 45,000  CBU from around  the  world.    The  National  Cord 
Blood  Program  was  established  in  New  York  by  Professor  Pablo  Rubinstein  and  is 
one  of  the  world’s  largest  public  cord  blood  banks,  storing  some  16,500  CBU  for 
transplant to unrelated recipients.  This bank has provided more than half of the cord 
blood  used  in  transplants  around  the  world.    In  Europe,  1992  also  saw  the 
establishment of the Düsseldorf cord blood bank under Professor Peter Wernet.  This 
initially  opened  for  family  donations  and  extended  to  take  unrelated  donations  in 
1993.  The bank now stores some 7,000 CBU. 

Since these first banks opened there has been a rapid increase in the number of cord 
blood  banks  across  the  world  both  in  the  private  ‘for  profit’  and  public  ‘non-profit’ 
sectors.  Given the constraints of this study it is not possible to give a precise figure 
for the number of cord blood banks worldwide  but a current estimate is at least 102 
made up as show in  Table 2.1. 

Table 2.1  Distribution and type of cord blood banks 

‘for profit’ cord blood banks 

‘non-profit’ cord blood banks 

Mixed 
banks† 

USA 

Europe  Rest of world 

USA Europe 

Rest of world 

USA 

16 

3* 

8* 

14 

36 

22 

3 

* In addition a number of private US banks have affiliates in Europe and the rest of the world.  The 
New  England  Cord  Blood  Bank  has  affiliates  in  the  UK,  Brazil,  Chile,  Mexico,  Peru,  Switzerland, 
Turkey and Venezuela – CBU are shipped for storage in Boston.  Cryo-Cell International has storage 
and processing facilities in Belgium and Germany for CBU from Europe and Israel and in Mexico for 
South America. 
†Banks offering private ‘for profit’ and non-profit services 

Cord  blood  banks  vary  greatly  in  size  and  mode  of  operation.    The  larger  public 
banks  are  hospital  based  and  receive  CBU  from  a  network  of  local  or  regional 
collecting  hospitals  where  the  cord  blood  is  collected  by  trained  midwives  or 
obstetricians.  In some cases where the cord blood bank is run by blood services, such 
as the American Red Cross or the National Blood Service in the UK, CBU may  be 
collected  by  dedicated  and  specially  trained  blood  services  staff.    Some  small  non-
profit banks may collect from their local obstetric unit and hold only a few hundred 
CBU, at most.  

83

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Private banks recruit clients from obstetric clinics, via the internet and through other 
promotional material.  One American company, BirthCells Technology Inc. provides 
inducements to recruiters in the form of commission  on every ‘sale’ and to parents in 
the  form  of  club  membership  for  the  child  which  gives  entry  to  a  sweepstake 
providing access to four  $10,000 college scholarships per year.  Cord blood collected 
for private banks may come from obstetric clinics which are far from their processing 
and  storage  facilities.    Cord  blood  units  are  therefore  shipped  by  courier/delivery 
service.  Although some private banks do provide training materials for obstetric staff 
undertaking  collection,  they  have  no  control  over  collection  standards  and  the 
obstetricians  or midwives  collecting CBU for private banking may have little or no 
experience.  Often the collection kits are provided directly to the parents requesting 
the service and they give them to their obstetrician.  The risk of contamination must 
be higher where those  responsible for the collection of cord  blood do not carry  out 
the procedure regularly and have little formal training. 

Although  most  of  the  larger  private  banks  have  their  own  processing  and  storage 
facilities others make use of ‘non-profit’ facilities.  For instance, CorCell Inc., based 
in  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania,  uses  the  processing  and  storage  facilities  of  the  Elie 
Katz  Umbilical  Cord  Blood  Program  at  Bergen,  New  Jersey.    The  Elie  Katz  Cord 
Blood Program is a principally non-profit bank and providing services to CorCell Inc. 
allows  it  to  offset  its  operating  costs.    Some  private  banks,  such  as  the  California 
Cryobank  and  Cryobanks  International  were  already  established  as  tissue  banks 
before taking CBU, the former being one of the oldest sperm banks in the USA. 

Private  cord  blood  banks  currently  offer  contracts  for  18-20  years  storage.    Recent 
research indicates that this may be reasonable as CBU stored for 15 years have been 
thawed  successfully  and  been  able  to  undergo  cell  expansion.    Engraftment  into 
NOD/SCID mice was comparable to fresh cord blood16. 

Two strategies are used  for the collection  of  cord  blood  and  are  common  across  all 
types  of  bank.    Cord  blood  units  are  collected  either  in  utero,  before  placental 
expulsion,  or  ex  utero,  following  placental  expulsion.    The  former  seems  to  be  the 
preference when collection is undertaken by obstetric staff and the latter favoured by 
blood  services  staff.    Research  does  not  seem  to  show  any  advantage  of  the  one 
collection method over the other17,18. In utero collection may give better volume at a 
higher  risk  of  contamination,  ex  utero  collection  may  compromise  volume.    Blood 
can be collected into syringes or into specially designed bags.  

Bone  Marrow  Donors  Worldwide  (BMDW,  see  Section  5)  is  the  largest  clearing 
house for CBU and its latest available Annual Report (2001) provides a useful picture 
of the development of cord blood banking since 1993. 

16 Broxmeyer HE, Srour EF, Hangoc G, et al., High-efficiency recovery of functional hematopoietic 
progenitor and stem cells from human cord blood cryopreserved for 15 years. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2003; 100(2): 645-650 
17 Lasky LC, Lane TA, Miller JP, et al.,  In utero or ex utero cord blood collection : which is better? 
Transfusion. 2002; 42(10):1246-1248 
18 Solves P, Moraga R, Saucedo E, et al., Comparison between two strategies for umbilical cord blood 
collection. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2003; 31(4):269-273 

84

 
 
 
 
                                                 
Figure  2.1 shows the increase in the number of cord blood registries participating in 
BMDW during this period.  The number of participating registries has since risen to 
some 30 organisations in 24 countries. 

Figure 2.1  Participating registries in BMDW between years 1993 -2001 

Number of Registries 

Most  cord  blood  units  were  stored  in  North  America  (49%)  and  this  was  closely 
followed by CBU in Europe (44%) with only 7% coming from the rest of the world.  
The continental distribution of CBU is shown in Figure 2.2. 

Figure 2.2 Total number of CBU per continent 1993 - 2001 

  Number of cord blood units (x thousand) 

The  first  non-profit  cord  blood  units  were  banked  in  Europe  and  there  has  been  a 
steady increase in the number of units banked both here and in North America. 

85

 
 
 
 
 
     
 
   
                     
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Since  2001  there  has  been  a  rapid  increase  in  CBU  registered  from  the  rest  of  the 
world which now makes up 17.5 per cent of the  total.  North  America  continues to 
have the most units stored (45.2%) with the remainder (37.3%) in Europe.  However, 
there  is  no  cord  blood  banking  in  Africa  and  large  parts  of  Asia.    In  both  these 
continents  there  is  a  high  endemic  viral  disease  load  which  makes  it  difficult  to 
collect CBU which would meet international standards. Table 2.2 shows the current 
worldwide inventory of CBU registered with BMDW. 

Table 2.2  Number of CBU registered with BMDW April 2003  

Registry 

Total 

ABDR1 

%ABDR 
typed 

DNA 
Class II2 

DNA 
Class I3 

CBU 
NVC4 

CBU 
TNC5 

Argentina  
Australia 
Austria 
Belgium 
Bologna 
China 
Czechia 
Düsseldorf 
Finland 
France 
Germany 
Japan-Tokyo 
Leuven 
Milan 
Netherlands 
Slovakia 
Spain 
Switzerland 
Taiwan-
Stemcyte 
Turkey-Ankara 
UK-BBMR 
USA-ARCCBP 
USA Aurora 
USA-CRIR 
USA-Michigan 
USA-New York 
USA-NMDP 
USA-Paramus 
NJ 
USA-Stemcyte 
Warsaw 

70 
7,188 
3 
4,351 
315 
6,141 
885 
5,438 
1,794 
3,798 
3,458 
2,541 
3,230 
8,023 
1,530 
37 
13,318 
569 
7,381 

20 
5,559 
6,257 
6,664 
5,123 
1,000 
17,498 
16,586 
1,429 

70 
7,188 
3 
4,351 
315 
6,141 
885 
5,438 
1,794 
3,797 
3,443 
2,541 
3,229 
8,023 
1,530 
33 
13,318 
569 
7,381 

20 
5,559 
6,257 
6,664 
5,123 
1,000 
17,498 
16,586 
1,429 

6,162 
42 

6,162 
42 

100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
1oo 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
89 
100 
100 
100 

100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 

100 
100 

58 
7,188 

4,295 
5 

885 
5,438 
1,794 
3,792 
3,447 
2,541 
3,227 
8,020 
1,530 

568 
7,380 

6 
4,839 
6,256 
6,664 
5,073 
1,000 
15,000 
16,575 
1,429 

70 
5,256 

494 
5 

714 

280 

2,071 

3,228 
1,475 
761 
7 
2,946 
105 
7,381 

4,752 
6,257 

5,088 
1,000 

15,503 

6,161 

6,162 

70 
7,188 

2,351 
315 
6,141 
884 
5,438 
1,794 
3,797 
3,458 
2,541 
3,230 

1,530 

13,308 
149 
7,380 

20 
5.531 
6,257 
6.664 

1,000 

16,586 
1,429 

6,160 
42 

70 
7,188 

2,351 
314 
6,141 
864 
5,438 
1,793 
3,794 
3,458 
2,541 
3,230 
8,023 
1,530 

13,315 

7,381 

20 
5,531 
6,257 
6,664 
5,123 
1,000 
17,498 
16,586 
1,429 

6,162 
42 

TOTAL 

136,410 

136,389 

115,401 

63,968 

103,265 

133,744 

1  HLA type ABDR by serology 
2  HLA type DR by molecular testing 
3  HLA A and B typing by molecular testing 
4  White blood cell count 
5  Total nucleated cell count (contains erythroblasts) 

86

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Looking  at  the  distribution  of  CBU  in  Europe,  it  can  be  seen  from  Figure  2.3  that 
banking is most highly developed in Belgium, Germany, Italy and Spain.  The banks 
in these countries are all important members of  EUROCORD. 

Figure 2.3  Distribution of cord blood units in Europe 

Another  useful  way  of  looking  the  worldwide  stock  of  cord  blood  available  for 
transplantation  is  to  look  at  its  distribution  per  10,000  inhabitants.    These  data  are 
only available for the year 2000 and the number of CBU in the BMDW inventory has 
doubled since then. 

87

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2.3  The number of cord blood units per 10,000 inhabitants. 

Country 

Number of 
inhabitants x 106 

Number of cord blood 
units 

Number of units per 
10,000 inhabitants 

Belgium 
Australia 
Spain 
USA 
Finland 
Italy 
Germany 
Israel 
Czech Republic 
UK 
The Netherlands 
France 
Switzerland 
Slovak Republic 
Argentina 
Poland 
Austria 
*Data extracted by BMDW from www.photius.com/wfb2000/countries (July 2002) 

3,489 
6,068 
  10,677 
  42,327 
738 
6,242 
7,043 
425 
652 
3,388 
733 
2,677 
285 
37 
70 
42 
3 

10.2 
19.2 
40.0 
275.6 
5.2 
57.6 
82.8 
5.8 
10.3 
59.5 
15.9 
59.3 
7.3 
5.4 
37.0 
38.6 
8.1 

  3.40 
  3.20 
  2.70 
  1.50 
  1.40 
  1.10 
  0.85 
  0.73 
  0.63 
  0.57 
  0.46 
  0.45 
  0.39 
  0.07 
  0.02 
  0.01 
  0.004 

The  mean number per 10,000 inhabitants is 1.0 and the median is 0.7.    It  has  been 
estimated19  that  to  meet  the  European  need  for  unrelated  allogeneic  HSC  for 
transplant in the next few years approximately 300 units per year would be required, 
that  is,  1  CBU  per  million  inhabitants  a  year.    The  NMDP  has  estimated  that, 
translated globally, this would mean a requirement for a reserve of 50,000 to 100,000 
CBU20.   Already the number of CBU registered with BMDW exceeds this and this 
number is an underestimate of the total worldwide stock.  However, it would appear 
that  this  assumption  is  made  on  the  basis  that  CBU  would  principally  be  made  for 
paediatric transplants for haematopoietic disorders.   

The growth of umbilical cord blood banking has improved the clinical availability of 
this source of HSC.  While the use of cord blood from unrelated donors has increased 
both in the treatment of children and adults, until cell expansion is fully validated for 
clinical  use,  cord  blood  cells  will  continue  to  be  transplanted  predominantly  in  the 
paediatric context.   Information from Netcord shows that only 31.5% of transplants in 
this network have taken place in adults so far.  Table 2.4 shows the current Netcord 
inventory  and  use  of  CBU.    More  than  2,000  umbilical  cord  blood  transplants  have 
been carried out in children21 (see also Table  2.4) and although the  number of adult 
transfers  is  increasing  the  total  of  all  transplants  only  represents  an  extremely  small 
percentage  (1-3%)  of  CBU  stored  annually.    This  low  turnover  makes  public  cord 
blood banking very expensive and non-profit banks may struggle to continue.  Indeed, 
in the USA two public banks, the Ashley Ross Cord Blood Program in San Diego and 
the former Chicago Community Cord Blood Bank have stopped receiving donations 
because of insufficient funds.  

19 Sirchia G and Rebulla P, Placental/umbilical cord transplantation. Haematologica. 1999; 84:738-747 
20 National Marrow Donor Program, Cord blood:  what are the issues? Cord Blood Update. 1998;2: 1-2 
21 Gluckman E, ISCT, Barcelona, 2002 (www.celltherapy.org/abstracts2002/Speaksrs/SA018.htm) 

88

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Table 2.4 The Netcord inventory and use of CBU 30 April 200322 

CB bank 

Inventory 

Transplanted 

Children 

Adults 

Barcelona 
Düsseldorf 
France Cord 
Helsinki 
Jerusalem 
Leiden 
Leuven 
Liege 
London 
Milan (Grace) 
New York 
Sydney 
Tel Hashomer 
Tokyo 
Total 

5621 
7067 
3751 
1794 
553 
1535 
3630 
3854 
4878 
8119 
16173 
5327 
186 
2583 
64885 

125
184
91
0
12
5
19
41
57
265
1284
35
3
165
2283

68
137
64
0
12
5
15
27
41
163
899
23
3
78
1532

57
47
23
0
0
0
4
14
16
102
361
10
0
87
721

Although cord cell transplants have been undertaken for 15 years now, the treatment 
is  still  viewed  as  experimental  by  many  physicians,  particularly  in  the  case  of  adult 
recipients.  Follow-up studies of patients have shown that there is a cell dose related 
effect  on  engraftment.    The  largest  follow-up  study23  on  562  patients  does  not  give 
overall  survival  rates,    EUROCORD  studies  of  102  children  and  42  adults24,25had 
overall  survival  rates  for  children  of  37%  and  17%  for  adults.    A  study  at  the 
University  of  Minnesota  and  Duke  University26  followed  a  mixed  populaton  (age 
range 0.2 – 58, median 8.1) with a 3 year survival rate of 41%.  These studies are now 
some  five  years  old  and  cell  expansion  techniques  should  improve  the  outlook  for 
adult  recipients  of  cord  blood.    The  EUROCORD  III  project  should  provide 
information on this point. 

The number of CBU held in private cord blood banks is unknown but the Cord Blood 
Registry  alone  claims  to  hold  over  45,000  and  Cryo-Cell  Internatonal  50,000.    The 
Royal Australia and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists in its 
recent statement on umbilical cord blood banking27 has estimated that 200,000 CBU 
are held in private banks for autologous use. 

22 http://office.de.netcord.org/status.gif 
23 Rubinstein P,Carrier C, Scaradovou A, et al. Outcomes among 562 recipients of placental-blood 
transplants from unrelated donors. N Eng J Med. 1998;339:1565-77 
24 Gluckman E, Rocha V, Boyer-Chamaud A for the Eurocord Transplant Group and the European 
Blood and Marrow Transplantation Group.  Outcome of cord blood transplantation from related and 
unrelated donors. N Eng J Med. 1997;337:373-81 
25 Gluckman E, Rocha V, Chastang C. European results of unrelated cord blood transplants. Bone 
Marrow Transplant. 1998;21(suppl3):S87-S91 
26 Ballen K, Broxmeyer HE, McCullough J, et al. Current status of Cord Blood Banking and 
Transplantation in the United States and Europe.  BB&MT, 2001;7:635-645 
27 RANZCOG, Umbilical Cord Cell Banking, Statement No. C-Obs 18, February 2003 

89

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Information  is  available  about  39  transplants  out  of  70  which  have  been  reported 
using  privately  stored  CBU  (see  Annex  1).    Of  these  5  were  used  for  autologous 
transplants and the remainder were used in the treatment of siblings.  The Cord Blood 
Registry  reports  26  transplants  from  CBU  held  within its bank (See Annex 2).   The 
annual  trend  is  for  increasing  numbers  of  transplants  each  year  as  demonstrated  in 
Figure 2.4 

Figure 2.4    Number of CBU transplanted from Cord Blood Registry 1993-2002 

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

No of transplants

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

Of the CBU transplanted only one was for autologous use in the treatment of aplastic 
anaemia, one CBU was used for a mother with chronic myelogenous leukaemia and 
the remainder were transplanted to siblings.   

However,  in  the  longer  term,  the  demand  for  CBU  may  increase.    Umbilical  cord 
blood is being used in the treatment of an increasing number of malignant and non-
malignant  diseases. 
  Table  2.5  shows  the  diseases  treated  by  cord  blood 
transplantation so far. 

Table 2.5 Diseases Treated by Cord Blood Transplantation 

Malignant diseases 

Acute lymphocytic leukaemia 
Acute myelocytic leukaemia 
Chronic myelogeneous leukaemia 
Juvenile chronic myelogeneous leukaemia 
Myelodysplastic syndrome 
Neuroblastoma 

Nonmalignant diseases 

Adrenoleukodystrophy 
Amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia 
Blackfan-Diamond syndrome 
Dykeratosis congenital 
Fanconi’s anaemia 
Globoid cell leukodystrophy 
Gunther disease 

90

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hunter syndrome 
Hurler syndrome 
Idiopathic aplastic anaemia 
Kostman syndrome 
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome 
Osteopetrosis 
Severe combined immune deficiency 
Thalassaemia 
X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome 

Table adapted from 28 

Recently  it  has  been  discovered  that  cord  blood  also  contains  pluripotent  stem  cells 
which have the capacity to develop into neuronal, muscle and bone forming cells  (G. 
Koegler  personal  communication)  and  into  endothelial  cells29,30.    It  has  also  been 
reported that autologous bone marrow cell transplantation has been used successfully 
in  the  treatment  of  patients  with  severe  heart  failure31.      It  is  likely  that  cord  blood 
cells  would  have  similar  properties.    In  the  longer  term  future,  therefore,  it  would 
seem that stem cells from umbilical cord blood might have a significant role to play in 
cell therapy and regenerative medicine.  It is therefore, not surprising to find biotech 
companies  being  established  alongside  cord  blood  banking  facilities.    In  Europe, 
Kourion Therapeutics AG has been established alongside the ‘non-profit’ Düsseldorf 
Cord Blood Bank and the Director of the Cord Blood Bank is a Scientific Advisor and 
on  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  company.    The  company,  which  estimates  that  the 
total  cell  therapy  market  will  amount  to  more  than  $30  billion  by  the  end  of  the 
decade,  is  developing  cell  therapies  for  the  treatment  of  bone  defects  and  for 
myocardial  regeneration  using  a  proprietary  lineage  of  Unrestricted  Somatic  Stem 
Cells (USSC) isolated from umbilical cord blood.  

28 Ballen K, Broxmeyer HE, McCullough J, et al. Op. cit. 
29 Wada M, Ebihara Y, Ma f, et al.,Tunica interna endothelial cell kinase expression and hematopoietic 
and angiogenic potentials in cord blood CD34+ cells. Int J Haematol. 2003; 77(3): 245-252 
30 Yoo ES, Lee KE, Seo JW, et al., Adherent cells generated during long-term culture of human 
umbilical cord blood CD34+ cells have characteristics of endothelial cells and beneficial effect on cord 
blood ex vivo expansion.  Stem Cells. 2003; 21(2): 228-235 
31 Perin EC, Dohmann HF,  Borohevic R, et al., Transendocardial, Autologous Bone Marrow Cells 
Transplantation for SevereChronic Ishcemic Heart Failure. epub circulated ahead of print April 2003. 

91

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
Figure 2.5  USSC cells  

Picture courtesy of Dr G Koegler 

In the ‘for profit’ cord blood banking sector Cryo-Cell Europe has recently acquired 
MainGen  GmbH,  a  company  located  in  Frankfurt  that  specialises  in  the  processing, 
preparation  and  expansion  of  stem  cells  from  cord  blood  and  bone  marrow  with 
interests in cell and gene therapy. 

92

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. CORD BLOOD BANKING NETWORKS, REGISTRIES AND 
ORGANISATIONS 

While  private  ‘for-profit’  cord  blood  banks  work  independently  and  in  competition 
with  one  another,  the  majority  of  ‘non-profit’  banks  co-operate  in  a  complex  of 
national  and  international  networks.    Some  banks  also  act  as  registries,  that  is,  they 
hold data about CBU available at their own and other banks.  But for the most part, 
data  about  CBU  are  held  by  registries  which  were  originally  established  to  hold 
information about potential bone marrow donors.  Details of these cord blood banking 
networks and registries are set out below. 

ADISCO  (l’Associazione Donatrici Italiane Sangue di Cordone Ombelicale) 

While ADISCO is not a banking network, it is included here because it plays a unique 
role  in  promoting  umbilical  cord  cell  banking  in  Italy.    Founded  in  October  1995, 
ADISCO  was  the  intiative  of  a  group  of  women  who,  with  the  encouragement  of 
Professor Franco Mandelli of the Institute of Haematology at La Sapienza University 
in  Rome,  wanted  to  promote  public  understanding  about  the  use  of  cord  blood 
transplants  and  the  need  for  donation.    This  women’s  organization  also  undertakes 
fundraising  to  support  Italian  cord  blood  banks  and  their  research.    ADISCO  is 
organised  on  a  regional  basis  with  a  presence  in  most  Italian  regions.    Individual 
regional offices host promotional and fundraising events.  The governing council and 
principal office of ADISCO is situated in Rome. 

AsiaCORD 

The purpose of AsiaCORD is to promote a pan-Asian supply of CBU because of the 
higher  frequency  of  HLA  matching  within  Asian  populations.  Based  at  Tokyo 
University,  AsiaCORD  aims  to  establish  international  standards  of  cord  blood 
banking  within  the  network.  It  is  hoped  that  experience  of  searching  for  cord  blood 
units in AsiaCORD will subsequently lead transplant medical teams to search for cord 
blood  units  which  are  located  in  other  cord  blood  banks  in  Asia  as  well.  Current 
members  of  AsiaCORD  are  sited  in  Japan,  China,  Korea,  Taiwan,  Thailand  and 
Vietnam. 

ASBMT 

The American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation was founded in 1993.  
It is a professional organisation which represents physicians and investigators in the 
clinical  conduct  of  haematopoietic  progenitor  and  stem  cell  transplantation.    The 
membership  of  the  ASBMT  numbers  about  800,  mainly  in  the  United  States  and 
Canada, and the Society was responsible for introducing the first clinical standards for 
haematopoietic cell transplantation. 

AusCord 

In May 2000 it was announced by the Australian Federal Minister for Health that the 
Commonwealth  Government  would  support  the  establishment  of  an  Australian 
National Cord Blood Collection Network and the four year development phase would  

93

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be managed by the Australian Bone Marrow Donor Registry (ABMDR).  The network 
was officially launched as AusCord in September 2000.  The aim of the network is to 
collect,  process  and  store  22,000  searchable,  TGA  compliant  CBU  (including  2,000 
indigenous  units)  for  the  purpose  of  transplantation  and  to  establish  a  computerised 
registry for the purpose of searching, matching and distributing CBU.  

BMDW (Bone Marrow Donors Worldwide) 

Bone Marrow  Donors  Worldwide is the biggest international bone marrow and cord 
blood  registry.    It  was  established  in  1988  with  offices  in  Leiden  (the  Netherlands) 
and  is  directed  by  an  Editorial  Board  comprised  of  one  representative  of  each 
collaborating registry or cord blood bank.  The Editorial Board meet twice a  year to 
discuss achievements and necessary improvements.  The BMDW mission statement is 

‘The BMDW is a voluntary collaborative effort of bone marrow donor registries and 
cord blood banks with the goal to provide centralised and anonymous information on 
the  HLA  phenotypes  and  other  relevant  data  of  unrelated  bone  marrow  donors  and 
cord  blood  units  and  makes  this  information  easily  accessible  to  the  physicians  of 
patients in need of a hematopoietic stem cell transplant.’ 

By 2003 some 30 cord blood banks and registries from 24 countries were participating 
in  BMDW  and  data  are  available  on  over  130,000  HLA-typed  CBU  available  for 
transplant.  The  BMDW  database  is  updated  monthly.  Phenotype  data  are  accessible 
online  only  to  registries  and  authorised  centres  and  are  provided  in  encrypted  form.  
Participating  cord  blood  registries  are  expected  to  adhere  to  the  guidelines  of  the 
World Marrow Donor Association (see below). 

The Caitlin Raymond International Registry 

This  registry,  which  was  established  in  1986  as  a  bone  marrow  donor  registry,  is 
based  at  the  University  of  Massachusetts  Medical  Center  in  Worcester  MA.    The 
Registry accesses more than 80,000 CBU through its network. It also contributes data 
to  BMDW.    The  organization  aims  to  co-ordinate  existing  and  help  develop  new 
donor  resources  and  to  provide  and  efficient  search  and  information  services  for 
physicians and transplant co-ordinators. It also appears, through its web site, to recruit 
potential  cord  blood  donors  to  Cryobanks  International,  a  cord  blood  bank  which 
stores CBU for both autologous/family use and unrelated donation. 

COBLT (Cord Blood Transplantation Study) 

COBLT is a network of 3 cord blood banks, 6 transplant centres and one medical co-
ordinating  centre  which  came  together  to  undertake  a  study  funded  by  the  US 
National Heart Lung and Blood Institute.  The aim of the study, which started in 1996 
and  has  an  estimated  completion  date  of  2004,  is  to  establish  cord  blood  banks  and 
develop  standardised  collection,  processing  and  cryopreservation  procedures.    The 
study  has  a  target  of  15,000  CBU  to  collect  and  store  for  use  in  unrelated  HSC 
transplantation.  The participating transplant centres will follow and describe 180-day 
survival and other events following cord blood transplantation.  In particular the study  

94

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aims  to  focus  on  donors  and  recipients  from  minority  ethnic  groups.    The  Study  is 
managed  by 
found  at  
http://spitfire.emmes.com/study/cord/ 

the  Emmes  Corporation  and 

information  can  be 

The  COBLT  Standard  Operating  Procedure  (SOP)  was  published  in  1998  and 
amended  in  December  2000.    Donor  recruitment  began  in  October  1997.    By 
December  2000,  30,709  potential  donors  had  been  screened  for  eligibility,  60% 
(18,432)  had  consented  to  donate  their  baby’s  cord  blood  to  the  study,  27%  (9,074) 
were not approached and 10% (3,203) had refused to participate.  Altogether 14,609 
CBU  were  collected  with  a  mean  volume  of  64.2  ml.    The  ethnic  mix  of  the  CBU 
collected  is  38.9%  Caucasian  (target  43%),  16.4%  African  American  (target  30%), 
11.2% Asian American (target 10%), 20.3% Hispanic (target 17%) and 13.1% mixed.  
Of the CBU collected, 46% were discarded because of insufficient volume and 29% 
were discarded because of a positive ID test. A total of 496 CBU (mostly Asian) has 
been quarantined because they tested Hepatitis B positive.  By May 2003, 301 patients 
had been enrolled into the study out of a target of 400. 

EBMT (European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation) 

The  EBMT  is  a  non-profit  organisation  established  in  1974  and  based  in  Nijmegen 
(the Netherlands).  Its purpose is to allow scientists and physicians involved in clinical 
bone  marrow  transplantation  to  share  their  experience  and  to  develop  co-operative 
studies.  The EBMT claims to promote all aspects associated with the transplantation 
of haematopoietic  stem cells from all donor sources and donor types including basic 
and clinical research, education, standardisation, quality control and accreditation for 
transplant  procedures.    Membership  is  open  to  European  centres  or  organisations 
performing or in other ways actively involved in HSC transplantation.  Non-European 
centres  may  apply  for  Associate  membership  and  new  centres  are  given  Provisional 
membership until approved.  Corporate membership is available to pharmaceutical or 
other  companies  active  in  the  field  of  HSC  transplantation.    Different  levels  of 
corporate  membership  are  offered  according  to  the  level  of  corporate  sponsorship 
provided;    Senior  Patron  >100,000  Euros  annual  fee,  Level  III  50,000  Euros  annual 
fee, Level II 20,000 Euros annual fee and Level I 10,000 Euros annual fee.  Currently 
EBMT  has  over  450  member  centres  from  around  the  world  and  15  Corporate 
members 1 Senior Patron, 4 at Level III, 6 at Level II and 4 at Level I). 

EUROCORD 

EUROCORD is a network of European Cord Blood Banks first established by means 
of  a  36-month  Concerted  Action  under  the  EU  Biomed  Programme  in  1997.    The 
network  has  been  particularly  successful  and  has  provided  important  analyses  of 
umbilical  cord  banking  and  transplantation.    The  network  continues  to  receive  EU 
support,  most  recently  under  the  Cell  Factory  area  of  FP5  as  EUROCORD  III  – 
Evaluation of the facilitation of umbilical cord blood transplant engraftment using ex 
vivo  haematopoietic  progenitors/stem  cell  expansion.    This  funding  will  run  from 
2003–2006.  The EUROCORD consortium is led by Professor Eliane Gluckman, who 
reported the first successful umbilical cord blood transplant in 1988, and now has 33 
partners from 7 countries. 

95

 
 
 
 
 
FACT (The Foundation for the Accreditation of Cellular Therapy) 
Formerly FAHCT (The Foundation for the Accreditation of Hematopoietic Cell Therapy) 

FACT is a non-profit corporation developed in 1994 by ISHAGE (see below) and the 
ASBMT (see above) for the purposes of self-assessment and accreditation in the field 
of  haematpoietic  cell  therapy.    Since  then  FACT  has  established  rigorous  standards 
for  the  provision  of  quality  medical  and  laboratory  practice  in  haematopoietic  cell 
transplantation,  including  umbilical  cord  cell  banking.    The  Foundation  conducts 
inspections  and  accredits  programmes  in  order  to  encourage  health  institutions  and 
facilities to voluntarily meet these standards.  Compliance is recognized by issuing a 
certificate of accreditation. 

GRACE (Gruppo per la Raccolta e Amplificazione dell Cellule Ematopoietiche) 

GRACE was founded in 1995 at  the instigation of  the Milan Cord  Blood Bank as  a 
common forum for  clinicians and investigators interested in cord blood  banking  and 
transplantation.    The  network  consists  of  seven  Italian  cord  blood  banks  situated  in 
Bologna,  Florence,  Milan,  Pavia,  Padua,  Rome  and  Turin  and,  in  addition,  GRACE 
includes 166 individual members from amongst physicians, biologists, midwives and 
information  technology  experts.    GRACE  aims  to  harmonise  banking  procedures  to 
high quality standards  (member cord  blood banks are expected to achieve ISO 9002 
approval)  and  to  facilitate  CBU  searches  performed  by  clinicians  through  the 
development of a unique hub able to search the whole inventory of its member banks.  
The target is to develop a global inventory of 15,000 CBU.   

ISCT (International Society for Cellular Therapy) 
Formerly ISHAGE (International Society of Hematotherapy and Graft Engineering) 

The  ISCT  was  established as the  International Society  for Hematotherapy  and Graft 
Engineering  in  1992  as  a  non-profit  professional  society  representing  scientists  and 
physicians  working  in  the  area  of  haematopoietic  stem  cell  graft  manipulation.    It 
changed its name in March 2002 to reflect the fact that its members represent interests 
in  cellular  therapies  more  broadly  than  those  associated  with  haematopoietic  stem 
cells.  It has over 1,100  members representing all of the major bone marrow/stem cell 
transplant centres in the world.  ISCT (as ISHAGE) developed the first standards for 
haematopoietic cell collection and processing.  The Society provides a  global forum 
for  communication  education  and  training;    performance  and  collaborative  studies;  
the  development  and  validation  of  standardized 
technology  and  provides 
representation  of  the  membership  to  other  professional  organizations  and  regulatory 
and government bodies.  The ISCT mandate includes work in the areas of cord blood, 
ex vivo expansion, gene therapy, graft evaluation, immunotherapy and dendritic cells, 
non-haematopoietic  mesenchymal  stem  cells,  transplantation,  tumour  evaluation  and 
legal and regulatory affairs.    

JCBBN (Japan Cord Blood Bank Network) 

This government funded network of 10 cord blood banks across Japan was established 
in 1999.  The aim is for the network to collect 20,000 CBU over 5 years. JCBBN is an 
active member of AsiaCord. 

96

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NetCord 

NetCord was formally constituted in 1998, following a pilot phase, to bring together 
the  cord  blood  banking  activities  in  Milan,  Düsseldorf,  Barcelona  and  London  in 
order  to  share  CBU  inventories  and  so  avoid duplication of searches.   Subsequently 
this  has  evolved  into  a  wide  international  network  of  cord  blood  banks  whose 
inventories  can  be  searched  through  two  hubs,  one  in  Düsseldorf  and  one  in  Milan.  
The creation of a virtual office means that searches can be carried out on the internet.  
Quality standards  are  of  the  essence  and in June 2000 NetCord, jointly  with FACT, 
published  The  International  Standards  and  Inspection  Checklist  for  Cord  Blood 
Collection,  Processing,  Testing,  Banking,  Selection  and  Release.    NetCord  is  also 
linked  to  GRACE  and  EUROCORD  which  is  involved  in  patient  follow-up.    The 
registered  office  of  NetCord  is  situated  at  Leiden  in  the  Netherlands  and  the 
Foundation is subject to Dutch law. 

NMDP (National Marrow Donor Programme (USA)) 

The NMDP is a non-profit organisation based in Minneapolis and facilitates unrelated 
marrow and blood stem cell transplants for patients with life threatening diseases who 
do not have matching related donors.  Founded in 1986, NMDP offers a single point 
of access for all sources of stem cells used in transplantation, whether from marrow, 
peripheral  blood  or  umbilical  cord,  from  registries  and  cord  blood  banks  across  the 
United  States  and  Canada.    Some  20  non-profit  cord  blood  banks  participate  in 
NMDP each with its own network of collecting hospitals.   

WMDA (World Marrow Donor Association) 

The WMDA was founded in 1988 with a view to establishing guidelines to promote 
the use of volunteer bone marrow donors for transplants involving patients and donors 
in  different  countries.    It  is  now  an  international  non-profit  organisation  which 
promotes the definition and standardization of ethical, technical medical and financial 
aspects  of  international  haematopoietic  stem  cell  transplantation  and  it  has  now 
extended  its  remit  to  cord  blood  registries.    The  most  recent  version  of  the  WMDA 
International Standards for Unrelated Hematopoietic Stem Cell Donor Registries was 
approved in October 2002 and sets standards for HSC registries around the world.  

Contacts and addresses 

ADISCO 
ADISCO Sede Nazionale 
Piazza Istria, 2 - 00198 ROMA 
Tel:  +39 06/86329281 
Fax:  +3906/86329282 
E-mail: 
segreteria-nazionale@adisco.it 
presidente-nazionale@adisco.it 
tesoriere-nazionale@adisco.it 
segretario.generale-
nazionale@adisco.it 

AsiaCORD 
Division of Cell Processing 
The University of Tokyo  
Shirokanedai 4-6-1 
Minato-ku, 
108-8639, 
Tokyo 
Japan 
Tel: +81-(3)-5449-5599 
Fax: +81-(3)-5449-5452 

97

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRIR 
The Caitlin Raymond International 
Registry 
University of Massachusetts Medical 
Center 
55 Lake Avenue North 
Worcester, MA 01655 
USA 
Tel: +1(800) 726-2824 or (508) 334-
8969 
Fax: +1(508) 334 8972 
E-mail: Info@CRIR.org 

COBLT 
Medical Coordinating Center 
401 N. Washington Street, Suite 700 
Rockville, Maryland 20850  
Tel:  +1 301.251.1161 
Fax:  +1 301.251.1355  
http://spitfire.emmes.com/study/cord/ 

EBMT 
EBMT Central Office 
Dept. Haematology 
MacDonald Buchanan Building 
Middlesex Hospital 
Mortimer Street 
London W1N 8AA 
UK-ENGLAND 
Phone: +44-207-380-9772 
Fax: +44-207-380-9597 

EUROCORD 
Co-ordinator 
Eliane Gluckman 
ARTM 
Hôpital Saint-Louis 
75010 Paris 
France 
Tel:  +33-1-4249 9644 
Fax:  +33-1-4249 9634 
Eliane.gluckman@sls.ap-hop-paris.fr 

ASBMT 
American Society for Blood and 
Marrow Transplantation 
85 W. Algonquin Road, Suite 550 
Arlington Heights, IL 60005 
Phone: 
Fax: 
E-Mail: 

+1(847) 427-0224  
+1(847) 427-9656 
mail@asbmt.org 

AusCORD 
Information regarding hospitals 
associated with AusCord can 
be obtained by contacting the Cord 
Blood Bank in each state. 

NSW & NT 
Australian Cord Blood Bank 
Sydney Children’s Hospital 
High Street 
Randwick NSW 2031 
Tel:  +61 (0)2-9382 0371 
Website: 
www.sch.edu.au/departments/acbb/ 

Vic, SA, Tas & WA 
BMDI National Cord Blood Bank 
Royal Children’s Hospital 
Flemington Road 
Parkville Vic 3052 
Tel:  +61 (0)3-9345 5834 
Email: 
cord@cryptic.rch.unimelb.edu.au 

Qld 
Queensland Cord Blood Bank 
Mater Misericordiae Hospital 
South Brisbane QLD 4100 
Tel: +61 (0)7-3840 1614 
 of Australia 
BMDW 
Europdonor Foundation 
Plesmanlaan 1b 
2333 BZ Leiden 
The Netherlands 
Tel: +31-71-5685300 
Fax: +31-71-5210457 
Email: BMDW@Europdonor.NL 

98

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NMDP 
National Marrow Donor Program 
Suite 500 
3001 Broadway Street Northeast 
Minneapolis, MN 55413-1753  
USA 
General Information: (612) 627-5800 
The Office of Patient Advocacy 
(OPA): (612) 627-8140  

WMDA 

WMDA Office 
Dorien de Kruijf 
Plesmanlaan 1b 
2333 BZ Leiden 
The Netherlands 
Tel.: +31-71-5685304 
Fax: +31-71-5210457  

e-mail: 
wmda@europdonor.nlmailto:headoffic
e@celltherapy.org 

FACT 
University of Nebraska Medical Center 
986065 Nebraska Medical Center 
Omaha, NE 68198-6065 
Tel:  +1 (402) 561-7555 
Fax: +1 (402) 561-7550 
www.factwebsite.org 

GRACE 
Milano Cord Blood Bank 
Centro Transfusionale e di 
Immunologia dei Trapianti 
IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore 
Via Francesco Sforza 35 
20122 Milano 
Italy  

ISCT (ISHAGE) 
ISCT HEAD OFFICE, 
suite 401, 777 West Broadway, 
Vancouver, B.C Canada 
V5Z 4J7 
Phone: 1.604.874.4366 
Fax: 1.604.874.4378 
mailto:headoffice@celltherapy.orghea
doffice@celltherapy.org 

Japan Cord Blood Bank Network 
Tsuneo Takahashi 
Tokyo Cord Blood Bank 
The University of Tokyo  
Shirokanedai 4-6-1 
Minato-ku, 
108-8639,Tokyo 
Japan 
Tel: +81-(3)-5449-5599 
Fax: +81-(3)-5449-5452 

NetCord 
The International NetCord 
Organisation 
c/o Prof. P. Wernet 
ITZ 
Heinrich-Heine-Univ. 
Moorenstr. 5 
40225 Düsseldorf 
Germany 

99

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. 

CERTIFICATION AND ACCREDITATION 

Umbilical cord blood to provide cells for unrelated use may be collected and banked 
locally, regionally or nationally and information about CBU and their blood and tissue 
types is held on registries with worldwide access.  Quality standards and accreditation 
are therefore extremely important in guaranteeing to users that the banked CBU are to 
be of use in transplantation.  Since cord cell transplantation is relatively new there is 
no single organisation setting international standards for the collection, processing and 
storage  of  CBU.    Several  organisations  involved  in  setting  standards  for  peripheral 
blood or bone marrow donation have, instead, extended their remit to cover cord cell 
banking.  This section briefly addresses some of the accreditation schemes that exist.  
Access  to  detailed  information  about  the  accreditation  schemes  available  requires 
membership of some of  these organisations.  As  the  resources  of  this  project  did  not 
extend  to  such  expenditure  internet  addresses  have  been  provided  in  case  more 
detailed information is sought than that provided here. 

Certification of cord blood registries 

The  World  Marrow  Donor  Association,  in  its  International  Standards  for  Unrelated 
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Donor Registries, sets standard for all such registries around 
the world including cord blood registries.  NetCord is represented on the Board of the 
WMDA  by  Professor  Eliane  Gluckman.    As  its  name  suggests,  WMDA  was 
established to set standards in the area of bone marrow donation but has subsequently 
extended its remit to cover umbilical cord cell banking.  However, the emphasis is on 
the processes and procedures involved in bone marrow donation. The latest version of 
the WMDA International Standards (approved October 2002) may be found at Annex 
3.  The following definitions are based on those found in these Standards. 

Registry A registry is a legal entity whose responsibility is to process requests for 
haematopoeitic  stem  cells  from  donors  originating  within  the  country  and 
emanating  from  abroad.    The  Registry  may  co-ordinate  the  activities  of  Donor, 
Collection and transplant centres in the respective country. 

Donor  Centre    The  Donor  Centre  is  the  organisation  responsible  for  recruiting, 
obtaining consent, and counselling potential donors. 

Collection  Centre    The  Collection  Centre  is  the  medical  facility  at  which  the 
haematopoietic stem cell (cord blood unit) collection takes place.  

Cord  Blood  Bank    A  Centre  whose  sole  mission  is  to  collect  and  maintain 
umbilical cord blood units.  A Cord Blood Bank may combine some or all of the 
activities of both a Donor Centre and a Collection Centre.  It may be responsible 
for  donor  recruitment  and  cord  blood  collection,  processing  and  storage  but  the 
database  of  donors  might  be  maintained  by  a  Registry.    Alternatively,  the  Cord 
Blood  Bank  might  include  all  of  these  activities  and  perform  searches  for 
Transplant Centres. 

101

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The WMDA sets standards for  

• 

the general organisation of a Registry, including its legal status, its location 
and  communication  links  and  the  expertise  expected  of  the  Director  and 
key personnel; 

• 

technology 

•  donor recruitment including consent procedures; 
•  donor characterisation, that is tissue and blood typing and disease testing  – 
HLA  typing  laboratories  must  be  accredited  by  the  relevant  professional 
bodies, in Europe this is the European Federation for Immunogenetics; 
 information 
confidentiality; 
facilitation of search requests; 

• 
•  collection, processing and transport of  haematopoietic  stem  cells  and  any 
other  collected  cell  products  intended  for  therapeutic  use  –  centres  must 
fulfil national, regional or international guidelines for such a facility; 
follow  up  of  patient  and  donor  –  registries  should  collect  transplantation 
outcome data; 
financial and legal liabilities. 

database  management 

including 

and 

• 

• 

Accreditation of Cord Blood Banks 

American Association of Blood Banks (AABB) 

The  AABB  has  been  developing  and  promoting  standards  for  blood  banks  and 
transfusion services since 1957.  In 1991 the Association published its first Standards 
for  Hematopoietic  Progenitor  Cells  which  covers  the  collection,  processing  and 
transplantation of bone marrow, peripheral blood and umbilical cord blood progenitor 
cells.    The  AABB  is  also  developing  Model  Standards  for  Blood  Banking  that 
incorporate blood banking terminology and are compatible with ISO 9000.   

The  AABB  provides  accreditation  for  banks  principally,  but  not  entirely,  in  North 
America.    Any  organisation  that  performs  activities  traditionally  performed  by 
hospitals  and  community  blood  centres  including  the  collection,  processing, 
distribution  or  transfusion  of  blood  or  blood  components  is  eligible  for  institutional 
membership of the AABB and AABB accreditation is a requirement for institutional 
membership.  Membership dues for Institutional Members, such as cord blood banks, 
are $750 ( 641) plus applicable accreditation fees per membership  year.  The yearly 
fee for a cord blood service that collects less than 5000 CBU annually is slightly over 
$4000 ( 3,420) per year. 

 The  Standards,  together  with  the  requirements  specified  in  the  Accreditation 
Information  Manual,  provide  the  basis  of  the  AABB  Accreditation  programme.  
(copies  of  the  AABB  Standards  and  Manual  may  be  purchased  online  at 
www.aabb.org).  A facility that is accredited for cord blood is assessed for compliance 
to  standards  every  two  years  through  an  on-site  visit  by  a  team  that  includes  a  cord 
blood  subject  matter  expert.    Once  a  facility  is  found  to  be  in  compliance, 
accreditation is good for two years.  A list of the cord blood banks accredited by the 
AABB at 30 April 2003 is given in Table 4.1 

102

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4.1  AABB Accredited Cord Blood Facilities 
American Association of Blood Banks 

Updated April 30, 2003 

State 
(or Country)  Company 
AZ 

CBR Systems, Inc. Stem Cell Bank 

California Cryobank, Inc 
San Diego Blood Bank 
StemCyte Inc. 

Cryobanks, Inc. 
Cryo-Cell International Inc.  
Florida Blood Services, Inc . 
LifeSouth Community Blood Centers 

City 
Tucson 

Santa Monica 
San Diego 
Arcadia 

Altamonte Springs 
Clearwater  
St. Petersburg 
Gainesville 

Children's Hospital 

New Orleans 

American Red Cross Blood Services  
Viacord, Inc. 

Dedham  
Boston 

American Red Cross Blood Services  

St. Paul  

Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital 

St. Louis 

Bergen Community Blood Services 

Paramus 

American Red Cross Western Community 

Portland 

Puget Sound Blood Center 

Seattle 

CA 
CA 
CA 

FL 
FL 
FL 
FL 

LA 

MA 
MA 

MN 

MO 

NJ 

OR 

WA 

BRAZIL  

Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein  

Sao Paulo  

Accredited - An AABB assessor has been on the facility's premises and the facility 
practices were found to conform with the AABB standards of practice. 

103

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Banks that are going through the accreditation process for the first time are not listed 
until  they  have  completed  the  accreditation  process  and  been  sent  their  AABB 
certificate.    There  are  usually  several  facilities  going  through  the  cord  blood 
accreditation  process  for  the  first  time.    The  accreditation  process  begins  when  a 
facility  that  has  expressed  an  interest  in  becoming  accredited  pays  their  dues.    The 
AABB  receives  many  enquiries  about  accreditation  and  some  are  followed  through 
once  the  facility  is  up  and  running.    The  premise  for  AABB  accreditation  is  that  a 
facility  is  up  and  running  and  that  all  standards  are  addressed  in  their  Standard 
Operating Procedure and that these standards are followed.  The assessment process 
ensures  that  a  facility’s  quality  and  operational  systems  are  evaluated  to  ensure 
compliance with AABB Standards; Code of Federal Regulations; CLIA ’88 (Clinical 
Laboratory  Improvement Amendments of the CMS and CDC) and  Federal  guidance 
and documents.  

The AABB is not regulatory and cannot shut a facility down but if a facility is having 
problems  the  Association  tries  to  educate  them  so  that  standards  are  met.    It  is 
possible for a facility to fail accreditation and there is a process in place for this but 
the AABB endeavours not to allow this to happen.  However, if a facility does not pay 
its  subscription  then  accreditation  is  removed.    Failure  to  pay  dues  is  the  most 
common reason for loss of accreditation. 

The Foundation for the Accreditation of Cellular Therapy (FACT) 

In  1994  a  North  American  Task  Force,  formed  of  all  the  major  professional 
organisations  interested  in  haematopoietic  cell  therapy  including  ISHAGE,  ASBMT 
and  FACT,  was  established  to  develop  graft  processing  standards.    There  was  a 
consensus  that  the  FACT  standards  were  of  sufficiently  high  standard  to  serve  as  a 
template for the other organisations involved in the field.  The FACT Standards were 
published  in  1996  and  the  first  inspections  began  in  September  1997.    FACT 
accreditation has been endorsed by NetCord, a number of whose members now have 
FACT accreditation.  The first Netcord-FACT inspections began in August 2002 and 
at  that  time  nearly  30  cord  blood  banks  across  the  United  States,  as  well  as 
internationally, had applied for accreditation.  Facilities, including cord blood banks, 
are  invited  to  apply  for  accreditation  which  is  voluntary.    Any  cord  blood  bank 
accredited by NetCord- FACT would automatically be accredited by WMDA.  It has 
been  impossible  to  access  information  about  which  cord  blood  banks  have  been 
accredited  by  FACT  and  the  FACT  Standards  and  Manual  are  only  available  for 
purchase.  However, information about FACT is available at www.factwebsite.org. 

Facilities  pay  an  initial  registration  fee  of  $5,000  ( 4,585)  and  FACT  accredited 
facilities are required to renew their accreditation every three years.   The Inspection 
Fee for cord blood banks is $15,000 ( 13,753). 

ISO 9000 

The  International  Organisation  for  Standardization  (ISO)  is  the  world’s  largest 
developer  of  standards.    While  ISO’s  principal  activity  is  in  the  development  of 
technical  standards,  ISO  standards  also  address  management,  environmental  and 
social issues.  ISO was established in 1947 and is a network of the National Standards  

104

 
Institutes of 146 countries.  It is a non-governmental organisation bridging the public 
and  private  sectors.    ISO  standards  are  voluntary  although  some,  mainly  those 
concerned with health and safety, have been adopted in a number countries as part of 
their  regulatory  framework.        Although  ISO  standards  are  voluntary,  they  are 
developed  in  response  to  market  demand  in  consultation  with  relevant  experts  and 
based  on  consensus  between  the  relevant  parties.    Standards  are  reviewed  at  least 
every  five  years.  ISO  9000  is  concerned  with  quality  management  and  is  the 
standardization system which has been applied to umbilical cord blood banking.  The 
Italian Grace network has been instrumental in developing the ISO 9002 standards to 
which they adhere.  The AABB is also making its standards compatible with ISO. 

The Joint Accreditation Committee EBMT-EuroISHAGE (JACIE) 

JACIE  was  established  in  1999  with  the  aim  of  creating  a  standardised  system  of 
accreditation officially recognised across Europe.  It is based on the FACT standards 
and  will  eventually  substitute  the  current  EBMT  accreditation  system.    While  the 
JACIE Standards were principally  established to provide standards for bone marrow 
progenitor cell collection, processing and transfer, they are also designed to apply to 
cord blood banks.  Their purpose is to foster good medical and laboratory practice in 
haematopoietic  progenitor  cell  therapy.    JACIE  Standards,  too,  are  voluntary  and 
provide  minimal  performance  guidelines.  Attempts  have  been  made  to  make  them 
conform  with  national  regulations  but  compliance  with  these  Standards  does  not 
guarantee compliance with all regulations in all cases.   

Accreditation  is  overseen  by  the  JACIE  Accreditation  Committee.    The  basis  for 
accreditation  is  documented  compliance  with  the  current  edition  of  the  JACIE 
Standards.    Accreditation  is  determined  by  evaluation  of  the  written  information 
provided  by  the  applicant  facility  and  by  on-site  inspection.    Inspections  are  carried 
out by people with training and experience in haematopoietic cell therapy, who have 
inspector  training  and  who  have  a  working  knowledge  of  the  FACT  Standards.  
Accredited  facilities  are  to  be  inspected  at  regular  intervals,  as  determined  by  the 
Accreditation Committee.  The Committee may, however, delegate this responsibility 
to an appropriate national agency.  Accreditation may be suspended if a facility fails 
to comply with the Standards.  

105

 
 
5. SURVEY OF UMBILICAL CORD CELL BANKS 

Background 

An  internet  search  resulted  in  a  questionnaire  (Annex  4)  being  sent  to  68  cord  cell 
banks in 25 countries around the world.  Of these, 45 were identified as ‘non-profit’ 
public banks and 23 were ‘for profit’ private banks.  Questionnaires were completed 
and  returned  by  27  cord  cell  banks  or  banking  organisations  in  15  countries.    The 
American  Red  Cross  provided  group  information  for  the  5  area  banks  in  its 
programme and AusCord provided individual information for each of the three banks 
in its network. This represents a 40% response rate.  One university hospital bank in 
the USA replied that it had closed and its CBU had been sent to the NIH and was not 
included.  Language difficulties may have hampered responses from countries in Asia.  
The total number of  CBU held in the respondent banks was 112,584.  Of these 21,000 
were  in  private  banks  (one  private  bank  declined  to  reveal  this  information)  and 
91,484  in  public  banks  (one  public  bank  stored  1,600  CBU  for  research  purposes 
only). 

The responses fell into three categories: private banks, public banks and mixed banks 
providing  private  and  public  banking  services.    A  list  of  respondents  is  provided  at 
Annex 5. 

Table 5.1  Categories of bank responding to questionnaire 

Public 

Private 

Mixed 

‘Non-profit’  bank  storing 
unrelated CBU donated for 
transplantation or research. 
CBU  may  be  stored  for 
autologous  or  family  use 
where  there  is  a  known 
of 
risk. 
processing 
storing 
CBU  are  charged  to  the 
user. 

costs 

The 

and 

‘For  profit’  bank  storing 
CBU  at  a  charge 
for 
autologous or family use. 

bank 

A 
principally 
collecting  unrelated  CBU 
donated for transplantation 
but  also  operating  private 
facilities 
risk 
for 
autologous and family use.  
from 
received 
Money 
private  banking  activities 
helps  to  offset  costs  of 
unrelated donor facility. 

low 

The majority of respondents (21) were public cord cell banks, four were private banks 
and two mixed banks. 

The most recently established bank was set up in January 2002 and the oldest in 1992.  
The distribution is shown in Figure 5.1. 

107

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.1  Responding umbilical cord cell banks by year of establishment 

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002

It is evident that most respondents have a considerable number of years’ experience of 
cord cell banking. 

Fees and Funding 

One private bank responded from the USA.  It has a graduated fee schedule depending 
on  the  length  of  prepaid  storage.    There  is  a  non-refundable  enrolment  fee  of  $150 
( 175.4).  The processing charge of $540 ( 632) and one year storage charge of $85 
( 73) are payable upon processing of the cord blood.  Storage may be prepaid for 5 
years ($350;  299), 10 years ($600;  513) and 20 years ($1,000;  855).   Two private 
banks in Europe charged  1,185 and  1,800 respectively for 20 years’ storage and one 
private bank in Australia charges A$2,000 ( 1,150) for collection and processing and 
18 years storage can be prepaid at A$4,000 ( 2,301).  The two mixed banks charged 
$1,350  ( 1,155)  for  an  indeterminate  storage  time  and  $1,000  for  15  years  for  their 
private  banking  operations.    It  is  assumed  that  these  charges  include  collection  and 
processing. 

The  funding  of  the  non-profit  banks  came  from  a  number  of  sources  and  in  some 
cases  is  precarious.    Sources  of  funding  in  the  USA  are  US  Federal  Government 
support  through  NIH  grants  (2  banks),  contributions  from  charitable  foundations, 
support  from  American  Red  Cross  Biomedical  Services  or  from  running  parallel 
private banking services.  The only Canadian public cord cell bank has no secure long 
term  funding  arrangements  although  it  has  received  Canadian  and  Provincial 
government funding in the past and it is now actively soliciting funds from the private 
sector.   In Europe the Jose Carreras Foundation  is an important source  of charitable 
funds and other charitable foundations, such as ADISCO in Italy, also contribute.  The 
cord  cell  bank  in  Milan  also  cited  Regional  Government  funding.    State  funding  is 
also mentioned by banks in Australia, Japan, Poland and Spain.  In Australia all the 
public  banks  have  been  funded  by  Commonwealth,  States  and  Territories 
Governments since 2001.  Previously, the banks in Queensland and New South Wales 
were  dependent  on  research,  charitable  and  community  funds  and  grants.    The  one 
Japanese respondent received Japanese Red Cross Blood Centre funding in addition to 
National  Government  funding.    All  public  banks  charge  users  for  CBU  on  release 
although the question was not specifically asked.  The two Italian banks ventured that 
they charged  17,000 (Bologna) and  17,675 (Milan) respectively. 

108

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CBU storage 

While 100% of CBU in private banks are stored for autologous or family use, a very 
small number of CBU, usually less than 1% but up to 5%, are stored for this purpose 
in public banks.  This is where there is a known disease risk in the family which could 
be treated by cord cell transplant.  The  Düsseldorf cord  cell bank opened  for family 
donations only in its first year and has subsequently banked unrelated donations.  The 
exception is in the two banks which fund their ‘non-profit’ activities through private 
banking.  Here the privately stored CBU represent 10% and 24%  of the total.  Of the 
21  public  banks,  12  reported  that  they  kept  CBU  for  research  and  quality  control.  
Generally these were CBU that would have been unsuitable for transplantation.  One 
bank kept 100% of its CBU for research, 

Storage limits 

Private  banks  offer  prepaid  storage  for  up  to  20  years  but  indicate  that  this  is 
extendable.  Generally the ‘non-profit’ banks have no storage limitation but 4 of these 
respondents did have storage limits;  three of 10 years and one of 25 years. 

Collection of maternal peripheral blood 

The majority of respondents (22) collected maternal peripheral blood.  Of the 5 that 
did not 3 were private banks, one was a  public  bank and one was mixed.  Maternal 
peripheral  blood  samples  are  important  in  determining  the  infection  status  of  the 
mother at the time of delivery. 

National regulation 

Only  three  respondents  cited  that  they  were  subject  to  no  national  regulations  or 
accreditation.    Two,  one  public  and  one  private,  were  based  in  Belgium  and  one  in 
Korea.    The  7  USA  respondents  all  cited  FDA  regulations  but  FDA  registration  is 
currently voluntary.  Two US banks, one public and one mixed, were licensed in New 
York  and/or  New  Jersey.    In  Australia  all  cord  cell  banks  have  or  are  awaiting  a 
licence from the Therapeutic Goods Administration under the GMP code for human 
blood  and  tissues.    This  is  mandatory.    In  Germany  the  two  respondent  banks,  one 
private  and  one  public,  were  licensed  for  production  by  their  local  authorities  in 
accordance with the German Drug Law.   The private bank cited approval by the Paul-
Ehrlich-Institute (the Federal  regulatory  body);    the public bank had a GMP licence 
from the Paul-Ehrlich-Institute.  The Japanese bank was regulated by the Ministry of 
Health  and  Welfare  through  the  JCBBN.    Banks  from  other  countries  cited  Health 
Department  accreditation  or  regulation.      The  research  only  cord  blood  bank  in 
Denmark was subject to Scientific Ethics Committee approvals.  

Professional guidelines/accreditation  

The most frequently quoted professional guidelines and accreditation were FACT (9 
plus 3 with accreditation pending), AABB (6) and ISO9002 (2).  One respondent had 
JACIE  accreditation  pending.    AsiaCORD  guidelines  were  followed  in  Korea  and 
JCBBN in Japan. 

109

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consent 

One  large  public  cord  blood  bank  reported  that  it  did  not  obtain  consent  before 
collecting  umbilical  cord  blood.    Here  brochures  are  provided  during  the  pre-natal 
period  and  mothers  are  interviewed  after  delivery  and  separation  of  a  potentially 
useful CBU.  One other public bank collected verbal consent only and one collected 
verbal  consent  before  and  written  consent  following  CBU  collection.    All  other 
respondents  collected  written  consent  from  mothers  before  collecting  cord  blood.  
Where  maternal  peripheral  blood  was  collected  all  cord  cell  banks  obtained  written 
consent  except  for  the  research  centre  which  collected  verbal  consent  only  for  both 
cord and maternal peripheral blood. 

Recruitment 

There  was  no  particular  difference  in  the  way  in  which  patients  were  recruited 
between  public  and  private  banks.    Both  types  of  bank  recruited  patients  through 
doctors’  offices  and  maternity  hospitals  and  clinics.    Both  public  and  private  banks 
distributed brochures at maternity hospitals and clinics the only difference being that 
public  banks  have  a  particular  network  of  collecting  hospitals  associated  with  them 
and only recruit from these whereas private banks recruit as widely as they can.  The 
majority of maternity hospitals and clinics will not have an affiliation to a public cord 
cell bank.  Three public banks reported that they also recruited through pre-natal and 
parenthood  classes.    One  public  bank  respondent  reported  that  patients  may  be 
recruited  by  staff  at  delivery  before  the  onset  of  labour  and  another  reported  that 
recruitment at delivery was only possible if the mother’s conditions were compatible 
with  the  collection  of  informed  consent  and  a  health  history.    The  American  Red 
Cross  reported  that  the  cord  blood  banks  within  their  programme  were  closely 
regulated  in  the  type  of  recruitment  and  donor  education  possible  by  their  IND  and 
IRB  permissions.    Advertising  was  also  undertaken  outside  hospitals  by  both  public 
and private banks.  Few banks used radio (4)  or television (5) as advertising media.  
The  largest  number  advertised  and/or  recruited  through  the  internet  (17)  and  11 
disseminated information through articles in newspapers, magazines and newsletters. 

110

 
 
 
 
6. 

UMBILICAL CORD CELL BANKING BY COUNTRY 

This section attempts to give an overview of umbilical cord cell banking around the 
world but does not include every country where cord blood is stored.  In some cases 
the information available is sparse and in some countries, especially in the Far East, 
accessibility to information is limited by language.  There is no cord blood banking in 
Africa although the UK affiliate of the New England Cord Blood Bank offers a 
private cord blood banking service in South Africa.  With its disease problem, 
particularly HIV, and political problems it is unlikely that public cord blood banking 
will be viable in Africa.  Other countries, for instance in the Far East, also have 
populations with a high viral load, in this case Hepatitis B and C which also reduces 
the number CBU suitable for banking. 

EUROPE 

There is currently little statutory regulation in Europe affecting the activities of cord 
blood banks.  However, this will change when the proposed EU Directive on setting 
standards  of  quality  and  safety  for  the  donation,  procurement,  testing,  processing, 
storage  and  distribution  of  human  tissues  and  cells  (Official  Journal  C  227  E, 
24/09/2002 P. 0505 -0521) comes into force.  The new Directive will aim to ensure a 
high level of quality standards across Europe with regard to the acquisition and use of 
human tissues and cells for therapeutic use in order to protect the health of recipients.  
The proposed measures will strengthen requirements for donor suitability and cell and 
tissue  screening;    will  establish  comparable  national  accreditation  and  monitoring 
structures  and  staff  training  across  Europe;    will  set  up  a  system  to  ensure  the 
traceability of tissues and cells, while maintaining donor and recipient confidentiality 
and  will  establish  a  system  to  regulate  the  import  of  human  cells  and  tissues  from 
third countries.   There would appear to be few private cord blood banks operating in 
Europe  and  only  two  European  companies,  VITA  34  based  in  Germany  and 
Activision Life in Poland.  Two other companies, Cryo-Cell Europe and the UK Cord 
Blood  Bank  are  European  affiliates  of  the  American  Companies  Cryo-Cell 
International and New England Cord Blood Bank.   

Austria 

The Austrian Cord Blood Registry, situated in Vienna, has registered only 3 CBU.  In 
2002  the  Austrian  Red  Cross  was  in  the  process  of  establishing  a  cord  blood  bank 
with the intention of storing up to 5,000 CBU. One private cord blood bank, Lifecord, 
situated in Graz, operates in Austria and has a sister bank in Hamburg, Germany. 

Belgium 

Cord  blood  banking  is  well-established  in  Belgium  with  the  banks  at  Leuven  and 
Liege being members of NetCord.   The University of Liege is a parent member of the 
Belgian Cord Blood Bank which also includes the Free University of Brussels (ULB) 
and  the  Catholic  University  of  Louvain  (UCL).    This  bank  was  established  in  1993 
with funds obtained through the fund raising operation TELEVIE.  More recently an 
additional storage facility has been added at the Institut Bordet, a cancer institute  

111

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
situated  in  Brussels  with  funds  from  la  Fédération  Belge  contre  le  Cancer,  Fonds 
Ariane and les Amis de l’Institut Bordet.  In April 2003 Netcord and BMDW recorded 
7484 and 7581 Belgian CBU respectively. 

There is no legislation or statutory regulation of cord blood banking in Belgium which 
also  hosts  the  private  bank  Cryo-Cell  Europe  at  Malines.    Cryo-Cell  Europe  is  an 
affiliate of the American company Cryo-Cell International.  It is represented, so far, in 
Austria,  Belgium,  Germany,  Luxemburg,  the  Netherlands,  Switzerland  and  the  UK 
but  aims  to  collect  and  store  blood  from  18  European  countries.    Cryo-Cell  has 
recently  acquired  the  German  biotechnology  company  MainGen  in  Frankfurt  with 
interests  in  cell  expansion  and  cell  therapy.    Cryo-Cell  Europe  currently  holds  over 
5,000 CBU stored for autologous and family use.   Cryo-Cell does not store maternal 
peripheral  blood  but  requires  a  blood  test  report  to  accompany  the  CBU  and  asks 
mothers to have their blood tested 4 months after delivery and to forward the results to 
the  bank.    The  costs  of  cord  cell  banking  with  Cryo-Cell  are  as  follows:    there  is  a 
125  registration  fee  of  which  80  is  refundable  if  there  are  complications  with  the 
delivery  and  the  collection  kit  is  returned  still  sealed;    following  successful  storage 
there is a further fee of  375 and then  685 is charged for 20 years storage.  The costs 
of collection and processing can be claimed on medical insurance with the company 
Mercator & Noordstar.  In its patient information Cryo-Cell recommends that parents 
donate  their  child’s  cord  blood  for  unrelated  use  if  they  do  not  wish  to  store  it 
privately. 

Czech Republic 

The first unrelated donor cord blood bank was established in 1996 in Prague.  In 1997 
it went into partnership with cord blood banks in Brno and Hradek Králové.  A total 
of 1,466 CBU had been stored by September 2002 of which 4 had been transplanted 
(1 in the Czech Republic).  Currently 885 CBU are registered with BMDW. 

 Denmark 

The  only  cord  blood  bank  operating  in  Denmark  is  the  Scientific  Cord  Blood  Stem 
Cell  Bank  at  Aalborg  University  where  it  is  run  in  the  Laboratory  for  Stem  Cell 
Research.    The  bank  was  established  in  January  2002  and  holds  1,600  CBU.    The 
bank’s  activities  are  subject  to  approval  by  the  Scientific  Ethical  Committee  in  the 
university.  Donors are recruited at the maternity clinic and give verbal consent to the 
use  of  their  baby’s  cord  blood  for  research,  written  consent  was  also  previously 
obtained.  The women also provide samples of peripheral blood. 

France 

The first successful engraftment of umbilical cord cells took place in France in 1988.  
In  1999  the  Agence  française  du  Sang  and  the  Etablissement  français  des  Greffes 
jointly  established  a  national  cord  blood  bank,    the  Réseau  Français  de  Sang 
Placentaire (RFSP).    The RFSP is composed of a network of 5 cord blood banks.   

112

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Four  of  them  (Besançon,  Bordeaux,  Paris  and  Marseille)  are  charged  with  the 
collection  of  the  CBU  from  a  number  of  maternity  hospitals  and  undertaking  the 
necessary testing and cryopreservation.  The units are then quarantined.  Finally they 
are validated and the validated units are transported as frozen CBU to the fifth site in 
Annemasse.      The  RFSP  is  publicly  funded  and  its  activities  are  co-ordinated  by  a 
committee.    There  are  regular  inspections  by  the  Agence  Française  de  Sécurité 
Sanitaire des Produits de Santé  and the laboratories are required to meet French good 
manufacturing practices for haematopoietic cells as  required by law (Journal officiel 
de  la  République  Française  –  Arrêté  du  16/12/1998).        The  RFSP  is  a  member  of 
NetCord  and  the  EUROCORD  III  project  is  co-ordinated  by  Professor  Eliane 
Gluckman  of  the  Hôpital  St.  Louis  in  Paris.    A  total  of  3798  French  CBU  were 
registered with BMDW in April 2003. 

Germany 

There are at least three non-profit cord blood banks in Germany.  These are situated in 
Düsseldorf, Dresden and Mannheim.  Germany is also the location of, probably, the 
largest European private cord blood bank VITA 34.   

The Jose Carreras Cord  Blood Bank in Düsseldorf is the longest established, having 
been opened for family donation in 1992 and then for unrelated donors in 1993.  As 
its name implies, the bank receives funding from the Jose Carreras Foundation, which 
would appear to be a major sponsor of cord blood banks in Europe.  The Düsseldorf 
bank is a founder member of NetCord and its Director, Professor Peter Wernet, is the 
President of NetCord.  The Düsseldorf bank is also a partner in the EUROCORD III 
project.  The bank aims to preserve a broad ethnic mix of CBU and in April 2003 had 
7,067  CBU  registed  with  NetCord  and  5,438  with  BMDW.    So  far  181  CBU  have 
been released for transplantation, mostly outside Germany.   If a CBU is released for 
transplant  in  Germany  someone  from  the  bank  will  accompany  the  sample  and 
oversee its thawing.  Cord blood is collected from a number of affiliated hospitals by 
specifically trained midwives and doctors who collect blood while the placenta is still 
in  utero  in  order  to  maximise  the  volume  collected.    The  bank  provides  peripatetic 
trainers who visit all hospitals regularly to ensure that skills are maintained.  The bank 
receives 10 – 20 CBU per day of which 70% may be discarded because of insufficient 
volume or cell numbers – 1 x 109 cells is considered to be the lowest number suitable 
for clinical use.  Discarded CBU may be kept and used for validation purposes or for 
research.   

The Mannheim Cord Blood Bank was established in 1996 and is run by the German 
Red Cross blood service for Bad-Württemburg-Hessen.  It held more than 2,000 CBU 
in  the  year  2000  and  reported  that  45%  of  samples  collected  were  unsuitable  for 
banking  either  because  of  small  volume  or  number  of  cells  or  because  of 
contamination.  The Dresden Cord Blood Bank is situated at the University Hospital 
of  Dresden  and  is  funded  by  the  German  Bone  Marrow  Donor  Registry  (DKMS).  
This bank stores CBU collected from a dozen local maternity hospitals and clinics and 
3,458 CBU were registered with BMDW in April 2003.  The bank reports its discard 
rate to be 60%.  

113

 
 
 
 
 
VITA 34, established in 1997, was the first private cord bank to be set up in Europe 
and is the  only private  bank  in Germany.   At 1 January  2003  VITA 34  held  12,000 
CBU    of  which  >99%  were  stored  for  autologous/family  use  and  <1%  donated  for 
research.  Patients are recruited through the VITA 34 web site and through advertising 
in the press.  In its publicity material VITA 34 recommends that prospective parents, 
who do not wish to bank cord blood privately, should consider donating their baby’s 
cord blood to a public bank for unrelated use. VITA 34 charges  1,800 for processing 
and 20 years storage.  The bank ran at a loss between 1997 and 2001 when it reached 
break even point.  In addition to its senior management VITA 34 employs 51 staff.  In 
July 2003 the bank will move to new laboratories at Leipzig Bio City, a biotechnology 
and biomedical centre being established by the State of Saxony in association with the 
University  of  Leipzig.    VITA  34  has  also  established  a  research  base  and  received 
720,000 research funding from the Saxony Ministry of Economics and Employment 
(Ministerium für Wirtschaft und Arbeit) in March 2002.  The bank has collaborations 
with  the  Institut  für  Immunologie  und  Transfusionsmedizin  at  the  University  of 
Leipzig  on  cell  expansion  and  stem  cell  differentiation  into  neural  tissue;    with  the 
University of Rostock on the development of cell therapy for the treatment of cardiac 
infarct  using  cord  blood  stem  cells  and  with  the  Ruhr  University  Bochum  on  the 
development  of  cell  therapy  for  Alzheimer’s  disease  using  cord  blood  stem  cells. 
Another private cord blood bank, Lifecord, operates from Hamburg. 

There  is  no  specific  legislation  in  Germany  on  the  retention,  storage  or  use  of 
umbilical  cord  blood  or  cells  and  little  discussion  on  related  ethical  questions.  
However,  umbilical  cord  cell  banks  in  Germany  are  licensed  under  the  terms  of  the 
German Drug Law (Arzneimittelgesetz).  Where CBU are stored solely for autologous 
use  a  licence  can  be  granted  by  a  Local  Authority  or  Regional  Council  but  where 
CBU are stored for related or unrelated third party use, then rigorous cGMP standards 
have  to  be  met  and  a  licence  obtained  from  the  Paul  Ehrlich  Institute,  the  relevant 
Federal statutory licensing body. In 1999 The German Federal Medical Society issued 
guidelines for the production, storage and use of stem cells from umbilical cord blood. 

Italy 

Italy has some 10 public cord blood banks but there is no private cord blood banking 
as this is prohibited by law (Gazetta Ufficiale n.31 January 2002).  Six of these banks 
form  the  GRACE  network  which  has  its  hub  in Milan.    These  banks  are  situated  in 
Milan,  Turin,  Florence,  Lazio,  Padua  and  Pavia  and  are  required  to  meet  ISO  9002 
standards.    Through  the  Milan  hub  GRACE  is  linked  to  NetCord,  where  it  had 
registered 8119 CBU at 30 April 2003 of which 265 had been transplanted.  GRACE 
is  also  linked  to  EUROCORD,  EBMT  and  BMDW.    Milan  is  the  largest  of  the 
GRACE  cord  blood  banks  with  4,433  CBU  stored  for  unrelated  use  (as  at  30 
November 2002) with a further 133 stored for related use and 120 for research.   The 
remaining banks are situated in Bologna, Genoa, Treviso and Sciacca in Sicily.  The 
Emilia Romagna Cord Blood Bank (ERCB) in Bologna and the Treviso Cord Blood 
Bank are both linked to BMDW although only ERCB has CBU registered (315 of 450 
currently stored).  The ERCB collects CBU only for unrelated use and has DM 03-04-
2001, UNI EN ISO 9002 and EFI accreditation.  The Milan Cord Blood Bank receives 
funding from the Regional Government of Lombardy and charges users  17,675 for a  

114

 
 
 
 
CBU.  ERCB charges  17,000.  Most Italian cord blood banks receive support from 
ADISCO the organisation established in 1997 to promote cord blood donation. 

The Netherlands 

The  first  public  cord  blood  bank  in  the  Netherlands  was  established  in  Leiden  by 
Sanquin  (the  Netherlands  Red  Cross)  which  runs  the  Dutch  blood  services.  
Subsequently  three  other  banks  have  been  established  at  Groningen,  Nijmegen  and 
Amsterdam.   Leiden acts as the hub for all haematopoietic stem cell activities in the 
Netherlands  and  is  the  home  of  the  Europdonor  Foundation  (the  Stem  Cell  Donor 
Registry of the Netherlands) which acts for EuroCord Nederland, the Dutch Registry 
of  Cord  Blood  Units.    The  aim  of  EuroCord  Nederland  is  to  collect  5,000  CBU.  
Europdonor  is  also  co-ordinating  the  STEMNET  project  which  aims  to  link  donor 
registries  and  stem  cell  banks  in  Central  Europe  with  networks  and  registries  in 
Western  Europe  such  as  NetCord  and  BMDW.    In  this  way  the  project  aims  to 
contribute  to  better  therapy  in  Central  Europe  and  through  the  introduction  of  new 
ethnic  groups,  to  better  chances  for  patients  worldwide.    Bone  Marrow  Donors 
Worldwide also has its headquarters in Leiden.     The Leiden Cord Blood Bank is a 
member of NetCord and a partner in EUROCORD.  In April 2003 Leiden registered 
1,535  CBU  with  NetCord.    There  are  no  Dutch  private  cord  blood  banks  but  Cryo-
Cell Europe is active in the Netherlands where it has its company offices. 

In February a new law was passed on “Safety and quality of human tissues”.  The law 
is not yet in force as it is awaiting the necessary Royal Decrees which will bring its 
different parts into force.  The law regulates that in principle all human material (be it 
kidney,  amputated  limb  or  cord  blood)  that  becomes  available  to  a  medical 
professional must be offered to an ‘Organ Bank’.  The bank then decides whether to 
accept it or to dispose of it as medical waste.  When the relevant parts of the Act come 
into force, Organ Banks  will  only be  able to operate with a Government permit  and 
will be inspected regularly.  This means that all cord blood banks, whether public or 
private,  will  have  to  apply  for  a  permit  to  operate  as  an  Organ  Bank.  It  has  been 
specifically stipulated that no-one may profit from the storage of cord blood for later 
personal use.  This means that as long as profits are invested in the bank there will be 
no problem and the law allows commercial corporations to apply for an Organ Bank 
permit  as  long  as  they  keep  their  cord  blood  storage  activities  administratively  and 
financially  separate  from  their  other  (e.g.  pharmaceutical)  activities  and  within  the 
intentions of the law. 

Poland 

Both  public  and  private  cord  blood  banking  facilities  are  operating  in  Poland.    The 
Jose Carreras Cord Blood Bank was opened in Warsaw in May 1999.   Jose Carreras 
gave  two  benefit  concerts  in  Warsaw  in  1996  and  1997  to  raise  funds  for  the 
modernisation of the Warsaw Haematological and Oncological Clinic, the creation of 
four bone marrow transplant units and the financing of a cord blood bank.   The Jose 
Carreras  Cord  Blood Bank recruits donors from  a number of collaborating hospitals 
and has 480 CBU stored so far (42 CBU are registered with BMDW).  Of these 4 are 
kept for related use.  A further 600 samples are kept for research.  The bank is  

115

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
supervised by the National Centre for Blood Donation and Blood Treatment and falls 
under Polish legislation concerning blood services. 

In  March  2001  the  Polish  biotechnology  company  Activision  Life  SA  was  founded 
with the objective of searching for and applying new techniques for medical therapy 
and  preventive  medicine.    The  company’s  main  activity  is  umbilical  cord  blood 
banking.    Based in Warsaw, this cord blood bank has hospital and medical contacts 
in each of the Polish provinces.  Activision Life charges the following fees: 

Administration and  processing fee 
(refundable if blood not collected) 

Balance following successful 
processing  and freezing 

PLN 

112.8 

395 

2,465 

556.3 

5 years prepayment 

1,710 

385.9 

10 years prepayment 

3,050 

688.3 

17 years prepayment 

4,450 

1,004.5 

Other instalment plans are also offered.  In addition the company may also charge for 
collectors’ costs. 

Spain 

Spain has probably  the strongest umbilical  cord  cell  banking  programme  in  Europe.  
This  is  probably  largely  due  to  the  activities  of  the  Jose  Carreras  International 
Leukaemia  Foundation  in  promoting  bone  marrow  and  cord  blood  donation.    The 
Foundation  established  the  Unrelated  Bone  Marrow  Donor  Registry  (REDMO) 
which,  in  1996,  started  to  register  CBU.    REDMO  is  a  member  of  the  WMDA  and 
links  to  other  registries  around  the  world.    The  Jose  Carreras  Foundation  is  active 
across the world in promoting bone marrow and cord blood donation and the tenor has 
given  many  benefit  concerts  in  a  number  of  countries  to  raise  money  for  donor 
registries, transplant facilities, cord blood banks and research. 

There is a network of 9 cord blood banks in Spain and the Canary Islands which by 
April  2003  had  registered  13,318  CBU  with  BMDW.    Between  1998  and  2002,  75 
CBU were released for transplantation. The largest of these banks, the Barcelona Cord 
Blood Bank, is a member of NetCord where it has registered 5,621 CBU of which 125 
have  been  released.    This  bank  was  established  in  1998  with  funding  from  the  Jose 
Carreras Foundation.  The Madrid Cord Blood Bank was established in 1996 and held 
1,638 CBU at the beginning of 2003.  Here a small number of units (4.6%) is held for 
family use and 15% used for research.   Legislation in 1996 (Real Decreto 411/1996 
March  1st,  Ministerio  de  Sanidad  y  Consumo)  required  the  Health  Department  to 
supervise the activities of cord blood banks and an Accreditation Programme for Cord 
Blood Banks was put in place.  Banks also follow FACT-NetCord guidelines.   

116

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Switzerland 

Umbilical  cord  blood  banking  is  co-ordinated  through  the  organisation  Swisscord 
which was established in 1996.   The aim is for Swisscord to represent 4 public banks 
in  Basel,  Geneva,  Zürich  and  Berne  but  so  far  only  those  in  Basel  and  Geneva  are 
operative.  The aim is to collect about 5,000 CBU over 5 years. The public cord blood 
bank  in  Basel  was  founded  in  1997  in  the  Haematology  Laboratory  of  the 
Kantonsspital.  It is currently funded by a local foundation but hopes, eventually, to be 
partly  self-sufficient.    As  the  bank  is  sited  in  a  haematology  laboratory,  it  is  GLP 
certificated  but  it  is  also  preparing  for  JACIE  accreditation.    The  bank  currently 
reports  to  the  Swiss  Federal  Office  of  Public  Health.    However,  new  legislation  on 
transplantation, which is in the pipeline, will make production under GMP rules and 
accreditation mandatory.   Women are recruited from the University hospitals in Basel 
and the bank holds about 500 CBU, of which 30 are targeted for family use.  The cord 
blood bank in Geneva holds some 250 CBU.  The Geneva bank has been a partner in 
EUROCORD.  The Swiss Bone Marrow Registry in Berne co-ordinates searches for 
units for transplant.  Swisscord had registered 569 CBU with BMDW in April 2003. 

United Kingdom 

Umbilical cord blood is stored in four localities in the UK.  The Blood Service was 
responsible for establishing cord blood banks in London and Newcastle in 1996 and 
1997.  Subsequently, with the formation of the National Blood Service the Newcastle 
bank  was  transferred  to  the  Royal  Victoria  Infirmary  and  it  is  no  longer  part  of  the 
Blood Service.    In 1997, also in collaboration with the Blood Service, 2-year funding 
was provided to establish an experimental cord blood bank in Bristol.  The aim of the 
project  was  to  evaluate  the  feasibility  of  establishing  a  midwifery-based  collection 
network. The Bristol Bank closed in 1999.  The fourth cord blood bank is sited at the 
Mater  Infirmorum  Hospital  in  Belfast  and was established in 1993.   By 1997 it had 
accumulated 824 units. 

The London Cord Blood Bank (LCBB) is now run by the National Blood Service.  It 
is  situated  at  Edgware  in  North  London  and  collects  from  three  feeder  hospitals;  
Northwick  Park,  Barnet  General  and,  shortly,  Luton  and  Dunstable.    The  aim  is  to 
collect CBU from a broad ethnic mix and these hospitals were selected because they 
serve a variety of ethnic populations.  The aim is to collect 10,000 CBU and currently 
the  LCBB  holds  over  5,500  CBU  (5,559  registered  with  BMDW).    The  Newcastle 
Cord Blood Bank which exists to serve the local population holds approximately 700 
CBU. 

The LCBB provides trained blood services staff at each hospital to collect CBU.  This 
service is available 24 hours a day for 5 days per week.  It was felt that it was difficult 
to  maintain  a  cohort  of  adequately  trained  midwives  and  so  collection  standards 
would  vary  and  there  would  be  a  higher  risk  of  contamination.    The  blood  services 
staff collect the cord blood with the placenta ex utero so that the umbilical cord can be 
better  cleaned  and  the  risk  of  contamination  reduced.    Cord  blood  in  Newcastle  is 
collected by midwives/obstetric staff with the placenta in utero. 

117

 
 
 
 
 
 
There  appear to be two  private cord blood banks operating in the UK, the UK Cord 
Blood  Bank  (an  affiliate  of  the  New  England  Cord  Blood  Bank)  and  Cryo-Care, 
which  is  part  of  Cryo-Cell  Europe.    The  CBU  collected  by  Cryo-Care  are  stored  in 
Belgium.  The UK Blood Bank was set up with the intention of setting up a storage 
facility  in  the  UK  but  was  shipping  cord  blood  to  Boston  in  the  USA  and  it  would 
appear that this still might be the case as the web site has not been updated since 2000 
and the New England Cord Blood Bank is operating from an address in Harley Street, 
London.  For UK and other EC residents Cryo-Care requires an enrolment fee of £95 
( 135) and is offering an all in charge for collection kit, processing, transport and 20 
years storage for £995 ( 1,417).  The UK Cord Blood Bank was charging £345 ( 491) 
for  enrolment,  collection  kit  and  processing  and  20  years  prepaid  storage  at  £700 
( 997).  There appear to be no transport charges but the policy of the New England 
Cord Blood Bank would appear to be to charge for transport. 

In  October  2001  the  Scientific  Advisory  Committee  of  the  Royal  College  of 
Obstetricians  and  Gynaecologists  published  and  Opinion  Paper  on  Umbilical  Cord 
Blood  Banking    (www.rcog.org.uk/mainpages.asp?PageID=430).    This  opinion  is 
sceptical  about  the  utility  of  directed  donations  in  low  risk  families  although 
supportive  of  altruistic  or  family  donation.    However,  the  document  raises  concerns 
about  the  logistic  burden  of  cord  blood  collection  upon  the  obstetrician  or  midwife 
involved.  Concerns are also raised about their indemnity status, should the collection 
be inadequate, contaminated or mislabelled.  The authors also believe that cord blood 
collection could distract staff from their primary task of caring for the mother and her 
baby and from the care of other patients.  These concerns are felt to apply particularly 
where collections are for private storage.   

There is, at present, no statutory regulation of cord blood banks in the UK, however, 
the Department of Health has brought out Guidance and a Code of Practice for Tissue 
Banks  (www.doh.gov.uk/humantissuebanking/).    The  Department  is  requesting 
voluntary accreditation with the Medicines Control Agency (MCA) and this voluntary 
accreditation  scheme  will  extend  until  31  March  2004.    Then,  in  anticipation  of  the 
adoption of the EU Tissue Directive, such accreditation will become mandatory.  The 
LCBB  was  the  first  tissue  bank  in  the  UK  to  receive  MCA  accreditation.    In  April 
2003 the Court of Appeal allowed a couple to use IVF technology to select an HLA 
compatible sibling for their thalassaemic son with a view to a cord cell transplant to 
cure his condition. 

NORTH AMERICA 

Canada 

There  are  four  cord  cell  banking  facilities  in  Canada,  three  of  them  private.    The 
Alberta  Cord  Blood  Bank  is  the  country’s  first  and  only  public  cord  blood  bank.  
Established in 1996 the bank has received funding from the Governments of Alberta 
and  Canada  as  well  as  from  private  donations  but  it  has  no  secure  funds  and  is 
actively seeking funds from the private sector.  The bank currently holds 2,500 CBU 
99% of which are for unrelated use. 

118

 
 
 
 
 
 
Of the private banks, two are situated in Ontario.  The Toronto Cord Blood Program is 
a  private  bank  that  charges  fees  to  recover  costs  but  does  not  make  a  profit.    The 
charges here are $50 ( 32) for registration, $550 ( 352) for processing and one year’s 
storage  and  an  annual  storage  fee  of  $100  ( 64).    In  1999  the  Toronto  Cord  Blood 
Program  was  reported  as  having  collected  more  than  2,000  samples  in  its  first  two 
years.    Cells  for  Life,  a  for  profit  organisation, is situated in Markham,  Ontario and 
charges  $625  ( 400)  for  collection  and  processing  and  $100  annually  thereafter.  
Lifebank  was  Canada’s  first  private  bank  and  is  situated  in  Burnaby,  British 
Columbia.  It reports holding 1,400 samples at the end of February 2003.  The charges 
for banking CBU are $155 ( 99) registration fee, $695 ( 445) processing and banking 
fee  and  an  annual  storage  fee  of  $125  ( 80).    It  is  now  possible  to  make  a  15  year 
prepayment of $1,500 ( 961). 

There is currently no statutory regulation of cord blood banking in Canada, however, 
Health Canada  is in the process of developing safety standards for cells, tissues and 
organs which will be applicable to cord blood banks.  In 1995 the National Consensus 
Conference  of  the  Safety  of  Tissues  and  Organs  recommended  that  standards  be 
developed  and  in  1999  a  Standing  Committee  on  Health  delivered  a  report  entitled 
Organ  and  Tissue  Donation  and  Transplantation:    A  Canadian  Approach  that 
recommended  that  national  standards  for  the  safety  of  cells,  tissues  and  organs 
intended  for 
into 
regulations under the  Food and Drugs Act.   Health Canada contracted the Canadian 
Standards Association to draft  the  relevant safety standards to ensure that they meet 
the  standards  of  the  Canadian  Standards  Council  and  their  implementation  was 
foreseen  to  start  in  2003.    Currently  the  three  private  banks  work  to  blood  banking 
standards and the Alberta Cord Blood Bank is preparing for FACT inspection.   

transplantation  be  made  mandatory 

incorporation 

through 

United States of America 

The United States has a vigorous private cord blood banking sector.  The Cord Blood 
Registry,  one  of  the  largest  US  private  banks,  was  established  in  1992  as  a  pilot 
programme partly sponsored by the American Cancer Society and as a fully fledged 
private bank in 1995.   It claims to be the first family  cord blood bank in the world.  
The  Parents’  Guide  web  site  (www.parentsguidecordblood.com)  currently  lists  15 
companies offering private cord blood banking in the USA. 

Birth Cells Technology Inc  (1999) 
CorCell  (1996) 
Cord Partners (2003) 

California Cryobank Inc (1997) 
Cord Blood Registry (1992) 
Cryobank 
Reproductive Donors (CORD) (1998) 
Cryo-Cell International  (1992) 

Oncologic 

for 

and 

Cryobanks International  (1994) 
Lifebank USA/Anthrogenesis Corp 1998)  LifeStor (1995) 
Newborn Blood Banking Inc (1997) 
Securacell (2001) 
Viacord (1995) 

New England Cord Blood Bank (1995) 
Stembanc (2003) 

Another bank, the American Cord Blood Institute, may no longer be in business as its 
web site is now inaccessible.  Some of these banks, such as the California Cryobank,  

119

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cryobanks  International  and  Lifestor were founded by companies who were already 
in  the  cryostorage  business.    Other  banks,  such  as  the  Cord  Blood  Registry  and  the 
New  England  Cord  Blood  Bank  had  no  previous  experience  in  cryostorage  before 
setting  up  their  own  cord  blood  banking  facilities.    Corcell  does  not  have  its  own 
storage facility but, in fact, uses the processing and storage facilities of the non-profit 
Elie  Katz  Cord  Blood  Bank.    A  sample  of  the  fees  charged  is  given  in  Table  8.1.  
Some banks, such as the Cord Blood Registry, will waive fees for high risk families; 
the costs are later recovered through medical insurance when units are transplanted. 

Table 8.1   Sample fees at US private cord blood banks  

Bank 

Enrolment 
fee 

Processing  Prepaid 
storage 
(yrs) 

Annual 
storage 

BirthCells 
Cord Blood Registry 
California Cryobank 
Cryobanks International 
Viacord 
*  $1 =  0.86 

$145* 
$295 
$150 

$450 
$995 
$540 
$695 
$1,550 

$1195 (21) 
$1,410 (18) 
$1,690 (20) 

$1,900 (20) 

$95 
$95 
$85 
$95 
$95 

Additional  costs  may  include  transport  and  rush  fees  for  late  enrolment.    The 
processing fees at private banks vary considerably.  At LifeStor a range of processing 
fees varying from $150 to $1,350 is offered depending on the complexity of the tests 
and  validation  to  be  carried  out.    The  difference  in  processing  fees  charged  may 
therefore  reflect  the  quality  of  testing.      A  number  of  banks  also  offer  plans  for 
payment  by  instalments.    A  number  of  American  private  banks  actively  recruit 
patients around the world, particularly in Mexico and South America, either directly 
or through affiliates such as Cryo-Cell Europe.  A large number of CBU are stored by 
the private banks in the USA.  The two largest banks Cryo-Cell International and the 
Cord Blood Registry hold 50,000 and 45,000  CBU  respectively.   The New  England 
Cord Blood Bank hold 10,000 and the California Cryobank 3,000. 

An  American  phenomenon  is  the  existence  of  organisations  which  facilitate  cord 
blood banking.  They work as  brokers, may be  non-profit organisations  affiliated to 
private banks and may help with referrals to public or private banks.  The following 
are recorded in the Parents’ Guide web site. 

Alpha Cord Inc. 

Birth Cells Foundation 

Acts  as  broker  to  a  network  of  3  private  banks  and 
offers lower fees. 
affiliate  of  BirthCells  Technology 
Non-profit 
promoting  awareness  of  private  cord  blood  banking 
and runs a club. Will assist families lacking financial 
means to bank cord blood.   

Cord Blood Donor Foundation  Non-profit  affiliate  of  Cord  Blood  Registry  also 

promotes cord blood banking and gives information  

120

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cord Blood Options 

UCB Education Alliance 

about  public  banks.    It  does  not  mention  individual 
private banks but suggests questions to ask. 
An  independent  non-profit  network  of  professional 
firms providing information about cord blood banking 
options. 
Another  independent  network  providing  information 
about cord blood banking options. 

Public cord blood banks in the United States tend to collect cord blood locally rather 
than store blood from across the country as in the private sector.  There are 12 banks 
linked to the NMDP Registry and a further 9 non-NMDP banks (see Annex 6).  Most 
public banks will take unrelated donations only although some will store donations for 
high risk families.  In April 2003, 60,719 CBU were registered with BMDW, 16,586 
of these being registered by NMDP.  The New York Cord Blood Bank is a member of 
NetCord and had 17,498 CBU with BMDW (16,173 with NetCord).  The New York 
Cord Blood Bank has also supplied the most CBU for transplant world wide;  1,284, 
of which 899 were used for children and 361 for adults.  

Currently,  cord  blood  banking  in  the  United  States  is  mostly  unregulated  but  most 
banks,  whether  in  the  public  or  private  sector,  seek  voluntary  certification  or 
accreditation  of  some  sort  either  through  the  AABB  or  FACT  (12  of  the  14  banks 
listed on the Parents’ Guide web site are shown to have some accreditation).  There is 
some laboratory regulation by the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Service (CMS) 
and Centers for Disease Control (CDC) which may be relevant.  In 1988 the Clinical 
Laboratories Improvement Amendments 1988 (CLIA’88), Law 100-578, required all 
laboratories  testing  material  derived  from  the  human  body  “for  the  purpose  of 
providing  information  for  the  diagnosis,  prevention  or  treatment  of  any  disease  or 
impairment of, or assessment of the health of human beings” to meet a uniform set of 
quality  control  standards  which  include  personnel  as  well  testing  and  equipment 
standards.    It  would  seem  that  these  standards  would  apply  to  laboratories  testing 
umbilical cord blood.  These standards, were phased in by 31 December 2002.  They 
have been amended subsequently and a final rule (CMS-2226-F) was published in the 
Federal Register, on January 24, 2003. 

Specific regulations with regard to cord cell banks have been under consideration by 
the Federal Drugs Agency (FDA) for a number of  years and are likely to come into 
force  in  2004.    The  FDA’s  principal  concern  is  public  health  and  the  avoidance  of 
communicable disease transmission.  A brief history follows. 

1995  FDA 

issues 

a  Draft  Document  Concerning 

the  Regulation  of 
Placental/Umbilical Cord Stem Cell Products Intended for Transplantation or 
Further Manufacture into Injectable Products (Docket No. 96N-0002).    This 
was a consultation document inviting comment. 

1997  FDA  publishes  A  Proposed  Approach  to  the  Regulation  of  Cellular  and 
Tissue-Based Products (62 FR 9721, March 4 1997).  This document proposes 
the  registration  of  establishments  involved  in  the  manufacture  of  human 
cellular  and  tissue-based  products  (HCT/P’s),  the  establishment  of  donor 
suitability  requirements  and  the  drawing  up  of  Good  Tissue  Practice  (GTP) 
regulations.   

121

 
 
 
 
 
1998  A  request  is  issued  by  the  FDA  for  Proposed  Standards  for  unrelated 
Allogeneic  Peripheral  and  Placental  Umbilical  Cord  Blood  Hematopoietic 
Stem/Progenitor  Cell  Products (Docket No.  97N-0497;  63 FR 2988, January 
12, 1998).  The intention was to develop product standards for HSC/progenitor 
cells  for  unrelated  allogeneic  use  and  it  was  proposed  that  cord  blood  banks 
should operate  under an  Investigational  New Drug (IND) licence, some cord 
blood banks have already acted in accordance with this proposal.  Comments 
were requested by July 2000. 

The  FDA  also  issued  a  proposed  rule  on  establishment  registration, 
Establishment Registration and Listing for Manufacturers of Human Cellular 
and Tissue-Based Products (63 FR 26744, May 14, 1998). 

1999  A  proposed  rule  on  donor  suitability  is  published;    Suitability  Determination 
for  Donors  of  Human  Cellular  and  Tissue-Based  Products  (64  FR  52696, 
September  30,  1999).      It  was  suggested  that  FDA-approved  tests  for  HIV1, 
HIV2, Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C, syphilis, HTLV I and II and Cytomegalovirus 
should be applied to all products.  Most cord blood banks would screen against 
HIV, Hepatitis and syphilis. 

2000  A  proposed  rule  on  Good  Tissue  Practice  for  Manufacturers  of  Human 
Cellular  and  Tissue-Based  Products  was  published  (66  FR  1508,  January  8,  
2000) 

include  skin, 

2001  The final rule on Establishment Registration and Listing (66 FR 5447, January 
19 2001) is published.  This states that the rule covers HCT/P’s at all stages of 
their  manufacture  from  recovery  to  distribution.    Examples  of  HCTP/’s  are 
provided  and 
tendons,  bone,  heart  valves,  corneas, 
haematopoietic  stem  cells,  manipulated  autologous  chondrocytes,  epithelial 
cells  on  a  synthetic  matrix  and  semen  or  other  reproductive  tissue.    This 
regulation would fall under sections 351 and 361 of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 264) parts 1270 and 1271.  Part 1271.3(d)(2) requires certain 
establishments,  which  would  include  cord  blood  banks,  to  register  with  the 
FDA by 19 January 2003.  All cord blood products, whether for  autologous, 
closely related or unrelated allogeneic use must be listed. 

2003  The  effective  date  of  the  final  rule  on  establishment  registration  is  delayed 
until  21  January  2004  (Docket  No.  97N-484R;    68  FR  2689,  January  21, 
2003).    The  original  deadline  of  19  January,  2003  for  voluntary  registration 
and  the  effectiveness  of  the  regulation  was  made  in  the  anticipation  that  the 
final rules on donor suitability and GTP would be in place by that date.  This is 
not  the  case  and  so  the  extension  was  made.    Proposed  rules  only  have 
consultative  status;  final  rules  become  law.    The  registration  of  cord  blood 
banks  will  therefore  remain  voluntary  until  January  2004  although  a  number 
have already registered with the FDA.   

In 1999 the American Academy of Pediatrics published a subject review entitled Cord 
Blood  Banking  for  Potential  Future  Transplantation:  Subject  Review  (RE9860).    It 
comments that the likelihood of children needing their own stored cells is small, citing  

122

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
estimates of 1:1,000 to 1:200,000, and mentions the lack of evidence that autologous 
transplantation of cord blood for the treatment of malignant neoplasms is either safe 
nor effective .    It  does  not recommend that parents store their childrens’ cord blood 
for  their  own  future  use  although  it  does  consider  that  there  is  a  case  if  there  is  a 
family member with a current or potential need.  The Academy does recommend the 
philanthropic  donation  of  cord  blood  for  allogeneic  use.    The  review  also  makes  a 
number  of  recommendations  for  organisations,  public  or  private,  involved  in  cord 
blood banking.  These include a recommendation for regulation by Federal agencies, 
the  provision  of  accurate  information  about  benefits  and  limitations  to  parents,  the 
obtaining of written, informed consent before the onset of labour, and that recruitment 
practices  should  be  developed  with  an  awareness  of  the  possible  emotional 
vulnerability of pregnant women.    

REST OF THE WORLD 

Argentina 

There appears to be one public cord blood bank in Argentina situated in Buenos Aires.  
It applied for membership of WMDA in 2001 and its stock of 70 CBU registered by 
BMDW  has  remained  unchanged  since  then.    A  number  of  US  private  cord  blood 
banks, such as the New England Cord Blood Bank, are active in Argentina.  

Australia 

Australia has three public cord blood banks, in Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane, and 
one  private  bank  which  is  Sydney  based.    In  May  2000  the  Federal  Minister  for 
Health  announced  that  the  Commonwealth  Government  would  help  to  establish  an 
Australian  National  Cord  Blood  Network  and  the  Network  was  officially  launched 
under  the  name  of  AusCord  in  September  2002  with  a  Federal  Government 
investment  of  A$10  million  ( 5.52  million).    Its  main  objectives  are  to  process  and 
store  22,000  searchable  CBU  (including  2,000  indigenous  units)  for  the  purpose  of 
transplantation  and  to  establish  a  computerised  national  registry  of  CBU  for  the 
purposes  of  searching,  matching  and  distributing.    In  April  2003  AusCord  had 
registered 7,188 CBU with Bone Marrow Donors Worldwide, but from data collected 
for this study the true number is nearer 11,000.  The Australian Cord Blood Bank at 
Sydney Childrens’ Hospital is a member of NetCord.  AusCord restricts its collection 
to unrelated donors.  In addition to funding by the Commonwealth, State and Territory 
Governments, the three AusCord banks also receive substantial financial support from 
individual, community groups and charities, in particular  

•  Ronald McDonald House Charities 
•  The Bone Marrow Donor Institute 
•  Australian Cord Blood Foundation 
•  Mater Hospitals’ Trust 
•  Rotary Australia 
•  Lions Clubs of Australia 
•  The Leukaemia Foundation 

123

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Established in 1999, Cryosite is a company offering an ultra-low temperature facility 
for the storage of patient samples and other biological specimens.  The Cryosite cord 
blood services division was set up in August 2001.  Its Medical Advisor is a leading 
Australian  immunologist  and  Director  of  the  St  Vincent’s  Hospital  Centre  for 
Immunology  in  Sydney.    It  was  reported  (Sunday  Herald  Sun  (Melbourne))  in 
February  2003  that  Cryosite  had  some  600  CBU  in  storage.    The  costs  of  cord  cell 
banking with Cryosite are as follows: 

Non-refundable registration fee  
Processing fee 
Annual storage fee 
Kit delivery fee (outside Sydney) 
max 

A$ 
  300 
1,550 
  150 
 200 

165.5 
855.1 
  82.8 
110.3 

As with all private banks, payment plans are available and an 18 year prepayment is 
A$4,000 ( 2,302). 

All  Australian  cord  blood  banks,  whether  public  or  private,  have  to  be  licensed  and 
accredited  by  the  Australian  Therapeutic  Goods  Administation  under  the  code  of 
Good Manufacturing Practice (cGMP) for Human Blood and Tissues. 

China 

Cord blood banks in China are regulated and standardised by the Ministry of Health.  
Enterprises and individuals are forbidden to set up for profit banks and the Ministry 
has  given  authorisation  to  only  seven  provincial-level  health  departments  in  the 
country.   The cord blood banks at Tianjin and Beijing both belong to AsiaCord and 
therefore follow AsiaCord guidelines.  Beijing has the largest and longest established 
haematopoietic  stem  cell  transplantation  centre  in  the  country  with  state  of  the  art 
freezing  facilities  and  GMP  laboratory.    Its  aim  is  to  store  50,000  CBU  in  order  to 
provide cord blood stem cells for Chinese anywhere in the world.  The Tianjin bank 
also  aims  to  store  50,000  CBU.    The  Shandong  Cord  Blood  Bank  in  Jinan  reported 
collecting  4,000  CBU  between  the  end  of  1999  and  March  2001.    The  Guangzhou 
Cord Blood Bank reported collecting 2,318 CBU of which 1,240 qualified for storage 
after  testing  and  screening.    Up  to  May  2000,  9  units  had  been  used  in  unrelated 
transplants of which 6 were successfully engrafted. The most recent cord blood bank 
to be established in China was at the Shanghai Blood Centre in June 2002.  The bank 
has  been  established  in  co-operation  with  the  Shanghai  Red  Cross  and  on  the 
instruction of the Ministry of Health to serve East China.   Funding to run the bank 
was  sought  from  the  municipal  government  (5  million  yuan;  518,292).    The 
Shanghai Cord Blood Bank aims to collect 10,000 – 50,000 CBU.  Cord blood banks 
have also been established in Guangdong and Shenzen.  

Hong Kong 

The Hong Kong Red Cross Blood Transfusion Service established a centralised cord 
blood bank for Hong Kong in 1999.  It is funded with support from the Hong Kong 
Jockey Club Charities Trust and aims to collect and store 2,300 CBU by 2004. 

124

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Two  specially  trained  nurses  are  deployed  to  collect  cord  blood  and  their  salaries, 
together with the equipment and consumables necessary for testing and storing CBU, 
are  funded  by  the  Jockey  Club  Trust.    Other  operating  costs  and  administrative 
support are met by the Hospital Authority through Government subvention.  Donors 
are  recruited  from  two  neighbouring  hospitals,  the  Kwong  Wah  Hospital  and  the 
Queen  Elizabeth  Hospital,    and  the  two  nurses  collect  two  to  four  CBU  daily  from 
Monday  to  Friday.    Two  other  hospitals  performing  bone  marrow  transplants,  the 
Prince of Wales Hospital and the Queen Mary Hospital, also store cord blood from the 
siblings of patients requiring haematopoietic stem cell transplants. 

India 

India’s first HSC bank was established in 2001 at the Armed Forces Medical College 
Department of Transfusion Medicine at Pune.  The Department stores cells from bone 
marrow, peripheral blood and umbilical cord blood.  It has been reported (India News 
Bureau,2003) that in Pune modified stem cells from umbilical cord blood have been 
used  to  treat  Parkinson’s  disease.    In  Hyderabad  a  project  is  being  undertaken  to 
establish a facility for umbilical cord cell banking and research.  This is to be a joint 
venture between Healthcare Holdings of Singapore and a healthcare providing partner 
from  Hyderabad  at  a  total  project  cost  of  50  crore  Rupees  ( 9.1  million).    It  is 
anticipated that the facility will be commissioned in January 2004. 

Japan 

Japan’s first cord blood transplant took place in 1994.  The first cord blood units were 
banked  in  1995  by  the  Japanese  Red  Cross  in  the  Kanagawa  Prefecture  and  at  the 
Tokyo  Metropolitan  Red  Cross  Blood  Centre.    In  1996  the  Ministry  of  Health  and 
Welfare  established  a  consultative  committee  to  discuss  the  issue  of  forming  a 
banking and donation network.  The committee’s report, presented in 1998, discussed 
issues such as safety, privacy and informed consent and recommended that a network 
of local banks should be established.  In 1999 the Japanese Cord Blood Bank Network 
(JCBBN)  of  non-profit  cord  blood  banks  was  established  with  Government  support.  
Ten cord blood banks belong to the network which has issued guidelines and standard 
codes of practice.  Each cord blood bank is inspected annually by members of JCBBN 
and less frequently safety inspections, financial audits and efficiency inspections are 
also carried out.  By June 2002, 9,500 CBU had been registered with JCBBN and 630 
units released for transplantation between 1996 and 2002.  The JCBBN is centred on 
the Tokyo Cord Blood Bank as is AsiaCord.  The Tokyo Cord Blood Bank is also a 
member of NetCord where it had registered 2583 CBU in April 2003 and is linked to 
BMDW where 2,541 CBU were registered. 

Professional  self-regulation  rather  than  statutory  regulation  seems  to  be  the  chosen 
model  for  umbilical  cord  cell  banking  in  Japan  although,  prior  to  the  formation  of 
JCBBN,  guidelines  were  issued  by  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Welfare  which  also 
carried out inspections.  There is some private cord cell banking in Japan.  According 
to  the  Asahi  Shimbun  (21  August  2002)  Private  operators  say  that  they  follow 
Government  safety  guidelines.    One  Tokyo-based  company  charges  ¥120,000 
( 869.290) to preserve cord blood for 10 years and currently holds 2,000 CBU.   

125

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Company officials said that many of their clients were parents of leukaemia patients 
who wanted to preserve the cord blood of their children in case they, too, contracted 
the disease.  Companies, which advertise in child-care magazines, are accused by the 
Japan Society for Haematopoietic Cell Transplantation of making exaggerated claims 
of the feasibility of technology still under development. 

South Korea 

The Seoul Cord Blood Bank is a mixed bank storing CBU for unrelated and related 
use.  The bank holds some 10,200 CBU or which 9,100 are donated for unrelated use 
and 1,100 are stored privately.  The bank charges $1,000 for 15  years’ preservation.  
Founded in February 2000, the Seoul Cord  Blood Bank is  a member of  AsiaCORD 
and  follows  this  network’s  guidelines.    There  are  no  national  regulations  in  Korea 
regarding cord blood banking. 

Taiwan 

There  appears  to  be  great  competition  for  umbilical  cord  cell  banking  in  Taiwan, 
particularly  since  it  was  reported  in  2002  that  the  cord  blood  of  the  First  Lady’s 
grandchild  was  privately  banked.    Wu  Shu-chen,  the  President’s  wife  is  paralysed 
from  the  waist  down  and  it  was  hoped  that  the  grandchild’s  cord  blood  stem  cells 
would  help  her.        Four  cord  blood  banks  belong  to  AsiaCord;    the  Chinese  Blood 
Service  Foundation  Cord  Blood  Bank,  the  Sun  Yat-Sen  Cancer  Centre  Cord  Blood 
Bank,  The  Tzu-Chi  Marrow  Donor  Registry  Cord  Blood  Bank,  Baby  Banks  Cord 
Blood  Bank  and  StemCyte,  Taiwan,  Cord  Blood  Bank.    Of  these,  the  Sun  Yat-Sen  
Centre reports 1,550 CBU and StemCyte has 7,381 CBU registered with BMDW.  A 
private bank,  BIONET  Corp., the first private bank in Taiwan and  founded in 1999, 
currently reports holding 7,000 CBU.  There appears to be no regulation of cord blood 
banking in Taiwan and there is fierce competition between private banks, particularly 
those  of  Taiwanese  origin  (a  number  of  American  cord  blood  banks  also  recruit  in 
Taiwan)  of  which  there  are  at  least  five  with  an  anticipated  four  new  companies 
expected  to  open  over  the  next  year.    Inducements  include  provision  of  life  and 
accident insurance for the baby in the storage package, large discounts on storage, and 
a $1 promotion whereby five winners are picked each month to have their annual fees 
reduced  to  $1.    As  20,000  babies  are  being  born  in  Taiwan  each  month  these 
companies see great growth potential. 

Vietnam 

The HoChiMinh City Cord Blood Bank is a public bank that collects and stores cord 
blood to treat cancer, blood and immune diseases.  The HoChiMinh City Cord Blood 
Bank is located at the Blood Transfusion and Haematology Centre and opened in June 
2000. The goal of the bank is to collect and store over 2000 units of cord blood in the 
next  two  years.  The  units  of  cord  blood  are  collected  at  the  nearby  Hung  Vuong 
Hospital. 

126

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The HoChiMinh City Cord Blood Bank is part of a national clinical trial of cord blood 
banking and transplantation. The purpose of the study is:  

1. To study the best ways to collect and process cord blood. 

2. To evaluate the efficacy and safety of cord blood as an alternative haematopoietic 
stem cell source.  

The HoChiMinh City Cord Blood Bank is also a member of the Asiacord network so 
any transplant center anywhere in Asia can access cord blood stored at the bank. 

127

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.  PUBLIC  BANKING  AND  PRIVATE  BANKING: 

  COSTS  AND 

CONFLICTS 

It is clear that there is tension between public and private cord blood banking.  This is 
exemplified by a statement from the RANCOG in February 2003. 

“It is estimated that of approximately 200,000 placental blood units stored for 
the  exclusive  use  of  the  baby  from  whose  birth  the  placental  blood  was 
obtained, at most 74 units (and this is very likely a gross overestimate) might 
“possibly” be used  and  199,926 would  be taken  out  of  circulation  for  use  of 
patients who require an allogeneic transplant.” 

This statement implies that private banks are storing CBU which might otherwise be 
available for the treatment of those in need.  Few private banks now only emphasise 
the  benefits  of  private  banking  for  autologous  use  but,  rather,  also  mention  the 
benefits for the family.  One of largest private banks, the Cord Blood Registry, calls 
itself  the  first  family  cord  blood  bank  and,  of  the  privately  stored  CBU  used  for 
transplantation, most transplants have been to siblings. 

Public cord blood banks also often condemn the private sector, in particular the sales 
pitch  that  private  banking  offers  “bio-insurance”.    This  is  clearly  put  in  the  patient 
information leaflet of AusCord. 

“There  are  organisations  around  the  world  that  are  now  charging  a  fee  to 
provide  this  private  service.    They  are  commercial  banks  actively  promoting 
private storage as ‘an insurance’ against future disease.  It is the opinion of the 
public cord blood banks that there may not be a role for this method of storage 
as  the  cord  blood  is  unlikely  to  be  used  for  transplantation  for  leukaemias, 
cancer  and  bone  marrow  failure.    The  stored  blood  cannot  be  used  to  treat 
genetic disease, as the cord blood would also be affected. 

The  most  common  reason  for  transplantation  in  childhood  is  for  leukaemia.  
Even if the donor developed leukaemia and required a transplant would their 
cord  blood  be  used  to  treat  themselves?    The  answer  is  ‘no’.    The  least 
successful  form  of  transplant  is  from  the  patient’s  own  cord  blood  or  bone 
marrow.    If  the  leukaemia  develops  in  early  childhood,  the  cord  blood  may 
well contain the propensity to develop leukaemia. 

The most appropriate source of stem cells is from another person whether it is 
another  family  member  or  an  anonymous  stem  cell  donor.    The  chance  of 
finding  a  match  within  your  family  is  about  30%,  the  chance  of  finding  a 
suitable unrelated cord blood donor is over 80%.” 

However,  it  is  questionable  that  private  banks  are  removing  essential  CBU  from 
circulation.  Public cord blood banks tend to collect CBU from a limited network of 
local hospitals and to have an upper limit on the number of CBU that they will store.  
It is difficult for women outside the target population of a particular bank to make an 
altruistic donation.  For instance, the London Cord Blood Bank would probably refuse 
a cord blood donation from a woman unless she came from the catchment population  

129

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the three hospitals serving the bank.  The policy is to collect a broad ethnic mix of 
CBU,  not  merely  a  high  number.    Moreover,  they  would  be  uncertain  about  the 
collection standards of CBU not obtained by their trained staff. 

A  recent  survey  in  Canada32  has  shown  that  a  high  proportion  (70%)  of  women 
attending antenatal classes at a regional hospital had a poor or very poor knowledge of 
cord  blood  banking.    This  is  surprising  since  one  might  expect  them  to  be  actively 
targeted  by  private  banks  in  the  USA  and  Canada.    Of  the  443  respondents  to  a 
questionnaire 86% were willing to make altruistic donations of cord blood with only 
14% preferring to elect private banking.  Research was considered an acceptable use 
of cord blood by the majority of respondents.  It would, therefore, seem that umbilical 
cord blood is a largely untapped resource, the logical consequence of which would be 
to routinely store CBU with women being able to elect private storage if they wished.  
However it is likely that the costs of cord blood banking would mitigate against this. 

Costs of cord blood banking 

However one looks at it, the costs of cord blood banking are high.  In private banking 
the  costs  are  borne  by  the  depositor;    in  public  banking  the  costs  are  charged  to  the 
user and paid either through medical insurance (principally in the USA) or by public 
health services. 

The costs of setting up a cord blood bank are not insignificant.  These are the same for 
public  and  private  banks.    From  information  in  the  literature33  and  on  the  internet 
(www.parentsguidecordblood.com)  the  first  year  costs  of  establishing  a  cord  blood 
bank  would  amount  to  some  $564,745  ( 485,527)  at  1996  US$  rates.    A 
Thermogenesis  Corp.  (one  of  the  principal  cryostorage  equipment  suppliers) 
Bioarchive  system  manages  an  inventory  of  up  to  3,626  CBU,  so  a  major  capital 
investment  would  be  required  every  time  this  capacity  is  filled  and  annual  running 
costs can be substantial. 

Private cord blood banks have to operate at a loss until they reach break-even point – 
this took VITA34 four years – but thereafter, if they maintain a steady intake of CBU, 
they will run at a profit.  There is a risk that if private cord blood banks do not acquire 
sufficient custom to break even they will close.  The problem then is that if they are 
not  acquired  by  another  organisation,  what  happens  to  the  CBU  stored  with  them.  
Some banks offer insurance against such an eventuality. 

Public cord blood banks are dependent on public or charitable funding and fees from 
CBU released for transplant.  As only 1-3% of CBU stored are likely to be used in any 
one year it is clear that banks are unlikely to cover their costs from such income.  This 
means that, unless public banks can get stable government, local or charitable support, 
they  are  vulnerable.    In  the  USA  two  public  banks  have  stopped  accepting  new 
donations  because  of  financial  problems  though  their  inventories  remain  in  the  cord 
blood registries.  The Alberta Cord Blood Bank has no long term support. 

32 Fernandez CV, Gordon K, Van den Hof M, Taweel S, Baylis F, Knowledge and attitudes of pregnant 
women with regard to collection, testing and banking cord blood stem cells.  CMAJ, 2003 Mar 
18;168(6):695-8  
33 Sirchia G et al. Costs of umbilical cord blood units released for transplantation. Transfusion, 1999 
June; 39(6):645-50 

130

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
In addition to the costs  of storage are the  costs  of  testing.  Public  cord  blood banks 
which  supply  data  to  international  registries  have  to  undertake  sophisticated  tissue 
typing  and  DNA  tests  which  private  banks  storing  for  autologous  use  do  not.    Both 
types  of  bank  would  be  expected  to  carry  out  contamination  and  communicable 
disease  tests.    Private  banks  pass  these  processing  costs  on  to  their  customers.  
However, tissue typing costs are high and these tests would not routinely be offered 
by private banks in their storage contracts.  Normally these costs would only have to 
be met by a private customer if a CBU is withdrawn for family rather than autologous 
use and, in the USA, this would be paid by medical insurance.  For CBU released for 
unrelated  use  these  costs  have  to  be  paid  by  the  user.    Table  7.1  compares  the  fees 
charged by the Emilia Romagna and Milan cord blood banks to physicians requesting 
CBU for transplant. 

Table 7.1  Sample fees for testing and CBU release at two European cord blood   

banks 

Item 

Emilia Romagna 
CBB    Fee 

Milan CBB 
Fee 

HLA-DRB1, B3, B4, B5 high resolution 
confirmatory test 
HLA DQA1 high resolution 
HLA DQB1 high resolution 
Unit segment DNA for laboratory testing 
DNA extraction 
Cord Blood Unit 

311.00
178.00
178.00
92.96
45.00
17,000.00

436.41
249.96
249.96
92.96
63.52
17,675.00

In addition there are transport costs and these vary with distance and complexity. 

Quality Standards 

In most countries the regulation of cord blood banking is voluntary.  At present public 
banks  are  expected  to  meet  high  quality  standards  and  require  some  form  of 
accreditation,  though  this  may  vary,  if  their  CBU  are  to  be  made  available  in 
international  registries.    However,  this  does  not  guarantee  the  quality  of  individual 
CBU.  In Germany a CBU was received from an accredited bank in the USA which, 
on thawing, was found to have few viable cells.  As the patient was already prepared 
for  the  transplant,  it  was  decided  to  go  ahead.    However,  because  of  the  low  cell 
number,  engraftment  was  slow  and  the  patient  had  to  remain  in  intensive  care  and 
immunological isolation for many months.  The cost of this to the hospital was very 
high  and  other  patient  care  was  affected.    Experiences  like  this  may  make  hospitals 
and physicians reluctant to consider cord cell transplants. 

Because public banks collect from a network of local hospitals the blood services or 
maternity staff involved in collecting cord blood are usually trained and accustomed 
to the procedure.  Private banks issue collection kits to the expectant parents who are 
expected to pass them on to the relevant obstetric staff.  Some private banks provide 
detailed training instructions and videos, others provide more peremptory instructions.   

131

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It  is  quite  likely  that  obstetricians  or  midwives  collecting  CBU  for  private  storage 
have  little  or  no  prior  experience.    This  has  implications  for  both  the  volume  and 
contamination  status  of  the  CBU.    There  is  no  information  available  about 
contamination rates in the private sector but private banks will accept as little as 40ml 
cord  blood,  or  less,  whereas  the  Düsseldorf  bank,  for  instance,  will  not  accept  less 
than  80ml.    In  the  public  sector  60-70%  of  CBU  may  be  discarded  because  of 
contamination  or  low  cell  count.    Of  course,  it  is  cell  number  rather  than  volume 
which  is  important  but  private  banks  are  probably  counting  on  cell  expansion 
techniques to come to the rescue. 

Proposed  tissue  banking  legislation  in  the  USA  and  Europe  will  impose  some 
common  standards  on  both  public  and  private  banks  although  tissues  used  for 
autologous  grafts  will  be  excluded  from  some  regulations  and  the  UK  Code  of 
Practice only applies to public tissue banks.  But the problem of disparity in collection 
expertise will remain. 

Consent 

Written,  informed  consent  is  obtained  by  both  public  and  private  cord  blood  banks.  
Informed consent for private banking provides additional indemnity for the company 
to  that  provided  by  the  storage  agreement  which  is  also  signed  by  the  client.    The 
client  will  also  be  expected  to  indemnify  the  physician  collecting  the  cord  blood.  
Some  private  banks  do  refer  potential  clients  to  objective  information  about  cord 
blood banking, so that they are aware of the possibility of donation for unrelated use.  
Sample forms, provided by the California Cryobank Inc., which includes a review of 
cord blood banking by the March of Dimes in its information pack, are  at Annex 7.  
Women  signing  consent  forms  for  altruistic  donation  do  so  in  the  belief  that  their 
baby’s  cord  blood  will  be  used  for  transplantation.    It  is  not  clear  whether  their 
consent  is  obtained  for  the  use  of  their  donation  for  research  (only  a  very  small 
proportion of CBU are stored for such purposes  and most would not be  suitable for 
transplantation) but, as mentioned above, it would appear that the majority of women 
would have no objection.  It appears, though, that there are organisations in the USA 
(www.parentsguidecordblood.com)  that  bank  donations  for  unrelated  use  and  sell 
them for research.  No doubt these are units that would be unsuitable for transfer but 
the ethics of this form of commercialisation would seem questionable.  

Ownership 

Biologically cord blood belongs to the newborn child but a newborn child is unable to 
exert its property rights or give consent to its use.  It is the mother’s consent that is 
required  if  the  blood  is  to  be  stored  for  the  child’s  own  future  use  or  donated  to 
another.  Annas34 makes an analogy with consent to the use of fetal tissue.  Once it is 
given away to a third party, cord blood ceases to be the property of the child.  If the 
mother  decides  to  store  the  cord  blood  in  a  private  cord  blood  bank  it  remains  the 
property  of  the  child  who  can,  when  he  or  she  is  of  age,  decide  whether  or  not  to 
continue storage.  Some banks notably offer 18 year storage, presumably to coincide 
with the child’s majority.  Problems can arise if the parents fail to continue storage  

34 Annas GJ, Waste and Longing – The Legal Status of Placental Blood Banking. NEJM, 1999 May 13; 
340(19):1521-24 

132

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
payments.    Some  private  banks  have  policies  that,  if  storage  fees  are  not  paid,  the 
CBU becomes the property of the company35, others will destroy the CBU. 

Confidentiality and traceability 

Because of the vulnerability of the newborn, confidentiality issues become especially 
important  in  cord  blood  banking  where  the  child’s  tissue  is  subject  to  a  number  of 
tests relating to disease  and  genetics.   In the context of private banking the tests are 
most  likely  to  be  limited  to  those  related  to  the  identification  of  communicable 
diseases and the information is not passed on to third parties.  However, the question 
arises,  if there is a positive test, as to who should be given this  information.   In  the 
context of public banking, cord blood units are expected to undergo both disease and 
genetic  (tissue  typing)  tests.    The  proposed  legislation  in  both  the  USA  and  Europe 
will require that there is traceability of  samples held in tissue banks so that, in case of 
need, they can be linked back to their donors.  The question is who should hold such 
linking information and how.  It is essential that the users of CBU for transplantation 
receive  them  as  anonymised  samples  and  the  data  held  in  international  cord  blood 
registries do not identify the donor.  However, the logistics may be more difficult if a 
CBU comes from a local bank.  Once again, there is the question as to whether any 
abnormality identified during testing at storage or release should be made available to 
the donor.   

Patents and cord blood banking 

In  1987  the  American  biotechnology  company  Biocyte  Corporation  filed  for  a  US 
patent on ‘the isolation and preservation of fetal and neonatal hematopoietic stem and 
progenitor  cells  of  the  blood’.    This  was  granted  as  US  Patent  No.  5,004,681  on  2 
April  1991.    A  continuation  application  was  filed  in  1988  and  US  Patent  No. 
5,192,553  was  granted  on  9  March  1993.    In  1996  Biocyte  was  granted  a  further 
patent in Europe under reference EP O 343 217.  In effect, these patents gave Biocyte 
patent monopoly rights over all stored cord blood cells and their therapeutic use and 
cord blood banks would be forced to operate under licence.  In Europe, the cord blood 
banking  and  transplantation  community  began  to  lobby  for  the  revocation  of  the 
patent both on legal and ethical grounds.  The patent was contrary to the resolution of 
the International Society of Transplantation that no part of the human body should be 
commercialised  and  that  the  donation  of  all  organs  or  cells  should  be  free  and 
anonymous.    Subsequently  Biocyte  was  acquired  by  PharmaStem  Therapeutics  who 
had the patents assigned to them.  In February 2002 PharmaStem filed a lawsuit for 
patent infringement against 8 American cord blood banking companies;  ViaCell Inc., 
Cryo-Cell International Inc., CorCell Inc., StemCyte Inc., Nu Stem Technologies Inc., 
Cord Blood Registry Inc., Bio-Cell Inc. and Birthcells Technology Inc.  In November 
2002 PharmaStem was awarded a third US Patent No. 6,462,645. 

After  a  four  year  legal  battle,  the  European  Patent  Office  revoked  PharmaStem’s 
European patent on 7 April 2003.  European cord blood banks can therefore continue 
to  operate  without  threat  of  legal  action.    In  the  USA  the  legal  battle  continues.  
Settlement is unlikely and, with 6 defendants remaining in the case, a trial has been  

35 Ibid. 

133

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
set  for  6  October  2003.    Although  decisions  of  the  European  Patent  Office  are  not 
controlling  in  US  courts,  those  opposing  PharmaStem’s  patent  have  argued  that  the 
recent  decision  of  the  EPO  to  revoke  the  Biocyte  patent  should  be  considered 
persuasive  authority.    In  the  past,  EPO  decisions  were  considered  irrelevant  in  the 
United  States  and  could  actually  work  against  an  American  decision  due  to  the 
underlying desire to remain independent and dominant to European law and practice.  
However,  there  is  a  new  emphasis  in  American  intellectual  property  law  for 
uniformity  of  law  internationally  in  order  to  foster  business  certainty.    In  a  recent 
case,  Eldred  v.  Ashcroft,  the  US  Supreme  Court  decided  in  favour  of  extending 
copyright  protection  partly  on  the  grounds  that  the  contested  extension mirrored  the 
protection provided by European copyright law.  This decision may act as a signal to 
federal judges that the US Supreme Court favours continuity with European Law so 
there is a chance that, on this occasion, the EPO decision may influence American law 
as the time would seem right. 

The revocation of the  PharmaStem European Patent will not affect the patenting of 
possible cell therapies, derived from the pluripotent stem cells present in cord blood, 
for  which  purpose  several  European  biotech  companies  have  been  established 
alongside cord blood banks.  Pluripotent stem cells from cord blood would provide an 
uncontentious source for such innovations in comparison to embryonic stem cells  for 
which the UK Patent Office would allow a patent stating “…a number of reports from 
influential UK political, medical and scientific bodies in recent years has emphasised 
the enormous potential of stem cell research, including embryonic stem cell research, 
to deliver new treatments for a wide range of serious diseases.  This indicates that on 
balance  the  commercial  exploitation  of  inventions  concerning  human  embryonic 
pluripotent stem cells would not be contrary to public policy or morality in the United 
Kingdom.    Thus  the  Patent  Office  is  ready  to  grant patents  for inventions involving 
such cells provided they satisfy the normal requirements for patentability. 

In  2003  a  new  private  cord  blood  bank,  Stembanc,  was  established  operating  under 
licence to PharmaStem. 

134

 
 
8.  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Schipper LF, Brand A, Reniers N, Melief CJ, Willemze R, Fibbe WE.  
Differential maturation of megakaryocyte progenitor cells from cord blood and 
mobilized peripheral blood. 
Exp Hematol. 2003 Apr;31(4):324-30. 

Hagen SA, Craig DM, Martin PL, et al. 
Mechanically ventilated pediatric stem cell transplant recipients;  effect of cord blood 
transplant and organ dysfunction on outcome 
Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2003 Apr;4(2):206-13 

Locatelli F, Rocha V, Reed W, et al. 
Related umbilical cord blood transplantation in patients with thalassaemia and sickle 
cell disease 
Blood. 2003 Mar 15; 101(6): 2137-43 

Saito H.  
[Regenerative medicine for blood diseases] 
Nippon Rinsho. 2003 Mar;61(3):494-7. Japanese. 

Isoyama K, Ohnuma K, Kato K, Takahashi TA, Kai S, Kato S, Takanashi M, Sato N, 
Sato H, Kitajima K, Naoe T, Saito H, Nishihira H.  
Cord blood transplantation from unrelated donors: a preliminary report from the 
Japanese Cord Blood Bank Network. 
Leuk Lymphoma. 2003 Mar;44(3):429-38. 

Fernandez CV, Gordon K, Van den Hof M, Taweel S, Baylis F.  
Knowledge and attitudes of pregnant women with regard to collection, testing 
and banking of cord blood stem cells. 
CMAJ. 2003 Mar 18;168(6):695-8. 

Solves P, Moraga R, Saucedo E, Perales A, Soler MA, Larrea L, Mirabet V, Planelles 
D, Carbonell-Uberos F, Monleon J, Planells T, Guillen M, Andres A, Franco E.  
Comparison between two strategies for umbilical cord blood collection. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 2003 Feb;31(4):269-73. 

Nishihira H, Kato K, Isoyama K, Takahashi TA, Kai S, Kato S, Takanashi M, 
Sato N, Sato H, Kitajima K, Naoe T, Saito H.  
The Japanese cord blood bank network experience with cord blood transplantation 
from unrelated donors for haematological malignancies: an evaluation of 
graft-versus-host disease prophylaxis. 
Br J Haematol. 2003 Feb;120(3):516-22. 

Broxmeyer HE, Srour EF, Hangoc G, Cooper S, Anderson SA, Bodine DM 
High efficiency recovery of functional hematopoietic progenitor and stem cells from 
human cord blood cryopreserved for 15 years. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 2003 Jan21; 100(2):645-50 

135

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lee DL,  
Marrow Donor Registry and Cord Blood Bank in Taiwan,  
Int J Haematol, 2002, 76 (Supplement 1):  312-314 

Pan J, Zhou SL, Shen BJ, Yan WY, Xu R, Song DG.  
[Statistical analysis of 4000 umbilical cord blood units preserved in shandong 
cord blood bank] 
Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Jun;10(3):257-60. Chinese. 

Lasky LC, Lane TA, Miller JP, Lindgren B, Patterson HA, Haley NR, Ballen K. 
In utero or ex utero cord blood collection: which is better? 
Transfusion. 2002 Oct;42(10):1261-7. 

Laurenti L, Perrone MP, Bafti MS, Ferrari F, Screnci M, Pasqua I, Girelli G.  
HLA typing strategies in a cord blood bank. 
Haematologica. 2002 Aug;87(8):851-4. 

Pafumi C, Farina M, Maggi I, Russo A, Pernicone G, Bandiera S, Giardina P, 
Mangiafico L, Leonardi I, Calogero AE, Cianci A.  
Influence of the kind of delivery on umbilical cord blood collection. 
Haematologia (Budap). 2002;31(4):341-5. 

Migliaccio AR, Campisi S, Migliaccio G.  
Standardization of progenitor cell assay for cord blood banking. 
Ann Ist Super Sanita. 2001;37(4):595-600. 

Alonso JM 3rd, Regan DM, Johnson CE, Oliver DA, Fegan R, Lasky LC, Wall DA. 
A simple and reliable procedure for cord blood banking, processing, and 
freezing: St Louis and Ohio Cord Blood Bank experiences. 
Cytotherapy. 2001;3(6):429-33. 

Kurtzberg J, Wagner E L, Gindy L, et al., The COBLT study cord blood banking 
experience:  donor recruitment, collection, processing, testing and banking. 2001, 
ISHAGE 7th Annual Symposium 
(http://celltherapy.org/2001abstracts/OralPresentations/130  

Yang H, Acker JP, Hannon J, Miszta-Lane H, Akabutu JJ, McGann LE.  
Damage and protection of UC blood cells during cryopreservation. 
Cytotherapy. 2001;3(5):377-86. 

Reed W, Walters M, Trachtenberg E, Smith R, Lubin BH.  
Sibling donor cord blood banking for children with sickle cell disease. 
Pediatr Pathol Mol Med. 2001 Mar-Apr;20(2):167-74. 

Zhou SL, Song DG, Shen BJ, Pan J.  
[Quality Control in Umbilical Cord Blood Bank] 
Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2001 Mar;9(1):86-90. Chinese. 

136

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zhou SL, Shen BJ, Yan WY, Xu R, Pan J, Ma XF, Song DG.  
[Operating Procedure of Collection, Processing and Preservation of 3000 Units 
Umbilical Cord Blood in Shangdong Cord Blood Bank] 
Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2001 Jun;9(2):153-159. Chinese. 

Morales VH, Milone J, Etchegoyen O, Bordone J, Uranga A.  
[Umbilical cord hematopoietic progenitor cells bank] 
Medicina (B Aires). 2001;61(6):843-8. Spanish. 

Liao C, Liu B, Huang Y.  
[Establishment of cord blood stem cell bank and its clinical application] 
Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2001 Aug;22(8):411-4. Chinese. 

Proctor SJ, Dickinson AM, Parekh T, Chapman C. 
Umbilical Cord Blood Banks in the UK 
BMJ, 2001;323:60-61 

Lazzari L, Lucchi S, Montemurro T, Porretti L, Lopa R, Rebulla P, Sirchia G., 
Evaluation of the effect of cryopreservation on ex vivo expansion of 
hematopoietic progenitors from cord blood. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 2001 Oct;28(7):693-8. 

Ballen K, Broxmeyer HE, McCullough J, Piaciabello P, Rebulla P, Verfaillie CM, 
Wagner J 
Current Status of Cord Blood Banking in Transplantation in the United States and 
Europe 
BB&MT, 2001 Sept; 7:635-45 

Hows JM.  
Status of umbilical cord blood transplantation in the year 2001. 
J Clin Pathol. 2001 Jun;54(6):428-34. Review. 

Lecchi L, Rebulla P, Ratti I, Magri M, Garcea F, Marangoni F, Bertele T, 
Giordano R, Sirchia G.  
Outcomes of a program to evaluate mother and baby 6 months after umbilical cord 
blood donation. 
Transfusion. 2001 May;41(5):606-10. 

Reed W, Walters M, Lubin BH.  
Collection of sibling donor cord blood for children with thalassemia. 
J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2000 Nov-Dec;22(6):602-4. 

Ordemann R, Petzold K, Holig K, Schaffer B, Freude M, Mauersberger S, 
Ehninger G.  
[The Dresden Cord Blood Bank. Experiences of the Cord Blood Bank in Dresden, 
promoted by the German bone Marrow Donor Registry] 
Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2000 Nov 24;125(47):1424-8. German. 

137

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mao P, Liao C, Zhu Z, et Al.  
[ Umbilical cord blood stem cells transplantation from an unrelated donor into 
an adult with severe aplastic anemia] 
Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2000 Oct;21(10):533-6. Chinese 

Kato S, Nishihira H, Hara H, Kato K, Takahashi T, Sato N, Kodera Y, Saito 
H, Sato H, Takanashi M.  
Cord blood transplantation and cord blood bank in Japan. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 2000 May;25 Suppl 2:S68-70. 

Rendine S, Curtoni ES, di Celle PF, Berrino M, Bertola L, Barbanti M, 
Saracco P, Fazio L, Gay E, Dall'Omo AM.  
Analysis of the Turin umbilical cord blood bank registry. 
Transfusion. 2000 Jul;40(7):813-6. 

Donaldson C, Buchanan R, Webster J, Laundy V, Horsley H, Barron C, Anderson 
N, Bradley B, Hows J.  
Development of a district Cord Blood Bank: a model for cord blood banking in 
the National Health Service. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 2000 Apr;25(8):899-905. 

Brown J, Poles A, Brown CJ, Contreras M, Navarrete CV.  
HLA-A, -B and -DR antigen frequencies of the London Cord Blood Bank units 
differ from those found in established bone marrow donor registries. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 2000 Mar;25(5):475-81. 

Ordemann R, Petzold K, Holig K, Schaffer B, Mauersberger S, Ehninger G, Ehminger 
G.  
Experiences of the Dresdner Cord Blood Bank, supported by the Deutsche 
Knochenmarkspenderdatei. 
Semin Thromb Hemost. 1999;25(6):575-8. 

Takahashi TA, Xu Y.  
[Current status of cord blood banks in the world] 
Rinsho Byori. 1999 May;Suppl 110:34-40. Japanese. 

Sato N.  
[Quality control of cryopreserved cord blood cells for transplantation] 
Rinsho Byori. 1999 May;Suppl 110:28-33. Japanese. 

Kodera Y.  
[The current status and future aspects of umbilical cord blood banking system 
in Japan] 
Rinsho Byori. 1999 May;Suppl 110:11-5. Japanese. 

Yamamoto N.  
[Role of the government for development of umbilical cord blood bank system in 
Japan] 
Rinsho Byori. 1999 May;Suppl 110:1-6. Japanese. 

138

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kogler G, Somville T, Gobel U, Hakenberg P, Knipper A, Fischer J, Adams O, 
Krempe C, McKenzie C, Ruttgers H, Meier W, Bellmann O, Streng H, Ring A, 
Rosseck 
U, Rocha V, Wernet P.  
Haematopoietic transplant potential of unrelated and related cord blood: the 
first six years of the EUROCORD/NETCORD Bank Germany. 
Klin Padiatr. 1999 Jul-Aug;211(4):224-32. 

Enczmann J, Rinker M, Kiesel U, Kuhrober A, Kogler G, Nurnberger W, Gobel 
U, Wernet P.  
Donor selection process for allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
at the university hospital of Dusseldorf (1997-1998). 
Klin Padiatr. 1999 Jul-Aug;211(4):218-23. 

Kogler G, Nurnberger W, Fischer J, Niehues T, Somville T, Gobel U, Wernet P.  
Simultaneous cord blood transplantation of ex vivo expanded together with 
non-expanded cells for high risk leukemia. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1999 Aug;24(4):397-403. 

Sirchia G, Rebulla P.  
Placental/umbilical cord blood transplantation. 
Haematologica. 1999 Aug;84(8):738-47. Review. 

Armitage S, Warwick R, Fehily D, Navarrete C, Contreras M.  
Cord blood banking in London: the first 1000 collections. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1999 Jul;24(2):139-45. 

Rebulla P, Lecchi L, Porretti L, Poli F, Ratti I, Mozzi F, Sirchia G.  
Practical placental blood banking. 
Transfus Med Rev. 1999 Jul;13(3):205-26. Review. No abstract available. 

Sirchia G, Rebulla P, Tibaldi S, Lecchi L.  
Cost of umbilical cord blood units released for transplantation. 
Transfusion. 1999 Jun;39(6):645-50. 

Ende N, Lu S, Mack R, Ponzio NM.  
The feasibility of using blood bank-stored (4 degrees C) cord blood, unmatched 
for HLA for marrow transplantation. 
Am J Clin Pathol. 1999 Jun;111(6):773-81. 

Hurley CK, Wade JA, Oudshoorn M, Middleton D, Kukuruga D, Navarrete C, 
Christiansen F, Hegland J, Ren EC, Andersen I, Cleaver SA, Brautbar C, Raffoux C.  
A special report: histocompatibility testing guidelines for hematopoietic stem 
cell transplantation using volunteer donors. Quality Assurance and Donor 
Registries Working Groups of the World Marrow Donor Association. 
Hum Immunol. 1999 Apr;60(4):347-60. 

139

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jefferies LC, Albertus M, Morgan MA, Moolten D.  
High deferral rate for maternal-neonatal donor pairs for an allogeneic 
umbilical cord blood bank. 
Transfusion. 1999 Apr;39(4):415-9. 

Reems JA, Fujita D, Tyler T, Moldwin R, Smith SD.  
Obtaining an accepted Investigational New Drug application to operate an 
umbilical cord blood bank. 
Transfusion. 1999 Apr;39(4):357-63. 

Armitage S, Fehily D, Dickinson A, Chapman C, Navarrete C, Contreras M.  
Cord blood banking: volume reduction of cord blood units using a semi-automated 
closed system. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1999 Mar;23(5):505-9. 

Fraser JK, Cairo MS, Wagner EL, McCurdy PR, Baxter-Lowe LA, Carter SL, 
Kernan NA, Lill MC, Slone V, Wagner JE, Wallas CH, Kurtzberg J.  
Cord Blood Transplantation Study (COBLT): cord blood bank standard operating 
procedures. 
J Hematother. 1998 Dec;7(6):521-61. Review. 

Tichelli A, Surbek D, Huxol H, Schmolck C, John L, Wicki R, Hoffmann T, 
Wodnar-Filipowicz A, Passweg J, Kuhne T, Imbach P, Holzgreve W, Gratwohl A.  
[Establishing an umbilical cord blood bank for unrelated allogenic stem cell 
transplantation] 
Schweiz Med Wochenschr. 1998 Oct 17;128(42):1598-601. German. 

Nishihira H, Ohnuma K, Ikuta K, Isoyama K, Kinoshita A, Toyoda Y, Ohira M, 
Okamura J, Nakajima F.  
Unrelated umbilical cord-blood stem cell transplantation: a report from 
Kanagawa Cord Blood Bank, Japan. 
Int J Hematol. 1998 Aug;68(2):193-202. 

 [No authors listed]  
[Umbilical cord blood as a biological spare part. Experiences from a pilot project] at 
the Fredericia hospital] 
Ugeskr Laeger. 1998 Sep 14;160(38):5501-4. Danish. 

Tanaka Y, Hosoi G, Ishii T, Shimoyama T, Fujimura Y, Sako M.  
Successful engraftment of unrelated cord blood stem cells for familial 
erythrophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Kinki Cord Blood Bank. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1998 Sep;22(5):511-3. 

Prat I, Hernandez-Lamas C, Munoz M, Sanchez Gordo F, Ortiz M, Galeote A.  
Organization of an umbilical cord blood transplant program. 
Haematologica. 1998 Jul;83(7):667-9. 

van Rood JJ, Schipper RF, Bakker JN, van der Zanden HG, Oudshoorn M.  
Bone Marrow Donors Worldwide and cord blood stem cell transplantation. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1998 Jul;22 Suppl 1:S19-21. 

140

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hakenberg P, Kogler G, Wernet P.  
NETCORD: a cord blood allocation network. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1998 Jul;22 Suppl 1:S17-8. 

Kogler G, Sarnowski A, Wernet P.  
Volume reduction of cord blood by Hetastarch for long-term stem cell banking. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1998 Jul;22 Suppl 1:S14-5. 

Pojda Z, Machaj E, Debski R, Oldak T, Cesarz R, Krawczyk E, Braun B.  
Organization of the cord blood bank in Warsaw, Poland: current status and future 
prospects. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1998 Jul;22 Suppl 1:S13. 

Dal Cortivo L, Marolleau JP, Gluckman E, Chavinie J, Brossard Y, Benbunan 
M.  
The Paris Cord Blood Bank. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1998 Jul;22 Suppl 1:S11 

Jacobs HC, Falkenburg JH.  
Umbilical cord blood banking in The Netherlands. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1998 Jul;22 Suppl 1:S8-10. 

Navarrete C, Warwick R, Armitage S, Fehily D, Contreras M.  
The London Cord Blood Bank. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1998 Jul;22 Suppl 1:S6-7. 

Querol S, Gabarro M, Amat L, Gonzalez S, Gomez MD, de la Calle O, Madoz P, 
Badell I, Garcia J.  
The placental blood program of the Barcelona Cord Blood Bank. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1998 Jul;22 Suppl 1:S3-5. 

Querol S, Capmany G, Cancelas JA, Garcia J.  
Expansion of cord blood progenitor cells. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1998 Jun;21 Suppl 3:S77-80. 

Kogler G, Callejas J, Sorg RV, Wernet P.  
An eight-fold ex vivo expansion of long-term culture-initiating cells from 
umbilical cord blood in stirred suspension cultures. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1998 Jun;21 Suppl 3:S48-53. 

Sirchia G, Rebulla P, Mozzi F, Lecchi L, Lazzari L, Ratti I.  
A quality system for placental blood banking. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1998 Jun;21 Suppl 3:S43-7. Review. 

Warwick RM, Barbara JA.  
Safety aspects of cord blood banking. 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1998 Jun;21 Suppl 3:S40-2. Review. 

141

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gluckman E, Rocha V, Chastang C.  
Cord blood banking and transplant in Europe. Eurocord. 
Vox Sang. 1998;74 Suppl 2:95-101. Review. 

Ikuta K.  
[Cord blood stem cell transplantation and cord blood bank] 
Nippon Rinsho. 1998 Feb;56(2):521-30. Review. Japanese. 

Wall DA, Noffsinger JM, Mueckl KA, Alonso JM 3rd, Regan DM, Johnson CE, 
Weinstein DL, Duarte LM, Winn HN.  
Feasibility of an obstetrician-based cord blood collection network for 
unrelated donor umbilical cord blood banking. 
J Matern Fetal Med. 1997 Nov-Dec;6(6):320-3. 

Lu S, Ende N.  
Potential for clinical use of viable pluripotent progenitor cells in blood bank 
stored human umbilical cord blood. 
Life Sci. 1997;61(12):1113-23. 

Bharucha C, Elliott S, Campbell D, Hunter R, McComb L.  
The Belfast Cord Blood Bank. 
Ulster Med J. 1997 May;66(1):9-12. 

Ohnuma K, Toyoda Y, Nishihira H, Iguchi A, Honda K, Nagao T, Kigasawa H.  
Successful engraftment of sibling cord-blood stem cell transplantation in a 
child with acute promyelocytic leukemia. 
Int J Hematol. 1996 Oct;64(3-4):271-8. 

Iwai S, Takanashi M, Ide T, Tsukui K, Ueda M, Nakajima K, Tadokoro K, Juji T.  
[Trials and analysis of umbilical cord blood collection, separation and 
cryopreservation methods for transplantation] 
Rinsho Ketsueki. 1996 Apr;37(4):288-96. Japanese. 

O'Neil B.  
Implementing a validation program in a cord blood bank. 
J Hematother. 1996 Apr;5(2):139-43. 

Meng GM.  
Issues in the development of a local cord blood bank. 
J Hematother. 1996 Apr;5(2):129-33. 

Harris DT.  
Experience in autologous and allogeneic cord blood banking. 
J Hematother. 1996 Apr;5(2):123-8. 

Lazzari L, Corsini C, Curioni C, Lecchi L, Scalamogna M, Rebulla P, Sirchia G.  
The Milan Cord Blood Bank and the Italian Cord Blood Network. 
J Hematother. 1996 Apr;5(2):117-22. 

142

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kogler G, Callejas J, Hakenberg P, Enczmann J, Adams O, Daubener W, Krempe C, 
Gobel U, Somville T, Wernet P.  
Hematopoietic transplant potential of unrelated cord blood: critical issues. 
J Hematother. 1996 Apr;5(2):105-16. 

Varadi G, Elchalal U, Brautbar C, Nagler A.  
Human umbilical cord blood for hematopoietic progenitor cells transplantation. 
Leuk Lymphoma. 1995 Dec;20(1-2):51-8. Review. 

McCullough J, Clay ME, Fautsch S, Noreen H, Segall M, Perry E, Stroncek D.  
Proposed policies and procedures for the establishment of a cord blood bank. 
Blood Cells. 1994;20(2-3):609-26. 

Bertolini F, Lazzari L, Corsini C, Lauri E, Gorini F, Sirchia G.  
Cord blood banking for stem cell transplant. 
Int J Artif Organs. 1993 Dec;16 Suppl 5:111-2. 

Gluckman E.  
[Umbilical cord blood bank for transplantation of hematopoietic stem cells in 
man] 
Nouv Rev Fr Hematol. 1993 Jun;35(3):293-4. French. No abstract available. 

Gluckman E.  
Cord blood banking for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. 
Nouv Rev Fr Hematol. 1993 Feb;35(1):77-9. 

Gluckman E, Thierry D, Traineau R.  
Blood banking for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. 
J Hematother. 1993 Summer;2(2):269-70. 

Raffoux C, Gluckman E.  
Suggested strategies for establishing an HLA-typed cord blood bank. 
J Hematother. 1993 Summer;2(2):263-4. No abstract available. 

Hows JM, Marsh JC, Bradley BA, Luft T, Coutinho L, Testa NG, Dexter TM.  
Human cord blood: a source of transplantable stem cells? 
Bone Marrow Transplant. 1992;9 Suppl 1:105-8. 

143

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
]

2

[

]

2

[

]

4

[

]

2

[

]

2

[

]

4

[

]

4

[

]

2

[

]

2

[

]

2

[

]

6

[

]

4

[

]

2

[

]

2

[

]

2

[

]

4

[

]

2

[

]

2

[

]

2

[

]

4

[

]

4

[

]

5

[

]

2

[

]

2

[

Annex 1

A
S
U

,

d
r
o
c
a
V

i

t

n
e
m

t
f

a
r
g
n
e

l
l
i
t

n
u

s
y
a
d

4
2

0
3

.

2

0
6
.
0
1

5
0
1

d
o
o
b

l

a

i
l
i

s
a
r

B

,

l

o
u
a
P

o
a
S

l

a

t
i

p
s
o
H

A
S
U

,

d
r
o
c
a
V

i

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

y
r
o

t

a
r
i
p
s
e
r

m
o
r
f

s
y
a
d

4
2

r
e

t
f

a

d
e
d

i

s
n
o

i
t

a
c

i
l

p
m
o
c

A
S
U

,

d
r
o
c
a
V

i

d

l
i

h
c

,
t

n
e
m

t
f

a
r
g
n
e

l
l
i
t

n
u

s
y
a
d

3
1

0
1

.

1

0
1
.
7

9
5

d
o
o
b

l

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

n
e

i

t
s
n
E

i

t
r
e
b
A

l

r
e
h

t

o
r
b

e
h

t

r
o

f

d
e

t

a
n
o
d

s
a
w
d
o
o
b

l

6
2
.
7

6
2
.
3

0
7
.
8

0
6

0
7

0
4
1

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

0
3

2
1

4
1

8
9
9
1
/
3
0
/
1
1

8
9
9
1
/
8
0
/
9
1

8
9
9
1
/
0
1
/
0
3

9
9
9
1
/
8
9
9
1

i

a
m
e
a
k
u
e

l

m
o
r
f

g
n
i
r
e

f
f

u
s

t

n
e
m

t
f

a
r
g
n
e

l
l
i
t

n
u

s
y
a
d

7
1

0
0

.

6
1

0
1
.
5
1

3
1
1

d
o
o
b

l

e
c
r
u
o
S

r
e
r
o
t

S

s

l
i

a
t
e
d
r
e
h
t
O

/

+
4
3
D
C

/

C
N
M

/
e
m
u
o
V

l

l
e
p
m
a
S

/
e
g
a
r
o
t

S

e
t
a
d
-

X
T

e
g
A

t
n
e
i
t
a
P

5
h
0
1
x

8
h
0
1
x

l

m

s
h
t
n
o
m

)
e
t
a
d
-
X
T
y
b

d
e
t
r
o
s
(

s

l
i

a
t
e
d

h
t
i

w
X
T
-

B
C
9
3

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

d
r
o
c
a
V

i

t

n
e
m

t
f

a
r
g
n
e

l
l
i
t

n
u

s
y
a
d

5
4

0
4

.

2

0
0
.
9

0
4
.
7

6
9
.
3

8
6
.
6

0
0
.
0
1

A
S
U

,

d
r
o
c
a
V

i

t

n
e
m

t
f

a
r
g
n
e

l
l
i
t

n
u

s
y
a
d

0
3

0
5

.

9

0
2
.
4
1

5
0
1

8
6
1

1
6

6
5

6
0
1

8
5
1

d
o
o
b

l

d
o
o
b

l

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

2
1

4
1

3

2

6

4

1

5
9
9
1
/
6
0
/
9

3
9
9
1
/
2
1
/
6
1

6
9
9
1
/
6
0
/
0
2

6
9
9
1
/
7
0
/
4
2

7
9
9
1
/
1
0
/
6

7
9
9
1
/
1
1
/
4
1

s
r
a
e
y

7

7
9
9
1
/
2
1
/
4
2

s
r
a
e
y

3

r
e
t
s
s

i

r
e
h
t
o
r
b

h
c
i
r
d
A

l

-
t
t

o
c
s
W

i

3
0
0
2

.

1
0

.

4
1

:
s
u

t

t

a
S

B
C
d
e
r
o
t
s
y
l
e
t
a
v
i
r
p
f
o
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
a
l
p
s
n
a
r
T

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

r
e
t
s
s

i

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

:

1

l

e
b
a
T

e
s
a
e
s
D

i

L
M
C

S
D
M

L
L
A

L
L
A

L
M
A

e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s

L
M
A

L
L
A

L
M
A

L
M
A

A
S
U

,

d
r
o
c
a
V

i

t

n
e
m

t
f

a
r
g
n
e

l
l
i
t

n
u

s
y
a
d

5
4

7
3

.

0

0
2
.
6

A
S
U

,

d
r
o
c
a
V

i

t

n
e
m

t
f

a
r
g
n
e

l
l
i
t

n
u

s
y
a
d

0
1

0
9

.

4

0
1
.
4
1

2
0
1

n

i

l

a

t
i

p
s
o
H

a
d
a
n
a
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

e
g
a
r
o

t
s

e

t

a
v
i
r
p

1
0
0
2
/
4
0
/
9
1

s
h
t
n
o
m
1
1

s
u
o
g
o
o
t
u
a

l

a
m
o

l

t
s
a
b
-
o
n

i
t

e
R

6
0
.
3

8
7
.
3

1
6

2
7

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

5
3

1
1

1
0
0
2
/
6
0
/
1

1
0
0
2
/
5
0
/
8
1

r
e
h
t
o
m

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

)
y
o
b
(

L
M
C

L
L
A

0
6
.
3

8
1
.
5

5
6
.
2

5
3

0
9

7
2

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

0
1

2
1
.
4

5
9
.
3

0
0
.
0
1

8
3
1

5
5

3
6

6
4

d
o
o
b

l

d
o
o
b

l

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

7

8

5

4
2

8
4

3
2

2

2
1

1
2

0
0
0
2
/
2
0
/
2
1

0
0
0
2
/
5
0
/
0
1

0
0
0
2
/
7
0
/
7
2

9
9
9
1
/
1
1
/
2

9
9
9
1
/
1
1
/
9
2

0
0
0
2
/
1
0
/
2
2

0
0
0
2
/
2
0
/
2

s
r
a
e
y

8

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

i

a
m
e
s
s
a
a
h
T

l

L
L
A

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

i

a
m
e
a
n
a

i

n
o
c
n
a
F

r
e
t
s
s

i

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

i

a
m
e
a
n
a

l
l

e
c

L
L
A

L
L
A

l

e
k
c
S

i

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

e
m
o
r
d
n
y
s

r
e
l
r
u
H

9
9
9
1
/
6
0
/
5
1

s
r
a
e
y

4

r
e
h
t
o
r
b

i

a
m
e
a
n
a

i

n
o
c
n
a
F

145

0
0
0
2
/
2
1
/
4
1

s
r
a
e
y

4

r
e
t
s
s

i

i

a
m
e
s
s
a
a
h
T

l

1
0
0
2
/
4
0
/
2

s
r
a
e
y

2

s
u
o
g
o
o
t
u
a

l

i

a
m
e
a
n
a

c
i
t
s
a
p
A

l

)
y
o
b
(

j

r
o
a
m

s
h
t
n
o
m
4
1

)
l
r
i
g
(

s
u
o
g
o
o
t
u
a

l

a
m
o

l

t
s
a
b
o
r
u
e
N

V

I

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
]

2

[

]

4

[

]

2

[

]

2

[

]

4

[

]

2

[

]

2

[

]

2

[

]

4

[

]

4

[

]

2

[

]

2

[

]

2

[

]

2

[

A
S
U

,
l
l

e
C
-
o
y
r
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

)
3
0
0
2
(

m
o
c
.

e
c
r
u
o
S

r
e
r
o
t

S

s

l
i

a
t
e
d
r
e
h
t
O

/

+
4
3
D
C

/

C
N
M

/
e
m
u
o
V

l

l
e
p
m
a
S

/
e
g
a
r
o
t

S

e
t
a
d
-

X
T

e
g
A

t
n
e
i
t
a
P

e
s
a
e
s
D

i

5
h
0
1
x

8
h
0
1
x

l

m

s
h
t
n
o
m

A
S
U

,

d
r
o
c
a
V

i

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

d
r
o
c
a
V

i

t

n
e
m

t
f

a
r
g
n
e

l
l
i
t

n
u

s
y
a
d

7
5

5
2

.

0

0
1
.
4

A
S
U

,

d
r
o
c
a
V

i

,
t

n
e
m

t
f

a
r
g
n
e

l
l
i
t

n
u

s
y
a
d

4
2

7
0

.

0

t

l

n
a
p
s
n
a
r
t

C
S
M
B
d
e
d
u
c
n

l

i

A
S
U

,

d
r
o
c
a
V

i

t

n
e
m

t
f

a
r
g
n
e

l
l
i
t

n
u

s
y
a
d

1
5

6
8

.

0

0
2
.
7

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

A
S
U

,

R
B
C

m
o
r
f

X
T
r
e

t
f

a

l

i

d
e
d
y
b
s
s
o
p

i

t

n
e

i
t

a
p

5
1
.
3

n
o

i
t
c
e

f

n

i

0
0
.
0
1

5
1
1

5
8
.
7

0
0
.
0
1

6
7
.
5

0
1
.
1

9
7

8
9

1
5

2
5

7
9

4
1

3
6

t

l

n
a
p
s
n
a
r
t

C
S
B
P
d
e
d
u
c
n

l

i

,
t

n
e
m

t
f

a
r
g
n
e

l
l
i
t

n
u

s
y
a
d

3
1

0
4

.

5

0
6
.
7

0
8
.
0
1

7
8

0
2
1

d
o
o
b

l

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
o
o
b

l

4
2

7
2

1

7
2

9
6

1
0
0
2
/
6
0
/
4
1

1
0
0
2
/
6
0
/
7
2

1
0
0
2
/
8
0
/
5
2

1
0
0
2
/
0
1
/
4
2

s
r
a
e
y

0
1

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

r
e
t
s
s

i

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

.
t
s
a
p
a

l

e
r
e
v
e
S

L
L
A

i

a
m
e
a
n
a

L
M
A

l
l

e
c

l

e
k
c
S

i

1
0
0
2
/
2
1
/
1
1

s
r
a
e
y

6

)
l
r
i
g
(

s
u
o
g
o
o
t
u
a

l

a
m
o

l

t
s
a
b
o
r
u
e
N

i

a
m
e
a
n
a

V

I

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

3
3

2
0
0
2
/
1
0
/
1
3

s
u
o
g
o
o
t
u
a

l

.
t
s
a
p
a

l

e
r
e
v
e
S

d
o
o
b

l

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

3

5

6
1

2
0
0
2
/
2
0
/
3
1

2
0
0
2
/
3
0
/
8
1

2
0
0
2
/
4
0
/
3
2

s
r
a
e
y

3

r
e
t
s
s

i

i

a
m
e
a
n
a

i

n
o
c
n
a
F

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

i

a
m
e
a
n
a

L
L
A

L
L
A

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

2
1

2
0
0
2
/
4
0
/
5
2

s
r
a
e
y

6

r
e
h
t
o
r
b

-
u
n
a
r
G
c
n
o
r
h
C

i

2
9
.
3

5
3
.
5

4
6

7
0
.
4

0
7
.
8

5
6
.
7

3
0
.
7

6
7

8
2
1

7
2
1

5
8

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

2

2

3

6

9

5
1

2
0
0
2
/
4
0
/
0
3

2
0
0
2
/
5
0
/
0
1

2
0
0
2
/
7
0
/
1

2
0
0
2
/
0
1
/
3

2
0
0
2
/
1
1
/
4
1

s
r
a
e
y

3

r
e
h
t
o
r
b

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

g
n

i
l

b
s

i

s
u
o

t

a
m
o

l

e
s
a
e
s
D

i

L
L
A

l
l

e
c

l

e
k
c
S

i

i

a
m
e
a
n
a

L
L
A

L
L
A

L
L
A

e
g
a
r
e
v
A

146

)
1
0
0
2
(

p
s
a

.
s
e
v
a
e
e
s
s
e

l

j
/
s
e
s
a
e
e
r
/

l

a
c
.

n
o

i

.
s
d
k
k
c
s
.
w
w
w

i

:

n
e
r
d

l
i

h
C
k
c
S

i

r
o
f

l

a
t
i
p
s
o
H

]
5
[

1
4
0
1

:
)
9
(
4
2

,

T
M
B

.

n
o

i
t

a

t

l

n
a
p
s
n
a
r
t

d
o
o
b

l

d
r
o
c

s
u
o
s
u
o
g
o
o
t
u
a

l

:
.
l
a

t
e
E
a
r
i
e
r
r
e
F

]
6
[

)
3
0
0
2
(

m
o
c
.
l
l

e
c
-
o
y
r
c
.
w
w
w

:
l
l

e
C
-
o
y
r
C

]
3
[

)
3
0
0
2
(

m
o
c
.
d
r
o
c
a
v
.
w
w
w

i

:
d
r
o
C
a
V

i

]
4
[

l

d
o
o
b
d
r
o
c
e
d
u
g
s
t

i

n
e
r
a
p
w
w
w

.

:

l

d
o
o
B
d
r
o
C
e
d
u
G
s
'
t
n
e
r
a
P

i

)
3
0
0
2
(

m
o
c
.

l

d
o
o
b
d
r
o
c
.
w
w
w

i

:
y
r
t
s
g
e
R
d
o
o
B
d
r
o
C

l

]
1
[

]
2
[

:
s
e
c
r
u
o
S

l

s
n
a
u
g
a
o
k
i
t
n
a

t
u
o
h
t
i

w
e
m
u
o
v

l

y
l
n
o
d
r
o
c
a
i
V

f
o
a
t
a
d

e
r
u
c
e
s
n

i

a
t
a
d

]
1
[

]
1
[

]
2
[

]
1
[

]
3
[

]
1
[

]
1
[

]
4
[

]
6

,
5
[

3
1

3
1

3
2

1

1

3

3

2

1
1

0
7

n
w
o
n
k
n
u
e
t
a
d
-
X
T
e
t
a
r
u
c
c
a

:
s
e
t
o
N

e
c
r
u
o
S
X
T

)

R
B
C

(

i

y
r
t
s
g
e
R
d
o
o
B
d
r
o
C

l

X
T
-

B
C

l
l

A

:

2

l

e
b
a
T

y
t
i
l
i

c
a
f

e
g
a
r
o
t

S

l
l

e
C
r
o
C

s
r
e
n
t
r
a
P
d
o
o
B
d
r
o
C

l

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
n
r
e

t

n

I

s
k
n
a
b
o
y
r
C

l
l

e
C
-
o
y
r
C

k
n
a
B
B
C
d
n
a
g
n
E
w
e
N

l

l
l

e
c
a
r
u
c
e
S

d
r
o
c
a
V

i

s
r
e
h
O

t

l

a
t
o
T

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cord Blood Registry Samples: Transplant Experience  

The following chart outlines more information about each transplant: 

Annex 2 

# 

Transplant 
Date 

Disease 

Relation- 
ship 

Collection
Volume 

Number of
Cells 
Stored 

Time 
Stored 

Transplant Hospital 

1 

12/16/93  CML 

Sibling 

105cc 

1 billion 

2 mths 

University of Minnesota, MN

2 

6/9/95 

MDS 

Sibling 

168cc 

3 

7/24/96 

ALL 

Sibling 

56cc 

4 

1/6/97 

AML 

Sibling 

106cc 

5 

3/11/98 

ALL 

Sibling 

140cc 

6 

8/19/98 

AML 

Sibling 

60cc 

7 

10/30/98  ANL 

Sibling 

70cc 

8 

11/2/99 

ALL 

Sibling  

35cc 

9 

11/29/99 

Thalassemia 

Sibling 

90cc 

10  1/22/00 

Fanconi's 
Anemia 

Sibling 

27cc 

900 
million 

396 
million 

668 
million 

726 
million 

326 
million 

870 
million 

360 
million 

518 
million 

265 
million 

11  2/12/00 

ALL 

Sibling 

138cc 

1 billion 

4 yrs 

12  5/10/00 

ALL 

Sibling 

55cc 

13  7/27/00 

Hurler 
Syndrome 

Sibling 

63cc 

14  5/18/01 

CML 

Mother 

61cc 

15  6/1/01 

ALL 

Sibling 

72cc 

16  6/14/01 

ALL 

Sibling 

120cc 

412 
million 

395 
million 

306 
million 

378 
million 

760 
million 

1 yr 11 
mths 

2 mths 

2 yrs 11 
mths 

11 mths  

2 yrs 

1 yr 2 mths  University Medical Center, 
Tucson, AZ 

2 mths 

6 mths 

2 yrs 6 
mths 

1 mth 

University Medical Center, 
Tucson, AZ 

Childrens Hospital Los 
Angeles, CA 

Kaiser Hospital, Los 
Angeles, CA 

Stanford Medical Center, CA

1 yr 2 mths  University of Michigan 

Medical Center, Ann Arbor, 
MI 

8 mths 

University Medical Center, 
Tucson, AZ 

5 mths 

10 mths 

University Medical Center, 
Tucson, AZ 

University Medical Center, 
Tucson, AZ 

Devos Childrens Hospital, 
Grand Rapids, MI 

Childrens Hospital of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 

Childrens Medical Center of 
Dallas, TX 

MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX 

University Medical Center, 
Tucson, AZ 

Childrens Hospital of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA 

17  8/15/01 

AML 

Sibling 

79cc 

1 billion 

less than 1 
mth 

City of Hope Hospital, 
Duarte, CA 

18  10/24/01  Sickle Cell 

Sibling 

98cc 

Anemia 

19  1/31/02 

Aplastic Anemia  Self 

52cc 

785 
million 

315 
million 

2 yrs 5 
mths 

2 yrs 9 
mths 

20  2/13/02 

ALL 

Sibling 

115cc 

1 billion 

3 mths 

University of Michigan, MI 

University of Minnesota, MN

City of Hope Hospital, 
Duarte, CA 

147

 
 
 
21  3/18/02 

ALL 

Sibling 

97cc 

22  5/10/02 

Sickle Cell 
Anemia 

Sibling 

64cc 

23  7/1/02 

ALL 

Sibling 

76cc 

24  10/03/02  ALL 

Sibling 

128cc 

25  11/14/02  ALL 

Sibling 

127cc 

26  12/18/02  Beta 

Sibling 

98cc 

Thalassemia 

576 
million 

535 
million 

407 
million 

870 
million 

765 
million 

773 
million 

5 mths 

Childrens Hospital Los 
Angeles, CA 

2 mths 

Medical City Dallas, TX 

3 mths 

San Diego Childrens 
Hospital, CA 

6 weeks 

UCLA Medical Center, CA 

9 months 

5 months 

Childrens Hospital, Los 
Angeles, CA 

University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI 

148

 
Annex 3 

________________________________________________________________________ 

WORLD MARROW DONOR ASSOCIATION 
INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS FOR 
UNRELATED HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL DONOR REGISTRIES 
________________________________________________________________________ 

Revised November 8, 2001 and approved January, 2002 
Revised May 30, 2002 and approved October 10, 2002 

Note: The words “certification” and “credentialing” have replaced the word 
“accreditation”. The precise words will be determined once this document has been 
reviewed by the WMDA lawyer. 

K:\www.worldmarrow.org\Download\WMDAInternationalStandards.doc 

149

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These standards are aimed at enhancing the quality of Registries assisting the grafting 
physician responsible for patient treatment in the international search for an unrelated 
donor  for  their  patient.  Credentialing  of  individual  Registries  by  the  World  Marrow 
Donor  Association  (WMDA)  is  an  indication  that  these  Registries  are  committed  to 
follow  WMDA  standards.  These  standards  promote  the  quality  of  procedures 
necessary to obtain, in the shortest possible time, the appropriate quality and quantity 
of  hematopoietic  stem  cells  of  the  best  unrelated  donor  suitable  for  engrafting  a 
patient while protecting the anonymity, health and well being of the volunteer donors. 
These  standards  are  based  on  recommendations  previously  published  [Goldman  J., 
Special Report: bone marrow transplants using volunteer donors – recommendations 
and  requirements  for  a  standardized  practice  throughout  the  world  –  1994  update. 
Blood 84:2833-2839, 1994.] 

I. OVERVIEW AND DEFINITIONS 

1.0 These standards are intended to provide minimum criteria for obtaining WMDA 
certification. 
1.01.  In  the  initial  implementation  of  the  credentialing  process  by  WMDA,  specific 
“benchmark” standards have been identified which must be met by a registry seeking 
certification.  These  standards  have  been  indicated  in  bold.  Other  standards,  not  in 
bold,  are  not  required  during  the  initial  implementation  process.  Registries  certified 
during  the  initial  implementation  period  will  be  granted  a  “pilot”  certification  status 
based  on  their  commitment  to  adhere  to  the  “benchmark”  standards.  The  WMDA 
Board  will  establish  the  length  of  the  initial  implementation  period.  Following  the 
initial  implementation  phase,  requirements  to  meet  specific  standards  will  follow 
standard 1.02. 
1.02.  After  the  initial  implementation  period  is  completed,  the  words  “must”  and 
“shall”  indicate  that  deviations  are  not  acceptable.  There  will  be  no  difference 
between bolded benchmark standards and non-bolded standards containing the words 
“must” and “shall”. “Should”, “might”, and “may” are used for recommendations that 
are  not  mandatory.  1.03.  If  national  laws  and  regulations  differ  from  the  WMDA 
standards,  the  requirement  to  meet  local  legal  standards  will  be  accepted  as  a  valid 
cause for variation from WMDA standards. 

2.0 Definitions 

World Marrow Donor Association (WMDA): An international non-profit organization 
which promotes the definition and standardization of ethical, technical, medical, and 
financial  aspects  of  hematopoietic  stem  cell  transplantation  involving  volunteer 
donors  in  one  country  who  give  hematopoietic  stem  cells  to  unrelated  patients  in 
another  country.  WMDA  Board:  The  board  includes  the  President,  Vice-Presidents, 
Secretaries, Treasurer, 
and Chairs of the WMDA Working Groups. 

Note:  The  institutions  providing  hematopoietic  stem  cells  to  a  patient  in  another 
country  vary  in  their  organizational  structures.  The  definitions  below  are  aimed  at 
defining  the  individual  elements  which  comprise  this  effort  and  are  not  intended  to 
indicate the requirement for a specific organizational structure. 

150

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Registry:  A  Registry  is  a  national  organization  whose  responsibility  is  to  process 
requests for hematopoietic stem cells from donors originating from within the country 
and  emanating  from  abroad.  The  Registry  may  coordinate  the  activities  of  Donor, 
Collection, and Transplant Centers in the respective country. 

Donors: Donors are defined as (1) Volunteer adult donors of hematopoietic stem cells 
or 
(2) Umbilical cord blood units collected after maternal permission. 

 Donor  Center:  The  Donor  Center  is  the  organization  responsible  for  recruiting, 
consenting,  counseling,  and  coordinating  the  testing  of  prospective  donors.  The 
Center  monitors  the  short  and  long  term  health  of  adult  volunteer  donors  who  have 
provided hematopoietic stem cells. The Donor Center maintains a register or database 
of donors, which may be searched as appropriate. 

Cord  Blood  Bank:  A  Donor  Center  whose  sole  mission  is  to  collect  and  maintain 
umbilical cord blood units is termed a Cord Blood Bank and may combine some or all 
of the activities of both a Donor Center and a Collection Center. For example, a Cord 
Blood  Bank  may  be  responsible  for  donor  recruitment,  cord  blood  collection,  and 
storage but the database of donors might be maintained by a Registry. Alternatively, 
the  Cord  Blood  Bank  might  include  all  of  these  activities  and  perform  searches  for 
Transplant Centers.  

Collection  Center:  The  Collection  Center 
the  medical  facility  at  which 
hematopoietic  stem  cell  collection  from  selected  donors  actually  takes  place.  This 
collection  might  include  marrow  aspiration  or  apheresis.  The  Collection  Center 
performs  the  medical  work-up  of  the  donor  and  provides  the  final  approval  of  the 
donor  for  harvest.  If  umbilical  cord  blood  is  collected,  the  Center  is  responsible  for 
processing and storage of the cord blood unit. 

is 

Transplant  Center:  The  Transplant  Center  is  the  medical  facility  at  which  a  patient 
(recipient)  receives  a  transplant  (graft)  with  hematopoietic  stem  cells  from  an 
unrelated  donor  or  from  an  umbilical  cord  blood  unit.  The  Center  oversees  the 
immediate medical treatment and provides long-term follow-up of the recipient. The 
Search  Unit  undertakes  the  search  for  an  unrelated  donor  for  specific  patients.  This 
entity  may  be  contained  within  a  Transplant  Center  or  may  be  separate  from  the 
Transplant  Center.  If  separate,  the  Search  Unit  may  coordinate  searches  for  one  or 
several Transplant Centers. In the standards, reference to a Transplant Center should 
be interpreted as a Transplant Center and/or a Search Unit as appropriate. Transplant 
Centers/Search  Units  seeking  an  international  donor  work  through  the  Registry  in 
their country. 

Testing Laboratories: These laboratories perform the histocompatibility, blood group, 
infectious disease, and other testing of the prospective donors and patients. They may 
be  under  the  direction  of  a  Registry,  Donor  Center  or  Transplant  Center  or  may  be 
separate from these entities. 

Blood  Bank:  A  Blood  Bank  is  a  medical  facility  at  which  blood  intended  for 
transfusion is drawn and stored. 

151

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Confirmatory  Typing  (CT):  This  typing  includes  the  tests  carried  out  on  a  specific 
donor when hematopoietic stem cells from that donor are requested by the Transplant 
Center to determine the appropriateness of using that donor for a specific patient. 

Work-Up:  At  this  stage,  a  volunteer  has  been  identified  as  a  match  for  a  patient, 
agrees to donate hematopoietic stem cells, and is medically evaluated for their fitness 
to donate stem cells. 

II. STANDARDS 

1.0 General 

1.01 A Registry which provides hematopoietic stem cells obtained from an individual 
recruited by that organization as a volunteer donor to a patient in another country and 
facilitates  exchanges  on  behalf  of  Transplant  Centers  in  its  country  is  eligible  for 
certification by the WMDA. 
1.01.1  An  organization  which  intends  to  provide  stem  cells  or  intends  to  facilitates 
exchanges but has not yet done so is eligible for certification by the WMDA provided 
that the organization can provide satisfactory documentation of their ability to provide 
stem cells to patients within their own country following WMDA standards. 
1.02  If  a  Registry  is  credentialed  for  international  exchange  of  hematopoietic  stem 
cells  by  an  international  organization  with  standards  that  meet  or  exceed  WMDA 
standards,  that  Registry  may  be  given  WMDA  certification  following  submission  of 
material documenting that certification. 
1.03 If a Registry relies on other entities to perform some of the duties described in 
these  standards,  it  is  the  responsibility  of  the  Registry  to  ensure  that  these  entities 
comply with WMDA standards. 
1.03.1  If  a  Registry  relies  on  an  independent  Donor  Center  to  recruit  donors,  the 
Registry  must  ensure  that  the  Donor  Center  complies  with  WMDA  standards 
concerning donor recruitment and characterization. 
1.03.2 The Registry must ensure that Transplant Centers affiliated with  the Registry 
and  requesting a donor from another country  meet standards designed to insure that 
donation  of  hematopoietic  stem  cells  will  only  be  requested  for  patients  for  whom 
transplantation is a medically acceptable procedure. 
1.03.2.1  The  Registry  shall  have  established  standards  for  Transplant  Centers  that 
shall be public. 
1.03.3  If  a  Registry  relies  on  an  independent  Collection  Center  for  the  follow-up  of 
donors or for collection of donor samples, for example, the Registry must ensure that 
the Collection Center complies with WMDA standards in these areas. 
1.03.4 These standards may be defined by the Registry or by an appropriate national 
or international organization. 
1.03.5 The nature of these affiliations and the duties and responsibilities of each entity 
must be documented. 
1.04 The Registry should abide by other WMDA recommendations in further detail as 
far as they do not contradict national laws and regulations.  

2.0 General organization of the Registry 

2.01  The  Registry  must  be  a  legal  entity  or  be  contained  within  a  legal  entity 
operating within the laws of the country in which the Registry resides. 

152

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.02  The  Authorized  Official  of  the  legal  entity  is  responsible  for  ensuring  the 
Registry’s compliance with the WMDA standards and must authorize all official 
documents related to WMDA certification. 
2.03  The  Director  or  key  Registry  personnel  must  have  demonstrated  experience  in 
program administration in a health care setting. 
2.04  The  Director  or  key  Registry  personnel  or  consultants  must  have  a  sound 
knowledge  of  human  histocompatibility  and  hematopoietic 
stem  cell 
transplantation.  At  least  one  of  these  individuals  must  be  a  physician.  These 
individuals  must  possess  a  basic  understanding  of  diseases  treatable  by 
hematopoietic  stem  cell  transplantation,  comprehend  alternative  therapies  and 
donor  search  problems  associated  with  these  diseases,  understand  HLA 
specificities  (serologic,  cellular,  and  DNA-based)  and  haplotypes,  and  possess  a 
knowledge of Transplant Center, Donor Center, Collection Center, and Registry 
protocols in their own country and abroad. 
2.05 The Registry must have at least one physician to assist the Registry with making 
unbiased  decisions,  for  example,  when  determining  the  appropriateness  of  a  second 
donation or evaluating a donation by a donor with health problems. 
2.05.1 A review panel should be available as needed for complicated o controversial 
situations. 
2.06  The  Registry  should  have  direct  daily  access  to  expert  consultants  in  the  areas 
pertinent to the operation of the registry to assist the registry in establishing policies 
and procedures. 
2.07 The Registry must retain a staff large enough to assume the volume and variety 
of services required to perform international searches within a time based on goals as 
recommended in WMDA procedures for unrelated donor search while maintaining the 
confidentiality of patient and donor. 
2.08 The Registry must have a fixed physical location. 
2.08.1 The location must have sufficient space so that all work can b carried out in an 
environment designed to minimize errors and maintain confidentiality. 
2.09  The  Registry  must  have  sufficient  communication  links  to  facilitate 
searches. 
2.09.1  These  links  must  include  telephone,  fax,  and  international  telematic  links 
(email, internet). 
2.10  Registry  must  maintain  written  policies  and  protocols  for  all  procedures 
performed in the Registry including staff training and quality management. 
3.0 Donor recruitment for the Registry and donors selected for specific patients 
3.01 The recruitment of donors must be performed under the direction of individuals 
who are experienced in recruitment of donors and in management activities including 
education, consenting, counseling, confidentiality, and medical screening. 

153

 
3.02  The  willingness  to  become  a  donor  must  be  the  individual  choice  of  each 
adult donor, that is, donors must be volunteers. Donors must be willing to donate 
on behalf of any patient being treated in any part of the world. Donors must not 
be paid for their donation but may be reimbursed for expenses incurred during 
the donation process, for example, time lost from work or travel to the Collection 
Center. 
3.03 The initial donation must be anonymous. The Registry must have a written 
policy  listing  the  conditions  under  which  donors  and  recipients  might  be 
informed of each other’s identity. 
3.04  Adult  donors  must  be  informed  regarding  their  potential  role  in  the 
donation of hematopoietic stem cells and the risks involved in the donation. 
3.04.1 Fully informed written consent must be obtained from all adult volunteer 
donors at the time of workup. 
3.04.2 Written consent must be obtained initially at the time of recruitment. 
3.04.3 Written consent may be obtained at other stages of the matching and donation 
process. 
3.04.4 A donor must be free to withdraw at any time. 
3.04.5  Consent  must  be  obtained  if  donor  blood  or  other  biological  material  or 
information  is  stored  and/or  used  for  the  purpose  of  an  ethically  approved 
research project. 
3.04.6  Consent  documents  signed  by  volunteer  donors  must  be  available  for 
review  by  individuals  designated  by  the  Registry  or  national  authorities  to 
evaluate the Registry. 
3.05  Requirements  for  donor  health  affecting  the  eligibility  of  donors  must  be 
established. 
3.05.1 An initial health screening may be performed at the time of recruitment. 
3.05.2 A health screening must be performed at the time of confirmatory typing.  
3.05.3 A medical examination must be performed at the time of workup. 
3.06  Prospective  unrelated  adult  volunteer  donors  selected  for  hematopoietic 
stem  cell  harvest  must  have  passed  a  minimum  age  established  by  national 
regulations or their 18th birthday if no regulations exist and an upper age-limit 
for  donation  must  be  stipulated  after  which  donors  will  be  removed  from  the 
Registry. 
3.06.1 That upper age limit should not exceed 60 years. 

4.0 Donor characterization 
4.01  Characterization  of  donors  for  blood  group  markers,  for  the  presence  of 
infectious  diseases  and  for  any  other  markers  considered  important  in 
transplantation must be performed. 
4.02  Testing  must  be  carried  out  by  laboratories  which  meet  national  guidelines  for 
performing these services. 
4.02.1 The HLA typing laboratory must be accredited by the European Federation for 
Immunogenetics (EFI), the American Society for Histocompatibility, Immunogenetics 
(ASHI), Australasian and  South East Asian Tissue Typing Association (ASEATTA) 
or an agency with similar standards and certification process. 
4.03 Testing must be carried out in a manner to ensure the accuracy of the data. 
4.04 The histocompatibility testing of donors must include identification of HLA 
loci considered essential for transplant success. 

154

 
 
 
4.04.1 A minimum of  HLA-A,-B,-DRB1 should be defined at serologic split or low 
resolution prior to listing the donor on the Registry. 
4.04.2  A  minimum  of  HLA-A,-B,-DRB1  must  be  defined  at  serologic  split  or  low 
resolution prior to donation for a specific patient. 
4.04.3 DNA-based testing is recommended for HLA-A,-B. 
4.04.3.1  If  serology  is  used  for  HLA-A,-B,  a  DNA-based  method  must  be  used  to 
define  antigens  in  the  population  tested  which  are  frequently  missed  and/or 
misassigned. 
4.04.4 DNA-based testing is required for HLA-DRB1. 
4.04.5 Registries must have established approaches to monitor and ensure the quality 
of HLA types listed in the donor database. 
4.05  Infectious  disease  testing  of  donors  selected  for  specific  patients  must 
include  testing  for  diseases  considered  to  be  important  to  consider  in 
hematopoietic  stem  cell  transplantation.  Testing  must  monitor  infection  with 
human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV),  hepatitis  B  virus,  hepatitis  C  virus, 
cytomegalovirus (CMV), and Treponema pallidum (syphilis). 
4.05.1  Selected  donors  should  also  be  tested  for  locally  important  diseases  that  are 
important to consider in transplantation. 
4.05.2 Volunteer donors may be screened for some infectious diseases before listing 
the donor on the Registry. 
4.05.3 Registries must also have the capability of shipping donor blood samples to the 
appropriate  Transplant  Center  in  the  event  the  transplant  center  requires  additional 
infectious disease testing. 
4.06  The  blood  group  testing  of  adult  volunteer  donors  selected  for  a  specific 
patient  must  include  identification  of  ABO  blood  group  and  Rh  factor  at  the 
confirmatory typing stage. 
4.06.1  Blood  cell  counts  of  donors  selected  for  specific  patients  must  be 
performed at the workup stage. 
4.07  Information  on  donor  age  and  gender  must  be  collected  at  the  time  of 
recruitment. 
4.08 Information on donor parity and history of other prior sensitizing events such as 
transfusion should be obtained during the confirmatory typing stage. 
4.09 Female donors of childbearing years must have a pregnancy test performed 
during the work-up stage. 
4.10  To  ensure  confidentiality,  the  identity  of  donors  must  be  protected. 
Approaches to ensure donor confidentiality must be established. 
4.11 Other appropriate information on the donor such as racial/ethnic group might be 
collected subject to national legislation. 

5.0 Information technology including the database or register of donors 
5.01  The  Registry  must  have  a  documented  plan  for  data  entry  and  storage  to 
ensure the maintenance of accurate records, that is, validation of data integrity. 
5.02 All patient and donor communications and records must be stored to ensure 
confidentiality. 

155

 
 
5.03 Records must be preserved and protected from accidental or unauthorized 
access, destruction or modification. 
5.03.1 Records should be maintained for an appropriate period of time as dictated by 
national standards. 
5.03.2  The  ongoing  backup  and  data  restoration  procedures  must  be  appropriate, 
validated and documented. 
5.04  Procedures  for  systems  development,  maintenance  and  operations  must  be 
validated.  Documentation  of  systems  development,  maintenance  and  operations 
including policies and procedures must be complete and in an appropriate language. 
Modifications to the computer system must be authorized and documented.  
5.05 Search algorithms must allow reliable searches which can be completed in a time 
frame consistent with WMDA recommendations. 
5.06 Each printed report must be dated. Quality assurance procedures should include 
dating each step in the search process in order to evaluate the time required for each 
stage of the search process. 

6.0 Facilitation of search requests 
6.01  Critical  communications  between  Registries  or  between  a  Registry  and  a 
Transplant Center must be in writing. 
6.01.1 These communications should contain a signature of authorization and be sent 
by fax or email. 
6.02  Registries  must  respond  to  search  requests  and  to  requests  for  additional 
information  and/or  an  aliquot  of  donor  sample  within  a  time  period  consistent 
with WMDA recommendations and in a defined manner. 
6.02.1  The  policy  of  the  Registry  regarding  repetition  of  the  database  search  for  a 
specific patient should be defined. 
6.03  Donor  and  patient  identity  must  remain  confidential  during  the  search 
process so that only appropriate Registry personnel have access to these data. 
6.04  A  donor  selected  for  a  specific  patient  must  be  placed  on  a  “reserved”  status 
from the time of confirmatory typing until the transplantation date is reached. 
6.04.1  A  maximum  time  limit  and  the  procedures  for  granting  exceptions  for  this 
status should be set in writing. 
6.05  Adult  volunteer  donors  must  be  counseled  when  selected  for  further  tests 
and when selected as a donor for a specific patient. 
6.05.1 Counseling for donors selected for specific patients must include anonymity of 
the  donor  and  patient,  requirement  for  further  blood  samples  before  donation, 
requirement  for  infectious  disease  and  other  testing,  risk  of  donation,  possible 
duration of loss of time from normal activities, location of the harvest, requirement for 
collection  of  autologous  blood,  donor’s  right  to  withdraw  and  consequences  for  the 
patient, details of insurance coverage, possible subsequent donations of hematopoietic 
stem  cells  or  blood  products,  alternative  collection  methods  and  whether  blood  is 
reserved for research purposes. 
6.05.2  The  adult  volunteer  donor  should  be  informed  if  the  donation  involves  an 
experimental procedure performed for a patient. 
6.06 The Donor Center and the donor must be informed of the proposed date(s) 
of transplant at the time a specific donor is requested for stem cell donation on 
behalf of a specific patient. The Transplant Center must specify the latest date by  

156

 
 
 
which the Donor Center must approve the eligibility of a donor for donation of 
hematopoietic stem cells for a specific patient (i.e., provide donor clearance).  
6.07 The adult volunteer donor must be medically examined to ascertain fitness 
to  donate.  This  examination  must  be  performed  by  a  physician  who  is  not  a 
member of a team who has cared for the patient. 
6.07.1 Policies for testing of the donor must be established. 
6.07.2  Infectious  disease  markers  must  be  measured  within  30  days  of  the 
hematopoietic  stem  cell  harvest  and  the  results  must  be  provided  to  the 
Transplant Center before commencement of patient conditioning. 
6.07.2.1  Markers 
include,  at  a  minimum,  human 
tested 
immunodeficiency  virus,  hepatitis  B  virus,  hepatitis  C  virus,  Treponema  pallidum 
(syphilis), and cytomegalovirus. 
6.07.3 Policies for counseling the donor in the case of positive identification of donor 
health risk such as the presence of an infectious disease should be established. 
6.07.4 The Registry must make their policy for the minimum criteria needed to 
allow a specific donor to be available for a specific patient available to the public. 
6.07.4.1  This  policy  might  include  a  minimum  level  of  HLA  match,  guidelines  for 
patient-specific  criteria  such  as  specific  diseases  or  disease  stages  for  which 
transplantation is not considered appropriate, the optimal amount of marrow aspirated 
based on the weight of the donor, or requirements for Transplant Center credentials. 

that  must  be 

7.0  Second  and  subsequent  donations  of  hematopoietic  stem  cells  and/or  blood 
products for the same patient 
7.01  Adult  volunteer  donors  must  be  fully  informed  in  advance  of  the  original 
donation  regarding  the  possibility  of  and  possible  procedures  involved  with  a 
subsequent donation of hematopoietic stem cells or blood products intended for 
therapeutic  use  for  the  same  patient  and  the  risks  involved  in  the  second 
donation. 
7.01.1 The Registry must have a process for communicating the donor’s willingness 
to participate in a subsequent donation to the appropriate Transplant Center although 
the donor must be free to decline a subsequent donation at the time that it is requested. 
7.02  The  Registry  must  have  a  written  policy  regarding  the  process  to  be 
followed upon a request by a Transplant Center for a subsequent donation. 
7.02.1 This document might include the specific details that should be provided by the 
Transplant Center to document the need  for  a  subsequent  donation,  identification  of 
any  medical  review  committee,  and  details  regarding  the  time  frame  of  the  process 
and 
the planned conditioning regimen.  
7.02.2 The policy should be available to the public. 

8.0 Collection, processing and transport of hematopoietic stem cells 
8.01 Collection of hematopoietic stem cells and any other collected cell products 
intended  for  therapeutic  use  must  be  performed  at  a  Collection  Center  that 
fulfills  national  and/or  regional  and/or  international  guidelines  for  such  a 
facility. 
8.02 Autologous donor blood must be collected at a blood collection center that 
fulfills  national  and/or  regional  and/or  international  guidelines  for  such  a 
facility. 

157

 
 
 
8.03 Written policies and procedures must be in place to ensure the quality and 
quantity  of  the  collected  cells.  These  must  include  policies  for  communication 
between the Transplant Center and Collection Center  regarding the number of 
cells required. 
8.03.1 This may include the collection of such information from the Transplant Center 
receiving the donated stem cells. 
8.04  Written  documentation  of  the  characteristics  of  the  collected  product 
important in facilitating the transplant must be provided with the cells according 
to  applicable  guidelines.  At  a  minimum,  this  information  must  include 
information  on  the  number  of  cells  collected,  the  donor’s  unique  identification 
code, donor ABO group, identification of the patient, date and time of collection, 
and name and contact information of the Transplant Center. 
8.05  Cells  must  be  transported  in  a  timely  and  reliable  fashion  to  ensure  the 
quality  of  the  cell  product  as  it  reaches  the  Transplant  Center.  Policies  and 
procedures documenting the transport process must be stipulated. 
8.05.1  These  policies  may  include  criteria  for  the  designated  courier,  describe 
information  and  resources  available  to  the  courier,  plans  to  address  disruption  of 
travel,  transport  temperature,  communication  procedures  used  to  contact  the 
Transplant  Center,  to  ensure  receipt  by  the  Transplant  Center,  procedures  to  avoid 
damage of the cells, and procedures to maintain anonymity of patient and donor. 

9.0 Follow-up of patient and donor 
9.01 The Registry  must have policies and procedures for the short term follow-
up and care of adult volunteer donors for conditions related to the hematopoietic 
stem  cell  donation.  Short  term  is  defined  as  within  the  first  year  following 
donation. 
9.02  The  Registry  must  have  policies  for  the  long  term  follow-up  and  care  of  adult 
volunteer donors for conditions related to the hematopoietic stem cell donation. Long 
term is defined as the time period following the first year after donation and extending 
for at least four years. 
9.03 Donor health issues potentially affecting the health of a patient receiving a 
hematopoietic stem cell donation from that donor should must be reported to the 
Transplant Center. 
9.04 Adverse  events affecting donors undergoing  harvest  of  hematopoietic  stem 
cells and occurring long term as a consequence of the donation must be defined 
and must be recorded. 
9.04.1 Reports of adverse events should be submitted to the Registry involved in the 
transplantation if the event might affect a subsequent donation. 
9.04.2  Reports  of  adverse  events  should  be  submitted  to  a  WMDA  sponsored 
international centralized database of such events. 
9.05  Cells  or  DNA  from  donor  and  recipient  should  be  preserved  for  research 
purposes  by  the  Registry  if  approved  by  national  legislation  in  the  countries  of  the 
patient and donor. 
9.05.1  Consent  for  preservation  and  research  use  must  be  obtained  from individuals 
providing research material. 
9.06 The Registry should collect data on the status of the patient post-transplant. 

158

 
 
 
10.0 Financial and legal liabilities 
10.01 Responsibilities 
10.01.1  The  Registry  must  keep  complete  and  correct  accounts  for  all  services 
provided  and  requested  according  to  national  laws  and  regulations  as  well  as 
international standards. 
10.01.2  The  Registry  must  have  sufficient  staff  dedicated  to  perform  all  accounting 
duties. 
10.02 Fee structure 
10.02.1 The overall charges of HLA testing, infectious disease marker testing, harvest 
and other related services should be readily available on a fee schedule. 
10.02.2  Any  cost  not  standardized  or,  for  any  reason,  not  accessible  through  such  a 
schedule (e.g. courier charges) should be communicated in advance to the requesting 
Registry and/or the Transplant Center. 
10.02.3  If  the  harvest  procedure  is  cancelled  after  the  final  donor  selection,  the 
Collection  Center  and/or  Donor  Center  and/or  Registry  are  entitled  to  charge  for 
services performed prior to notice of cancellation. 
10.03 Billing 
10.03.1 The Registry providing a donor or any other service should bill to and request 
payment from the Registry requesting the donor or service. 
10.03.2 Billing should occur within sixty days after the service has been completed. 
10.04 Payment 
10.04.1  A  Registry  requesting  a  service  for  a  patient  or  forwarding  such  a  request 
from  a  Transplant  Center  guarantees  the  payment  of  such  service  if  completed 
properly  provided  the  search  for  the  patient  is  still  active  or  within  30  days  after 
search inactivation. 
10.04.2  A  Registry  must  have  adequate  administrative  structures  and  financial 
resources to guarantee the settlement of all invoices in due course. 
10.04.3  It  is  the  responsibility  of  the  requesting  Registry  to  collect  funds  from  any 
person or institution ultimately covering these expenses. 
10.05 Legal liability 
10.05.1 The Registry must assume responsibility and establish procedures for all 
donor  medical  expenses  including  the  pre-collection  physical,  the  collection 
procedure and all post-collection medical expenses that are directly related to the 
donation. 
10.05.1.1  Registry  should  offer  disability  and  death  benefits  to  all  stem  cell  donors. 
These benefits might be provided through insurance coverage. 
10.05.2 The Registry should maintain liability insurance. 

159

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 4 

UMBILICAL CORD CELL BANKING 2003 
QUESTIONNAIRE 

Please enter name, address and contact details of your bank 

Date established: 

Is your bank public or private? 

Is your bank ‘for profit’ or ‘not for profit’? 

Do you charge for storage of cord blood?    YES/NO 
If ‘yes’, please list charges 
If ‘no’, please explain how your bank is funded 

How many cord/placental cell samples do you currently hold? 

Of the samples stored at your bank what percentage is kept for 

- 
future use of donor or family 
-  donation to others for treatment 
- 

research 

Does your bank have a maximum storage period for cord cells 
YES/NO     If ‘yes’, please give details 

Do you collect and store maternal peripheral blood?  YES/NO 

Is your bank subject to any national regulations/accreditation? 
YES/NO   If ‘yes’, please give details. 

Bank details 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Costs 

5. 

Storage 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

Regulation 

10. 

161

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11. 

Is your bank subject to any professional guidelines/accreditation? 
YES/NO   If ‘yes’, please give details. 

Is consent obtained before collecting cord blood?  YES/NO 
If ‘yes’ please state whether verbal or written consent is obtained. 

Is consent obtained before collecting maternal peripheral blood? 
YES/NO   If ‘yes’, please state whether verbal or written consent is 
obtained. 

Consent 

12. 

13. 

Recruitment 
and 
Marketing 

14. 

Please state briefly how patients/donors are recruited. 

15. 

Do you advertise your bank on 

- 

- 

local or national radio?  If ‘yes’ please state which. 

local or national television?  If, ‘yes’, please state which. 

-  on the internet 

- 

in the press (magazines, newspapers,etc) 

Many thanks for your help. 

162

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 5 

LIST OF QUESTIONNAIRE RESPONDENTS 

Public Banks 

Mary Banfill 
Michigan Community Blood Centers Cord Blood Bank 
1036 Fuller NE 
Grand Rapids, MI 49503 
USA 

John K Fraser PhD 
UCLA Umbilical Cord Blood Bank 
Dept Medicine (Hem-Onc) 
David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA 
Box 961678 
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1678 
USA 

National Cord Blood Program of the 
New York Blood Center 
310 East 67th Street 
New York, NY 10021 
USA 

M. Douglas 
Cord Blood Program 
Puget Sound Blood Center 
921 Terry Ave 
Seattle, WA 98104 
USA 

Neil Rupp 
National Director 
American Red Cross Cord Blood Program 
3131 N. Vancouver Avenue 
Portland, OR 97227 
USA 

Jose Carreras Cord Blood Bank 
Department of Experimental Hematology 
M. Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center 
 and Institute of Oncology  
02-781 Warsaw 
ul. Roentgena 5 
Poland 

163

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr Paolo Rebulla 
Milano Cord Blood Bank 
Centro Trasfisionale e di Immunologio dei Trapianti 
Via Francesco Sforza 
35 20122 Milano 
Italy 

Emilia Romagna Cord Blood Bank 
Transfusion Medicine Service 
S, Orsola-Malpighi Hospital 
Via Massarenti 9  
40138 Bologna 
Italy 

Minoko Takanashi, MD, PhD 
The Metro Tokyo Red Cross Cord Blood Bank 
4-1-31 Hiroo 
Shibuya-ku 
Tokyo 150-0012 
Japan 

Professor M Boogaerts 
Leuven Cord Blood Bank 
UZ Leuven 
Herestraat 49 
B 3000 Leuven 
Belgium 

RFSP 
c/o Professor Eliane Gluckman 
ARTM 
Hôpital St Louis 
75010 Paris 
France 

Dr P Ebbesen 
The Scientific Cord Blood Stem Cell Bank 
Aalborg University 
Laboratory for Stem Cell Research 
Gustav Wieds Vej 10B 
DK-8000 Aarhus C 
Denmark 

Sun Yat-Sen Cord Blood Bank 
125 Lih-Der RD 
Taipei 
Taiwan 

164

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr R Bornstein 
Madrid Cord Blood Bank 
Hospital 12 de Octubre 
Avda de Córdoba 
s/n 28041 Madrid 
Spain 

Professor A Tichelli 
Hämatologielabor 
Kantonsspital Basel 
Petersgraben 4 
CH-4031 Basel 
Switzerland 

Dr J Akabutu 
Alberta Cord Blood Bank 
780, 8303 112th Street 
Edmonton 
Alberta T6G 2T4 
Canada 

Professor Peter Wernet 
Jose Carreras Cord Blood Bank 
Medical Centre 
University of Düsseldorf 
40225 Düsseldorf 
Moorenstrasse 5 
Germany 

Dr Robyn Rodwell 
Queensland Cord Blood Bank 
Mater Health Services 
Raymond Terrace 
Sout Brisbane Qld 4010 
Australia 

A/Prof Marcus Vowels 
Australian Cord Blood Bank 
Sydney Children’s Hospital 
High Street 
Randwick NSW 2031 
Australia 

Dr Simon Bol 
BMDI National Cord Blood Bank 
Department of Clinical Haematology & Oncology 
Royal Children’s Hospital 
Flemington Road 
Parkville Vic 3052 
Australia 

165

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mixed (profit and non-profit) cord blood banks 

Seoul Cord Blood Bank 
518-4 Doonchon-dong 
Kangdong-ku 
Seoul 
Korea 

Zbigniew Roger  Mrowiec PhD 
The Elie Katz Umbilical Cord Blood Program 
Bergen Community Blood Center 
970 Linwood Avenue 
W. Paramus, NJ 07652 
USA 

Private cord blood banks 

Kaj Rydman 
General Manager 
California Cryobank Inc. 
Stem Cell Services Division 
3228 Nebraska Avenue 
Santa Monica CA 90404 
USA 

Professor R Penny 
Cryosite 
9 Sirius Road 
Lane Cove NSW 2066 
Australia 

Cryo-Cell Europe 

Frank Schott 
VITA 34 AG 
Nonnenstr 37 
04229 Leipzig 
Germany 

166

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 6 

US PUBLIC BANKS LINKED TO NMDP REGISTRY 

American Red Cross North Central Blood Services 
Cord Blood Program 
100 South Robert Street 
St. Paul, MN 55107 

American Red Cross Cord Blood Bank New England 
Five Biotech 
381 Plantation Street, Suite 110 
Worcester, MA 01605 

American Red Cross Western Area Community Cord Blood Bank (Portland) 
3131 North Vancouver Avenue 
Portland, OR 97227 

Ashley Ross Cord Blood Program of the San Diego Blood Bank 
440 Upas Street 
San Diego, CA 92103-4900 
(619) 296-6393 ext. 161 

Bonfils Cord Blood Services Belle Bonfils Memorial Blood Center 
717 Yosemite Circle 
Denver, CO 80230 

Children's Hospital of Orange County Cord Blood Bank 
455 South Main Street 
Orange, CA 92868 

ITxM Cord Blood Services  
ITxM Clinical Services 
1205 Milwaukee Avenue 
Glenview, IL 60025 

LifeCord  
1221 Northwest 13th Street 
Gainesville, FL 32601 

New Jersey Cord Blood Bank at the Coriell Institute for Medical Research 
403 Haddon Avenue 
Camden, NJ 08103 

Puget Sound Blood Center  
Northwest Tissue Center 
921 Terry Avenue 
Seattle, WA 98104 

167

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
St. Louis Cord Blood Bank  
3662 Park Avenue 
St. Louis, MO 63110 

StemCyte, Inc.  
400 Rolyn Place 
Arcadia, CA 91007 

NON- NMDP BANKS 

Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute 
Sibling Donor Cord Blood Program 
5700 Martin Luther King Jr. Way 
Oakland, CA 94609-1673 

University of Colorado Cord Blood Bank 
Denver, CO 
Phone: (303) 372-2673 

Cryobanks International 
270 S North Lake Blvd, Suite 1012 
Altamonte Springs, FL 32701 
Phone: (800) 869-8608 or (407) 834-8333 

Michigan Community Blood Centers Cord Blood Bank 
1036 Fuller Avenue NE 
Grand Rapids, MI 

The Elie Katz Umbilical Cord Blood Program 
Bergen Community Regional Blood Center 
Cord Blood Stem Cell Program 
970 Linwood Ave West 
Paramus, NJ 07653 

Placental Blood Program of the New York Blood Center 
310 East 67th Street 
New York, NY 10021 

Carolinas Cord Blood Bank 
Duke University Medical Center  
Box 3350 
Durham, NC 

Ireland Cancer Center at Case Western Reserve University 
and University Hospitals of Cleveland Umbilical Cord Blood Program 
Cleveland, OH 

South Texas Blood & Tissue Center 
San Antonio, Texas 

168

 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
EXHIBIT A
California Cryobank, Inc.

Annex 7 

PHYSICIAN’S CONSENT TO COLLECT CORD BLOOD

My patient, who is named below, has requested that I collect her baby’s umbilical cord and placental blood (“Cord Blood”).
While collection is a relatively simple procedure, complications may occur during delivery, which may preclude the collection of
Cord Blood. Pursuant to the patient’s consent given herein that my judgement shall be absolute and final and the patient’s herein
release of liability, I agree to collect the Cord Blood from the baby’s umbilical cord following the delivery.

_______________________________________
Signature of Physician

___________________________
Date

__________________________
License No.

_______________________________________
Print Name of Physician

(_____)_____________________
Physician’s Telephone No.

(_____)____________________
Physician’s FAX No.

__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Physician’s address (Street, City, State, Zip)

REPORT OF PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

I have performed a complete physical examination of my patient named below and found her to be in good health. I found no

evidence of alcohol or drug abuse on said patient.

_____________________________________________________
Signature of Physician

_________________________
Date

PATIENT’S RELEASE OF LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION

I understand that complications may occur during delivery that may preclude the collection of Cord Blood. I hereby agree that
my physician’s judgement to collect or not to collect the Cord Blood shall be absolute and final.
I hereby release my physician,
CCB and the hospital and their respective owners, board of directors, officers, employees, affiliates and agents from any and all
claims, liabilities, demands and causes of action surrounding the collection and handling of the cord blood.

I hereby indemnify and agree to hold harmless and provide defense to my physician, CCB and the hospital and their respective
owners, board of directors, officers, employees, affiliates and agents from any and all claims, liabilities, demands and causes of
action asserted by person(s) for whose benefit the cord blood is being collected and stored.

________________________________________ _____________________
Signature of Client (Mother)

Date

_________________________________
Print Client Name

Mother’s Full Name ___________________________________________

Father’s Full Name __________________________________________

Mother’s Maiden Name ________________________________________

Mother’s Date of Birth _________________________________________

Father’s Date of Birth _______________________________________

Social Security Number ________________________________________

Social Security Number ______________________________________

Hospital Name _____________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Hospital Address ___________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Hospital Telephone Number (________)__________________________

Expected Due Date: ______________________________________

CCB-3501, rev 05/01/02

„2000 California Cryobank, Inc.

169

EXHIBIT B

        California Cryobank, Inc.

 INFORMED  CONSENT  FOR  CORD  BLOOD  STORAGE

The Client represents that Client has been informed of and fully understands the following:

1.

2.

3.

4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

Client enters into an agreement with Company on behalf of Client’s child to provide processing, cryopreservation
and storage of the umbilical cord blood collected from the child’s umbilical cord.  Client agrees to be the custodian
of the child’s Cord Blood until the child attains the age of majority, at which age the child has ownership claims to
the Cord Blood.
Umbilical cord blood is a rich source of stem cells that can be used to replenish the failing immune system. Umbilical
cord blood stem cell transplantations have been shown to be successful treatments for a variety of diseases.  Possible
current benefits from the use of cord blood cells are that the cells could be used to treat certain life-threatening
diseases, including leukemia, certain other cancers, and blood disorders.
Client understands that because this is a new procedure, the use of stem cells collected from cord and placental blood
is still considered to be experimental even though the same type of cells harvested from other sources, such as bone
marrow, have been used successfully for many years. Potential risks include the possibility that this type of
treatment may not be effective.  Client understands that transplantation technologies continue to evolve and change,
and the risks and benefits of this procedure will alter in unpredictable ways in the future.  Client understands that
these risks and benefits will be explained to Client in a separate informed consent at the time of future use of these
cells.  Client understands the potential toxicities and risks that may be involved in the use of these cells include
organ damage, failure to engraft and possibly death.  Client understands that cord blood cells are not the treatment
of choice for all diseases or conditions and that the decision to use or not to use the cord blood cells stored under
the Storage Agreement is strictly between the Client and child and their physician.  It is possible that in the future
better therapies may be developed.
It is not possible to determine whether the child will ever develop a disease which may require a stem cell treatment.
At the time of birth, the mother’s and child’s blood samples will be tested for a variety of infectious agents, including
those causing AIDS,  hepatitis and syphilis.  Client consents to providing blood samples for those tests. The
collected umbilical cord blood may not be cryopreserved and stored should it, or the mother’s blood, be positive
for HIV and/or Hepatitis.
Should any complications occur during the delivery of the child, the discretion to collect umbilical cord blood is
entirely that of the physician or midwife. Client shall not hold Client’s physicians, nurses, the hospital, its owner,
its Board and Officers,  its medical staff and employees responsible or liable for any arrangements, procedures or
handling regarding the cord blood.
Should the umbilical cord blood not be collected, Client will not be charged for collection, testing, processing and
cryopreservation.
The collected umbilical blood will be processed only if it passes thresholds of acceptance set by Company: minimal
volume of 40 ml, complete and negative blood results, demonstrated  presence, viability and hematopoietic potential
of the stem cells and absence of viral and/or bacterial contamination.
Client understands that other alternative sources of stem cells exist, including bone marrow and peripheral blood,
and that blood cells harvested from these sources have been used successfully to treat the same diseases. While bone
marrow is currently the most common source of stem cells, collecting stem cells from bone marrow is costly, requires
an invasive procedure, and carries the risk of infection and surgical complications. Should a stem cell donor be
needed later, finding a suitable match can be expensive and may take a long time. The collection of stem cells from
peripheral blood involves the use of new or experimental procedures. In the future, other ways of treating these
diseases may be found, so that the cord blood cells stored under the Storage Agreement may not be necessary.
Client understands that the freezing and storage process used to preserve cells harvested from cord and placental
blood is the same process that is currently used for storing other human cells, and that although this freezing
technique has been used for many years to successfully preserve bone marrow and other blood cells, it has been used
to store stem cells only in the last 15 years. Although the storing of umbilical cord blood stem cells is relatively new,
laboratory studies and transplants utilizing frozen stem cells suggest that this process can be used successfully with
cord blood cells.
Client agrees to pay Company all fees required in the Storage Agreement.

I certify that I have read the preceding or it has been read to me, that I understand its contents, and that any questions I have pertaining to this
Informed Consent and the Storage Agreement have been answered.

Client’s Signature

Date

Print Client’s Name

CCB-3502, 7/1/97

          ©1997 California Cryobank, Inc.

170

Account Number

CORD BLOOD STORAGE AGREEMENT

This Agreement is made on                          , 20___, between California Cryobank, Inc., a California
corporation (“Company”) and                                              and                                              (“Client”).

Company is in the business of providing for the collection, testing, typing, processing, cryopreservation and
storage of the blood that is taken from the umbilical cord (the “Cord Blood”) after the birth of a child  (the
”Storage Services”).

Client desires to collect for storage the Cord Blood of Client's child after the birth of the Client's child.

Therefore, Company and Client desire to enter into an agreement under the provisions set forth below for
Company to provide the Storage Services to Client:

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Collection of Cord Blood:  Client has requested that Client's physician collect the Cord Blood
upon the birth of Client's child pursuant to the terms of the form attached hereto as Exhibit A -
Authorization to Collect Cord Blood and Release from Liability.  Company shall provide to Client's
health care provider a collection kit for transportation of the Cord Blood from the birthing facility to
the Company's processing facility.

Storage Services:   The Storage Services shall be provided by the Company to the Client pursuant
to the terms of the Informed Consent for Cord Blood Storage which is attached hereto as Exhibit B.
 Upon signing, this Agreement shall constitute a non-negotiable storage receipt for the Client's Cord
Blood stored by the Company.

Term of Agreement:    The term of this Agreement shall be for a period of one year, effective the
date of birth of Client's child.  This Agreement shall be automatically extended for one year periods,
unless either party gives at least sixty (60) days written notice of its intent to terminate this Agreement
prior to the expiration date of any one year period. 

Fees for Storage Services :   The fees to be paid by Client to Company for Storage Services are
set forth on the Cord Blood Storage Fee Schedule, attached hereto as Exhibit C.   The Company may
increase the annual storage fee for subsequent storage periods to an amount equal to Company’s
then current annual storage fee, upon written notice to Client prior to the expiration of the current
storage period.

Access and Preparation for Transfer of Cord Blood:   The Cord Blood stored hereunder will
be ready for access or delivery during regular business hours on regular work days (excluding
Saturday, Sunday and holidays), on 48 hours notice, upon submission by Client to Company of a
Request for Retrieval and Transfer of Cord Blood form which is attached hereto as Exhibit D.  Client
shall pay a transfer fee to Company as set forth in Exhibit C attached hereto.  All fees due to Company
must be paid in full prior to transfer of the Cord Blood.

CCB-3500, rev 3/6/00 

2000 California Cryobank, Inc.

171

6.

Limits on Liability, Liquidated Damages and Declared Value

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Liability:  Company shall only be liable for payment of liquidated damages as specified
hereafter for the loss, injury, damage or destruction of Client's Cord Blood directly caused by
Company's failure to exercise reasonable care in providing storage services hereunder.

Liquidated Damages:  The parties stipulate and agree that it would be impracticable and
extremely difficult to fix actual damages for the loss, injury, damage, or destruction of Client's
Cord Blood stored under this Agreement.  In accordance with California Civil Code, Section
1671, the parties hereby agree that in the event of the loss, injury, damage or destruction of
Client's Cord Blood stored under this Agreement, caused by the breach of this Agreement or
of any duty or relationship arising out of or related to this Agreement by Company, liquidated
damages therefore shall be the amount of the fees paid by Client for the account set up and
processing services and storage fees paid to date.  The parties stipulate and agree that this
declared value is a limit of liability in accordance with California Civil Code Section 1840.

Client hereby accepts the amount set forth in the above paragraph for all the amount of
liquidated damages amount. 

 (Client's Initials)

Availability of Optional Insurance Coverage:  In the event that optional insurance is
available for the Cord Blood storage under Company's existing insurance policy for an amount
in excess of the liquidated damages and declared value agreed to herein, Company shall
provide the Optional Insurance Rate and Application Form, which is attached hereto as Exhibit
E,  to Client setting forth the additional costs and providing to Client the option to acquire said
optional insurance.

Waiver of Claims:  Except as expressly provided above with respect to the liquidated
damages and declared value, Client hereby releases Company and Client’s hospital and
physicians (collectively, the Releasees) and the Releasees’ respective agents employees,
officers, directors, shareholders, and affiliates to the fullest extent permitted by law from any
claims, demands, or causes of action which Client may have or claim to have arising out of
or in any way relating to this Agreement, and hereby expressly waive and forever give up the
provisions of California Civil Code Section 1542 which section provides as follows:

A general release does not extend to claims
which the creditor does not know or suspect to
exist in his favor at the time of executing the
release, which  if known by him must have
materially affected his settlement with the
debtor.

Indemnification:  Client stipulates and agrees that the person(s) for whose benefit the Cord
Blood is being stored, or to whom it is later provided, shall at all times and for all purposes be
deemed to be bound by the provisions of this Agreement.  Client hereby indemnifies and
agrees to hold harmless and provide defense to Company and its Affiliates and client’s
hospital and physicians (collectively, the Indemnitees) and the Indemnitees’ respective agents,
employees, officers, directors, shareholders, and affiliates from any and all claims, liabilities,
demands and causes of action asserted against Company and/or its affiliates by  such
person(s).

CCB-3500, rev 3/6/00 

2000 California Cryobank, Inc.

172

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

Termination for Failure to Pay Fees:  If this Agreement is canceled, terminated or expires, or if
any payment due Company is not made within thirty (30) days of its due date, and if the Client has not
submitted to Company a Request for Retrieval and Transfer of Cord Blood (Exhibit D), the stored Cord
Blood shall be discarded. 

Notices:   Any and all notices to be given in connection with storage Agreement shall be in writing
and shall be deemed to have been duly given on the date of service if served personally on the party
to whom notice is to be given, or within 72 hours after mailing, if mailed to the party to whom notice
is to be given, by first class mail, registered or certified, postage prepaid, and property addressed to
the party at his address set forth on the signature page of this Agreement, or any other address that
any party may designate by written notice to the others.  The Client agrees to promptly notify
Company in the event of a change in Client's current mailing address at any time during the term of this
Agreement.

Governing Law:  This Agreement shall be governed by the laws of the State of California for  any
and all purposes, regardless of where the Agreement is entered into or is to be performed; and
jurisdiction for all purposes, including entering an arbitration award, shall be in Los Angeles County,
California.

Arbitration:    All disputes, which arise under this Agreement, shall be referred to a single arbitrator
mutually acceptable to both parties.  Such arbitration shall be conducted at Los Angeles, California,
in accordance with the rules of the American Arbitration Association then in effect, and the decision
of the arbitrator shall bind the parties to the controversy and their representatives and shall be
enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction.  Each party shall advance one-half of the costs
of arbitration.

Partial Invalidity:  If any provision of this Agreement is found to be invalid or unenforceable, that
provision shall be ineffective only to the extent that it is in contravention of applicable laws, and this
Agreement shall otherwise remain in full force and effect.

Assignment:  Client has the right to assign this Agreement to the parent or legal guardian of the Child
or to the Child upon the Child attaining the age of majority.  Company has the right to assign this
Agreement to an affiliate of the Company.

Binding Effect and Opportunity to Consult Counsel:   This Agreement is binding upon the
parties hereto, their personal representatives, estate, heirs and successors in interest, as well as
upon the child and any other person for whom the Cord Blood is stored or used.

Client acknowledges that Company has strongly recommended Client consult Client's own legal
counsel to review this Agreement and any other documents and forms to be signed in connection
therewith, and to advise Client in connection therewith, prior to signing; and that Client take sufficient
time to do so.  Client further acknowledges that whether or not Client has consulted Client's own legal
counsel Client understands all of the provisions of this Agreement.

Exhibits:  The Exhibits referenced in and attached to this Agreement are hereby made a part of this
Agreement.

Construction:  In this Agreement, whenever the content so requires, the masculine gender shall
include the feminine or neuter, the singular number shall include the plural and the plural shall include
the singular.

CCB-3500, rev 3/6/00 

2000 California Cryobank, Inc.

173

16.

17.

Captions:  Any captions in this Agreement are for convenience only and shall not be deemed part
of the context of this Agreement, and shall in no way define, limit, extend or describe the scope of
this Agreement or the intent or any of its provisions.

Counterparts: This Agreement may be executed in one or more counterparts, each of which shall
be deemed an original, but all of which together shall constitute one and the same instrument.

CLIENT HAS READ THIS AGREEMENT BEFORE SIGNING IT.

COMPANY:

CLIENT:

CALIFORNIA CRYOBANK, INC.
a California Corporation

________________________________
(Signature)

By

(Print Name and Title)
3228 Nebraska Avenue
(Address for Notice)
Santa Monica, CA 90404

________________________________
(Print Name)
________________________________
(Address for Notice)
________________________________

            ________________________________

(Telephone)

CHILD'S NAME OR OTHER
UNIQUE IDENTIFICATION

________________________________

Authorization to Charge Credit Card (do not fill out when using other methods of payment)

I, the undersigned, authorize the Company to charge my credit card for the services as described in this
Agreement and its Exhibits.  I understand that these charges will include fees for the processing and first
year storage of the Cord Blood and any subsequent storage services as described in this Agreement, and
that these charges may be charged at different times, as services are being provided.

Credit Card Type: ___VISA___M/C___AMEX___Discover

Billing address:

(Credit Card Number)                                          Exp. Date

_________________________________________________
Street address

_________________________________________________
City

State

Zip Code

(Name as it appears on the credit card) 

(Cardholder’s Signature)

CCB-3500, rev 3/6/00 

2000 California Cryobank, Inc.

174

EXHIBIT D

California Cryobank, Inc.
REQUEST FOR RETRIEVAL AND TRANSFER OF CORD BLOOD

Account No:

Client,________________________________________, has instructed the Company to transfer

(Client Name)

Client’s  Cord Blood to

                                                                                                                                                     .
Client has been advised that Client has the option to provide for the transportation of the Cord
Blood.  Client has also been informed and agrees that upon request of the Client, the Company may
assist in arranging transportation of the Cord Blood.

(Name and Address of Facility)

Client has been informed and agrees that there are risks in removing the Cord Blood from its present
container and risks in transporting Cord Blood from one facility to another. Client further
understands and agrees that the Company assumes no responsibility for loss of or damage to Cord
Blood resulting from the transportation or any other movement of the Cord  Blood from the
Company.   Client will be responsible for all charges related to the transfer of Client’s Cord Blood.

______________________________________
Client Signature

________________________
Date

Executed in my presence on the date set forth above.

______________________________________
Notary Public

CCB-3504, 7/1/97

©1997 California Cryobank, Inc.

175

Appendix: 

Secretariat of the EGE 

177

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat of the European Group on Ethics 

Ms Christiane Bardoux 

Tel: 32 (0) 2 295 45 47 
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65 
E-mail: christiane.bardoux@cec.eu.int   

Ms Joelle Bezzan 

Tel: 32 (0) 2 296 19 48 
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65 
E-mail: joelle.bezzan@cec.eu.int  

Ms Marie Chirol 

Tel: 32 (0) 2 296 25 84 
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65 
E-mail: marie.chirol@cec.eu.int   

Ms Patricia Mommens 

Tel: 32 (0) 2 296 84 74 
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65 
E-mail: patricia.mommens@cec.eu.int 

Mailing address 

European Commission 
Group of Policy Advisers 
BREY 10/128 
B – 1049 – Brussels - Belgium 

Office 

European Commission 
Avenue d’Auderghem 45 
B – 1049 – Brussels - Belgium 

Web site 

http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics 

179

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Commission 

Opinion No 19 — Ethical aspects of umbilical cord blood banking 

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities 

2004 — IV, 179 pp. — 21 x 29.7 cm 

ISBN 92-894-7439-4 

 
 
 
 
 
