OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS  

IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES  

TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

No 19 

Original in English 

16th March 2004 

ETHICAL ASPECTS OF UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD BANKING 

Reference:  

Request from Romano Prodi, President of the European Commission 

Rapporteurs:   Dr. P. Puigdomenech Rosell and Prof. G. Virt 

***************************************************************************************************************************** 

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE), 

Having  regard  to  the  request  of  Romano  Prodi,  President  of  the  European  Commission,  to  the 

EGE on 24 August 2001, to prepare an opinion on private cord blood banking; 

Having  regard  to  the  Treaty  on  European  Union  and  in  particular  its  Article  6  of  the  common 

provisions concerning the respect for fundamental rights, and to Article 152 of the EC Treaty on 

public health, and in particular paragraph 4(a) referring to substances of human origin; 

Having  regard  to  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  rights  of  the  European  Union,  approved  by  the 

European  Council  in  Biarritz  on  October  14th  2000  and  proclaimed  solemnly  in  Nice  by  the 

European  Parliament,  the  Council  and  the  Commission  on  December  7th  2000,  in  particular  its 

Article 1 on « Human dignity », Article 3 on the « Right to the integrity of the person », Article 8 on 

« Protection of personal data » and Article 38 on « Consumer protection »; 

Having regard to the Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on setting standards 

of quality and safety for the donation, procurement, testing, processing, preservation, storage and 

distribution of human tissues and cells adopted on 2nd March 2004; 

Having  regard  to  Directive  95/46/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  the 

European Union of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing 

of personal data and on the free movement of such data1; 

1 Official Journal L 281, 23/11/1995 P. 0031 - 0050 

1

 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
                                                      
 
Having regard to the Council of Europe Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, signed on 

4  April  1997  in  Oviedo,  in  particular  its  Article  5  on  “Informed  consent”  and  its  Article  21  on 

« Prohibition  of  financial  gain »  and  the  Additional  Protocol  on  Transplantation  of  organs  and 

tissues of human origin opened for signature on 24th February 2001; 

Having regard to the Universal Declaration on the human genome and the rights of man adopted 

by the UNESCO on 11 November 1997; 

Having  regard  to  the  various  laws  and  rules  applying  in  some  Member  States  concerning  cord 

blood; 

Having regard to the opinions expressed by national instances on that issue, namely the Opinion 

n°  74  of  12  December  2002  of  the  National  Consultative  Ethics  Committee  on  umbilical  cord 

blood banks for autologous use or for research (France)2, the statement by the Belgian Medical 

Association addressed to gynaecologists and general practitioners3, the opinion paper of October 

2001  of  the  Scientific  Advisory  Committee  of  the  Royal  College  of  Obstetricians  and 

Gynaecologists  (UK)4,  the  opinion  of  7th  December  2001  of  the  Belgian  Health  Council  on  the 

revision of tissue banks’ legislation5 and the American Academy of Paediatrics’ recommendations 

of 14th July 19996; 

Having regard to the previous EGE Opinion No. 11 of 21.07.1998 on the ethical aspects of human 

tissue  banking  and  Opinion  No.  15  of  14.11.2000  on  the  ethical  aspects  of  human  stem  cell 

research and use7; 

Having regard to the hearings of experts and Commission departments on 16 September 2003, 

18 November 2003 and 16 December 2003 in Brussels and 20 October 2003 in Rome; 

Having heard the rapporteurs, Dr. P. Puigdomenech Rosell and Prof. G. Virt, 

2 Internet: http://www.ccne-ethique.fr/english/start.htm 
3 Internet: http://www.ordomedic.be/braf/sangcordon.htm  
4 Internet: http://www.rcog.org.uk/print.asp?PageID=430&Type=main  
5 Internet: http://www.health.fgov.be/CSH_HGR/Francais/Avis/Avis_Banques_Tissus.htm 
6 Internet: http://www.cordblood.med.ucla.edu/experts.html  
7 Internet: http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm  

2

                                                      
 
1. WHEREAS : 

BACKGROUND OF THE REQUEST 

The Group is issuing an Opinion on the ethical aspects of cord blood banking following a request 

from President Prodi in 2001. Concerns on commercial cord blood banks were also expressed in 

questions8  from  members  of  the  European  Parliament  to  the  European  Commission.  There  are 

concerns namely about the fact that promises about the benefits of cord blood transplantations to 

treat  a  number  of  diseases  were  made  to  convince  future  parents  to  store  cord  blood  from 

newborn babies against payment with a view to using it to treat a disease incurred by the child or 

one of his family members and for which there is at present no medical evidence for the validity of 

the treatment.  

INTRODUCTION 

Since  1988  it  has  been  shown  that  the  haematopoietic  stem  cells  present  in  the  blood  of  the 

umbilical cord can be used for allogeneic transplantation in a number of genetic diseases, blood 

malignancies  and  immune  deficiencies,  for  example  leukaemia.  After  transplantation,  the 

haematopoietic stem cells can repopulate the bone marrow of the patient, providing a source of 

blood  cells. 

It  currently  constitutes  an 

increasingly  used  alternative 

to  bone  marrow 

transplantation.  

In  order  to  have  cord  blood  cells  available  for  transplantation  a  number  of  banks  were  created 

worldwide.  These  banks  are  run  by  either  hospitals  or  non-profit  organizations  that  collect  the 

samples from donors and provide them when the cells are needed for transplantation. 

Recently,  private  firms  have  been  offering  to  future  parents  the  conservation  of  blood  from  the 

umbilical  cord  of  newborn  children  for  one’s  own  use  or  for  the  use  of  close  relatives.  Different 

types of cord blood banks can be distinguished : private or public, for-profit or non-profit.  

8 Written question E-1079/01 by Ria Oomen-Ruijten (OJ C 340 E of 04/12/2001, p. 166) and written question E-3677/02 by Bart 
Staes (OJ C 137 E of 12/06/2003, p. 238) 

3

 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
 
In this opinion, the Group considered: 1. public (non-profit) banks that store cord blood cells from 

donors  and  provide  them  when  transplantation  is  prescribed  to  an  unrelated  patient  and  2.  ° 

Private banks that offer a commercial service to parents in order to preserve the cells to be used 

for their child or children in the future. 

DEFINITIONS 

For the purposes of this Opinion: 

a)  « cord blood » means: residual placental blood collected from the cord of the newborn; 

b)  « stem cells » means cells that can both replicate and also differentiate into several types of 

cells ; 

c)  « progenitor  stem  cells »  means  cells  whose  terminal  progeny  consist  of  a  single  cell  type 

only ; 

d)  « haematopoietic stem cells » means those cells that give rise to cells present in blood ; 

e)  « pluripotent » means capable of giving rise to all cell types in the body ; 

f)  « HLA  (Human  Leukocytic  Antigen)  types »  are  determined  by  proteins  present  on  the 

surface  of  leukocytes  that  allow  the  cells  from  the  individual  to  be  recognized.  Identical  or 

similar HLA types are necessary for successful transplantation. 

g)  « autologous transplantation » refers to the transplantation to a patient of his/her own cells ; 

h)  « allogeneic  transplantation  »  refers  to  the  transplantation  of  cells  from  a  donor  to  another 

person. 

4

 
 
 
 
SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND 

1.1. Characteristics of cord blood 

Umbilical cord blood was found to be rich not only in normal blood cells but also in haematopoietic 

stem  cells.  These  stem  cells  are  found  only  in  insignificant  numbers  in  normal  adult  peripheral 

blood. After transplantation, the haematopoietic stem cells can repopulate the bone marrow of the 

patient, providing a source of blood cells. 

An  important  characteristic  of  cord  blood  cells  is  their  immunological  immaturity.  Therefore, 

haematopoietic stem cells from cord blood are less likely to induce immunological reactions when 

transplanted than haematopoietic stem cells from bone marrow.  

Furthermore,  in  laboratory  experiments  it  has  been  shown  that  cord  blood  stem  cells  can 

differentiate  into  a  number  of  different  cell  types,  which  could  give  rise  to  future  potential  new 

therapeutic uses.  

1.2. Advantages of cord blood cells compared to bone marrow 

The collection of cord blood units is easy and non-invasive for the donor and therefore the number 

of potential donors is higher than for bone marrow. 

Cord  blood  units  are  stored  in  advance  and  are  therefore  rapidly  available  when  needed  while 

bone marrow has to be collected from the donor just before transplantation and there is always a 

risk of last minute consent refusal. 

The  HLA  type  does  not  need  to  be  a  perfect  match  in  case  of  allogeneic  cord  blood  cell 

transplantation  because  these  cells  are  less  likely  to  induce  immunological  reactions  than  bone 

marrow cells. 

1.3. Current uses of cord blood.  

Cord blood can be an alternative to bone marrow transplantation in the treatment of patients with 

blood and immune disorders requiring a source of haematopoietic stem cells.  

Cord blood is currently being used for the treatment of leukaemia, lymphomas, aplastic anaemia 

and hereditary disorders of the blood. 

It is also used as a source of stem cells for current research. 

5

 
 
 
 
1.4. Allogeneic transplantation 

In all the current uses of cord blood indicated above, the transplantations are allogeneic and the 

cells used are obtained from donation. The use of autologous graft would be inappropriate in case 

of a genetic disease as the cells of the patient would carry the same genetic defect, or in case of 

leukaemia, as the cells of the patient could also become malignant.  In the case of an allogeneic 

transplantation  there  is  always  a  risk  that  the  body  rejects  the  transplanted  tissue.  Therefore, 

HLA-typing is essential to have the best possible HLA matching between donor and recipient in 

order to minimize rejection effects and optimize the chances of therapeutic success.   

The  residual  HLA  differences  between  donor  and  recipient  may  induce  a  limited  immunological 

reaction.  In  the  treatment  of  leukaemia,  this  “graft  against  host  reaction”  is  beneficial  and 

contributes to destruction of the leukaemia cells. 

1.5. Limitations of the use of cord blood cells 

In  order  to  be  useful  for  transplantation  samples  have  to  contain  a  sufficient  number  of  cells 

according to the patient’s weight and therefore mainly young patients of small weight can benefit 

from  this  kind  of  transplantation.  Nevertheless,  recent  experience  shows  that  it  is  possible  to 

combine  several  samples  in  order  also  to  treat  adults9.  Further,  research  on  methods  of  cell 

expansion  is  actively  being  pursued  in  order  to  overcome  the  problem  of  the  limited  number  of 

cells contained in cord blood samples, which would allow a more systematic treatment of adults. 

Until  now  between  2  500  and  3  000  transplantations  from  cord  cells  have  been  carried  out 

worldwide10. Studies show higher survival rates for children than for adults. 

1.6. Autologous transplantation 

Most indications of autologous grafts concern adults who are undergoing aplasia following chemo- 

or radio-therapy. The aim of the transplantation is to repopulate the bone marrow of the patient 

with  his/her  own  haematopoietic  stem  cells  that  will  provide  a  source  of  blood  cells.  Such 

autologous  grafts  do  not  require  one’s  own  cord  blood  stem  cells  to  have  been  stored  at  birth. 

Indeed,  such  grafts  can  be  performed  by  harvesting  before  the  therapy  stem  cells  from  the 

peripheral blood of the patient after stimulation by a growth factor.  Therefore, indications to store 

cord blood at birth in view of a future autologous graft are for the present time almost non-existent. 

9 Report “A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking” by Dr J. Gunning (June 2003) 
10 Hearing of Prof. Gluckman on 18 November 2003 

6

 
 
                                                      
 
The probability of needing an autologous transplantation has been estimated as approximately 1 

in 20 000 during the first 20 years of life11.  

Exceptions can however be mentioned. In case of rare HLA types or in a family at risk of specific 

leukaemia it may be appropriate to store cord blood of newborn children in order to have available 

cells  in  case  of  need  for  a  member  of  the  family.  The  purpose  is  then  for  an  intra-familial 

allogeneic  graft  rather  than  for  a  strictly  autologous  use.  Until  January  2003,  only  5  autologous 

transplants  for  the  treatment  of  Neuroblastoma,  Aplastic  Anaemia,  and  Retino-blastoma12  have 

been mentioned in the scientific literature.   

1.7. Current research 

During recent years, research on stem cells has expanded rapidly. Research is taking place into 

differentiation  of  pluripotent  stem  cells  into  specific  cell  types  which  could  be  used  for  the 

treatment  of  chronic  diseases  such  as  Parkinson’s,  diabetes,  cancer,  or  cardiac  infarcts  by 

means of human stem cells but no clear proof of the utility of these stem cells has been shown. 

Stem  cells  from  embryonic  origin  raise  many  ethical  concerns  as  well  as  some  scientific  ones. 

Cord blood is another valuable source for research on stem cells. 

The  possibility  of  using  one’s  own  cord  blood  stem  cells  for  regenerative  medicine  is  currently 

purely  hypothetical.  Research  in  this  field  is  only  at  a  very  early  stage.  To  become  a  reality  it 

would be necessary: 

•  To be able to control the differentiation of stem cells; 

•  To have evidence of the efficacy and safety of such therapy; 

•  To be able to store cord blood stem cells for decades; 

•  To be able to multiply cord blood stem cells. 

Even if these conditions were met, it is not evident that the use of patient’s own cord blood would 

be preferable to the use of his / her own bone marrow or to well-matched allogeneic stem cells 

from donation. 

It is therefore highly hypothetical that cord blood cells kept for autologous use will be of any value 

in the future.  

11 Annas, NEJM 2000 ; 340 :1521 
12 Report “A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking” by Dr J. Gunning (June 2003) 

7

 
 
 
                                                      
 
1.8. Collection of cord blood 

During or immediately after the birth of a child residual blood from the umbilical cord and placenta 

can be collected. The collection is a technically simple procedure that poses, if carefully done, no 

foreseeable health risks to the mother or the child in a normal delivery. In Europe the most widely 

used  technique  involves  collecting  the  umbilical  cord  blood  while  the  placenta  is  still  in  utero, 

while  another  technique  waits  until  the  placenta  is  delivered  and  then  places  the  placenta  in  a 

sterile supporting structure and finally collects the blood by venepuncture. The first technique is 

more intrusive, and has the potential to interfere with the mother’s care after the delivery, while 

the  latter  requires  extra  and  specially  trained  staff  members  and  holds  a  greater  risk  of 

contamination.  Cord blood can also be collected during delivery by Caesarean section. 

The  blood  collected  in  order  to  be  donated  to  public  banks  is  collected  in  some  maternity 

departments  where  it  is  done  on  a  regular  basis  with  well  established  procedures  and  by  an 

experienced staff. However, in the case of autologous storage, the staff of the maternity hospital 

that has to collect the blood might have no prior experience of the procedure. Commercial cord 

blood  banks  simply  issue  collection  kits  to  the  expectant  parents  who  pass  them  on  to  the 

obstetric staff. 

1.9. Storage and quality of cord blood 

After  collection,  the  cord  blood  is  reduced  in  volume,  frozen  at  a  controlled  rate  and  stored  in 

liquid nitrogen at – 196°C. 

According to current experience, cells are usable for transplantation for at least 15 years.  

Before  storage,  quality  control  has  to  be  performed.  Cord  blood  units  are  screened  for  some 

infectious  diseases  before  storage  in  order  to  diminish  the  risk  of  transmission  of  infections. 

Protection  against  infection  requires  checking  the  mother  for  HIV,  hepatitis,  etc.  at  the  time  of 

collection as well as several months after collection. In case of donation made for the purpose of 

allogeneic  use,  including  within  the  family,  the  sample  has  to  be  HLA-typed.  The  HLA  type  is 

necessary to identify the sample which is compatible with the recipient. 

To be clinically useful the sample, at the present time, has to contain a minimum number of cells; 

below this number it does not have at this moment any use. Therefore, more than half of cord 

blood units have to be discarded13 (the minimum cell dose to be transplanted should be 2.0 x  

13 Report « A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking » by Dr J. Gunning (June 2003) 

8

 
 
                                                      
 
107/kg before freezing14). This might change if the samples of different donors are bulked or if cell 

expansion techniques are successfully developed. 

1.10. Umbilical cord blood banking 

There are now about 100 cord blood banks worldwide15. The present geographical distribution is 

approximately  as  follows  :  40  %  in  Europe,  30  %  in  US  and  Canada,  20  %  in  Asia,  10  %  in 

Australia and none in Africa.  

About 75 % of cord blood banks in the world are public or private non-profit banks, which offer a 

service for the public benefit. They store donated samples for the purpose of transplantation or 

research. They also store cord blood for family use in case of a known risk in a family with a rare 

HLA group. 

The remaining 25 % are commercial banks, which propose as a service the conservation of cord 

blood cells for autologous use for the benefit of their customers. In Europe, there are commercial 

banks namely in Austria, Belgium, Germany, The Netherlands, Poland and the United Kingdom16. 

1.11. Necessity of a great diversity of cord blood cells 

There is a need for a great diversity of cells with different genetic and HLA types from different 

populations  in  order  to  be  able  to  find  an  acceptable  donor  for  any  recipient  in  need.  The 

probability  to  find  an  acceptable  donor  is  much  lower  for  some  ethnic  populations.  It  is  for 

example much easier to find a suitable donor for a patient of Caucasian origin than for one of an 

African  origin,  because  most  of  the  banks  are  set  up  in  Western  countries,  and  donors  will  be 

more frequently recruited within the Caucasian population. 

1.12. Networks and registries 

Networks  of  banks  and  registries  have  been  created  around  the  world  in  order  to  share  and 

exchange  samples.  Such  co-operation  between  the  banks  is  necessary  in  order  to  have  the 

largest possible choice of donors. In general, data about the stored blood samples are held by 

the  same  registries  which  were  originally  holding  information  about  bone  marrow  donors.  The 

biggest international bone marrow and cord blood registry is the Bone Marrow Donors Worldwide  

14 Hearing of Prof. Gluckman on 18 November 2003 
15 Report “A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking” by Dr J. Gunning (June 2003) 
16 Report “A worldwide study of umbilical cord cell banking” by Dr J. Gunning (June 2003) 

9

 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
 
(BMDW)17. It is a voluntary collaborative effort of bone marrow donor registries and cord blood 

banks with the goal of providing centralised and anonymous information on the HLA phenotypes 

and  other  relevant  data  of  unrelated  bone  marrow  donors  and  cord  blood  units.  All  cord  blood 

registries participating in BMDW are expected to adhere to the guidelines of the WMDA (World 

Marrow  donor  association)18,  which  promotes  the  definition  and  standardisation  of  ethical, 

technical, medical and financial aspects of international haematopoietic stem cell transplantation. 

It has now extended its remit to cord blood registries. In 2003 the BMDW registry contained data 

on roughly 130 000 samples in about 34 different public banks all over the world. 

1.13. The European Network 

The  NETCORD  Foundation19  was  established  in  1998  with  the  aim  of  promoting  the  use  of 

umbilical  cord  blood  for  allogeneic  stem  cell  transplantation.  It  is  a  non-profit  organization 

promoting the establishment of high quality umbilical cord blood banks and has issued statutes 

and  guidelines  in  order  to  further  promote  studies  and  research  on  the  collection,  processing, 

characterization, preservation and ex vivo expansion of placental blood with the primary aim of 

improving  the  quality  of  such  components  for  clinical  cell  therapy  on  an  international  level. 

16 banks participate from 12 countries all over the world, currently totalling around 72 000 cord 

blood units and representing more than half of the units banked in the world20.  

To  facilitate  the  searches  for  cord  blood  units  by  transplant  centres,  NETCORD  has  also 

established an on-line search program, called the Virtual Office. By submitting a search request 

to the Virtual Office transplant centres will no longer have to search multiple data bases of the 

different cord blood banks, but they will receive a single unified search report on all units that are 

contained in the inventory of NETCORD.  

In  order  to  ensure  high  and  uniform  quality  of  all  cord  blood  units  in  the  NETCORD  inventory, 

NETCORD  has  established  quality  standards  in  collaboration  with  the  Foundation  for  the 

Accreditation of Cellular Therapy (FACT) on the collection, cryopreservation, storage and release 

of units. All NETCORD banks must obtain accreditation by FACT and thus have to comply with 

quality standards of FACT/NETCORD.  

17 Internet: http://www.bmdw.org  
18 Internet: http://www.worldmarrow.org  
19 Internet: https://www.netcord.org  
20 Hearing of Prof. Wernet, Chairman of NETCORD, on 18 November 2003 

10

 
 
 
                                                      
 
1.14. Research in Europe 

The  European  Commission  is  financing  in  partnership  with  Member  States  research  projects 

through its Research and Development Framework Programmes. 

A research project called EUROCORD was initiated in 1996 by The European Group for Blood 

and  Marrow  Transplantation  (EBMT)21.    EBMT  is  a  non-profit  organisation  established  to  allow 

scientists  and  physicians  involved  in  clinical  bone  marrow  transplantation  to  share  their 

experience and to develop co-operative studies. It aims to promote all aspects associated with 

the transplantation of haematopoietic stem cells from all donor sources and donor types including 

basic  and  clinical  research,  education,  standardisation,  quality  control,  and  accreditation  for 

transplant procedures. 

The  objectives  of  EUROCORD  include  establishing  a  European  Registry  of  patients  treated  by 

cord  blood  transplants.  EUROCORD  works  in  close  collaboration  with  NETCORD  banks  and 

registries. 

These objectives are in conformity with the recommendations made in the Opinion no. 11 of the 

European Group on Ethics concerning the necessity to promote surveys on practices relating to 

tissue banks and to use the surveys to provide information on perspectives in therapy, diagnosis 

and research offered by human tissues. 

21 Internet: http://www.ebmt.org  

11

 
 
 
                                                      
 
LEGAL BACKGROUND 

Most European countries have no specific legislation on cord blood banking. In fact, they have 

been following different practices. Only a very few, including Italy, have enacted specific rules on 

the issue. 

When regulations on human tissue or human blood at large exist, such as in France then cord 

blood is considered as a tissue and not as blood because it is the haematopoietic progenitor cells 

contained in cord blood which are important for transplantation. For instance the Directive of the 

European Parliament and the Council on setting standards of quality and safety for the donation, 

procurement,  testing,  processing,  preservation,  storage  and  distribution  of  human  tissues  and 

cells,  adopted  on  2nd  March  200422,  covers  haematopoietic  progenitor  cells  but  excludes  blood 

and  other  blood  products.    Another  example  is  the  Additional  Protocol  to  the  Convention  on 

Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine,  on  Transplantation  of  Organs  and  Tissues  of  Human  Origin 

which  applies  to  tissues  and  cells,  including  haematopoietic  stem  cells  but  does  not  apply  to 

blood and blood derivatives. 

1.15. The European Community 

The  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community23  in  its  Article  152  §  4(a)  provides  that  “the 

Council … shall contribute to the achievement of the objectives referred to in this article through 

adopting  measures  setting  high  standards  of  quality  and  safety  of  organs  and  substances  of 

human origin, blood and blood derivatives; these measures shall not prevent any Member States 

from maintaining or introducing more stringent protective measures.” 

In order to implement high quality standards, a legal framework has been adopted.  

First, there is a directive 2002/98/EC of 27 January 200324 concerning the quality and safety of 

collection, storage and distribution of human blood and components but it does not apply to blood 

stem cells. 

Second, the directive of the European Parliament and the Council on setting standards of quality 

and  safety  for  the  donation,  procurement,  testing,  processing,  preservation,  storage  and 

22 At the time of adoption of this Opinion an Official Journal number has not yet been attributed. 
23 The texts of the Treaties can be found on the Internet: http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/en/search/search_treaties.html  
24 Official Journal L 033 , 08/02/2003 P. 0030 - 0040 

12

 
 
 
 
                                                      
 
distribution of human tissues and cells, adopted on 2nd March 2004, applies to cord blood banks 

as haematopoietic stem cells are considered as tissues. Transplantations of tissues and cells are 

increasingly  offering  greater  opportunities  for  the  treatment  of  as  yet  incurable  diseases.  The 

objective of the directive is to ensure the quality and safety of tissues and cells at European level, 

particularly in order to prevent the transmission of diseases.  

Although  the  directive  does  not  specifically  mention  commercial  or  for-profit  private  cord  blood 

banks, it also applies to them. It therefore means that these types of institutions also have to apply 

the  quality  and  safety  standards  set  out  in  the  directive,  namely  in  terms  of  staff  training  or 

accreditation. 

The  European  Community  is  however  not  competent  when  it  comes  to  national  measures  on 

donation or medical use of organs and blood. Indeed, Article 152 § 5 of the Treaty establishing the 

European  Community  provides  that  “Community  action  in  the  field  of  public  health  shall  fully 

respect  the  responsibilities  of  the  Member  States  for  the  organisation  and  delivery  of  health 

services and medical care. In particular, measures referred to in paragraph 4(a) shall not affect 

national provisions on the donation or medical use of organs and blood.”  

It can however be noted that the directive provides in its Article 12 that “Member States shall take 

the necessary measures to encourage voluntary and unpaid donations of human tissues and cells 

with a view to ensuring that, insofar as is possible, they are obtained from such donations”, that 

“Member  States  shall  report  to  the  Commission  on  these  measures”  and  that  “on  the  basis  of 

these  reports  the  Commission  shall  inform  the  European  Parliament  and  the  Council  of  any 

necessary  further  measures  it  intends  to  take  at  Community  level”.  It  provides  further  that 

“Member States shall encourage the procurement of tissues and cells to be carried out on a non-

profit basis.” 

Concerning the duty of information, Article 28(d) refers to the information to be provided on the 

donation of cells and/or tissues. 

Finally, the respect for fundamental rights is mentioned in the recitals of the directive. Mention of 

the EGE opinions is also made in the recitals. 

13

 
 
 
 
 
 
1.16. The Council of Europe 

Article 21 of the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine25 of the Council of Europe (Oviedo 

Convention) provides that “the human body and its parts shall not, as such, give rise to financial 

gain”. 

The  Additional  Protocol  to  the  same  Convention26  concerning  transplantation  of  organs  and 

tissues of human origin, opened for signature on 24 January 2002, provides in its article 2  that 

“The  provisions  of  this  Protocol  applicable  to  tissues  shall  apply  also  to  cells,  including 

haematopoietic stem cells.”  

The European Health Committee of the Council of Europe adopted a draft Recommendation on 

autologous blood banks. At the time of adoption of this opinion the recommendation has however 

not been adopted yet by the Committee of Ministers. It recommends to its member states that : 

1.  “If cord blood banks are established, they shall be from altruistic and voluntary cord blood 

donation and used for allogeneic transplantation and related research. 

2.  The promotion of donation for autologous use and the establishment of cord blood banks 
for autologous use should not be supported by member States or their health services. 

3.  Accurate  information  should  be  provided  to  the  population  about  the  advantages  and 

disadvantages of cord blood banking. 

4.  Where autologous cord blood banks are being established, the publicity and information 
provided  to  families  must  be  accurate  and  fully  informed  consent  to  cord  blood  storage 
must be obtained.  

5.  Autologous  blood  banks  that  are  being  established  must  meet  the  same  quality  and 
safety  standards  as  set  out  in  the  Council  of  Europe’s  Guide  to  safety  and  quality 
assurance for organs, tissues and cells.” 

1.17. French legal framework 

Although there is no special regulation concerning the umbilical cord blood, there is every reason 

to admit that the rules of the code of public health relating to tissues and cells would be applicable 

to it. This would mean that umbilical cord blood can only be taken by establishments being the 

subject to an administrative authorization and only with a therapeutic or scientific aim.  

25 The text of the Convention can be found on the Internet: http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/en/treaties/html/164.htm 
26 
found  on 
http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/en/treaties/html/186.htm 

the  Additional  Protocol  on  Transplantation 

the  Convention  can  be 

text  of 

  The 

to 

the 

Internet: 

14

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
 
On the one hand, although the creation and functioning of a commercial private bank for the auto 

conservation  of  the  cord  blood  are  not  expressly  prohibited,  such  banks  seem  not  to  be  in 

accordance  with  the  principles  and  rules  laid  down  by  the  code  of  public  health.  On  the  other 

hand, in the eyes of civil law of contracts and medical deontology, the validity or the enforceability 

of the contracts by which parents are prompted to the taking and conservation of the cord blood 

for their child, taking account in particular the absence of medical and current or future therapeutic 

usefulness, could be discussed. 

In December 2002 the French National Consultative Ethics Committee (CCNE) gave an opinion 

on umbilical cord blood banks for autologous use or for research (opinion no. 74)27. 

The CCNE concludes that although it cannot recommend that private banks should be prohibited, 

it draws attention to a number of risks: 

• 

“The gravest danger is for society in so far as setting up such banks is likely to contradict the 

principle of solidarity, without which no society can survive”; 

• 

“Such  banks  raise  hopes  of  utopia  and  disguise  a  mercantile  project  using  assistance  to 

children as a screen”; 

• 

If autologous use proved to be useful, the principles of justice and equity should predominate 

and autologous storage should become routine and taken in charge by public authorities; 

•  The  uselessness  of  autologous  storage  and  its  cost  could  constitute  a  provocation  for  the 

poorest countries; 

•  At the moment of birth the attention and care for the mother and child could be diverted; 

•  The advertising made by private banks could play on the parents’ feelings such as fear and 

guilt,  although  it  should  be  made  clear  that  today  there  is  no  scientific  justification  to 

autologous storage; 

•  Should  the  management  of  an  autologous  bank  be  left  to  the  State,  the  high  cost  for  a 

currently useless technique would be unethical. 

In conclusion, the CCNE recommends to public authorities to promote the development of public 

banks which store umbilical cord blood for allogeneic purposes. 

27 The text of the Opinion can be found on the Internet: http://www.ccne-ethique.fr/english/start.htm 

15

 
 
 
 
                                                      
 
1.18. The situation in Belgium 

The  Belgian  Health  Council  gave  on  7th  December  2001  an  opinion  on  the  revision  of  tissue 

banks’ legislation28. It recommends in particular for the cord, cord blood and derived cells that :  

• 

“The cord and cord blood cells are part of the legislation regulating tissues and cells ; 

•  Quality standards for cord blood banks have to be worked out ; 

•  The therapeutic autologous uses for deferred preventive intentions have to be prohibited.”  

In its Annex II, the Health Council lists the conditions of approval and authorisation of the activities 

relating to cell and tissue banks. It stipulates in particular that “each cell or tissue bank has to be 

approved by the Minister after a report of the relevant service and after the opinion of the Health 

Council and that this approval can only be granted for (…) non-profit-making organisms”. 

A  Royal  Decree  is  in  preparation  by  the  Ministry  of  Public  Health29  in  order  to  have  a  clearer 

legislation regarding umbilical cord blood banks. The draft Decree provides that all tissue banks 

will  have  to  be  accredited  by  the  Ministry  of  Health.  The  Royal  Decree  proposes  that  the 

accreditation will be granted to non-profit organizations only. The draft Decree also clearly forbids 

the use of umbilical cord blood cells for deferred preventive intentions as well as all discrimination 

aiming at favouring a person’s access to therapeutic possibilities linked to tissues of human origin, 

any form of publicity and the research of profit.  

1.19. The Italian law30 

An ordinance from the Ministry of Health was adopted on 30 December 2002 concerning urgent 

measures  with  respect  to  stem  cells  of  the  umbilical  cord  blood  and  replacing  the  ordinance 

adopted  on  11  January  2002.  It  has  been  published  in  the  official  government  announcements 

(Gazzetta Ufficiale) no. 27 of 3 February 2003 and is valid for one year. It provides the following: 

•  Cord blood banking is only authorized as a public conservation structure; 

•  Each bank is also subject to approval by the regional government where it is located;  

•  Private banking is forbidden; 

•  The import or export of cord blood must be authorized by the Ministry of Health; 

•  These  provisions  are  believed  necessary  because  therapies  using  stem  cells  from  umbilical 

cord blood are still under study. 

28 Internet: http://www.health.fgov.be/CSH_HGR/Francais/Avis/Avis_Banques_Tissus.htm  
29 Internet: http://www.lachambre.be/QRVA/pdf/50/50K0156.pdf , p. 120 
30 Internet: http://www.cittadinolex.kataweb.it/Article/0,1519,22470|99,00.html  

16

 
 
 
                                                      
 
ETHICAL BACKGROUND 

1.20. Fundamental ethical principles 

There are several fundamental ethical principles and values which can be considered relevant for 

this opinion : 

•  The principle of respect for human dignity and integrity, which asserts the principle of non 

commercialisation of the human body; 

•  The principle of autonomy or the right to self-determination on the basis of full and correct 

information; 

•  The principles of justice and solidarity, as regards to fair access to healthcare services; 

•  The principle of beneficence, or the obligation to do good, especially in the area of health 

care; 

•  The principle of non-maleficence, or the obligation not to harm, including the obligation to 

protect vulnerable groups and individuals, to respect privacy and confidentiality; 

•  The principle of proportionality which implies a balance between means and objectives. 

There are also some value conflicts. The values of freedom and free enterprise can conflict with 

the principles of solidarity and justice, according to which access to healthcare should be on an 

equitable  basis  and  based  on  realistic  needs,  as  well  as  with  the  principle  of  protection  of 

vulnerable groups. 

1.21. Ethical concerns regarding tissue banking 

The ethical implications of cord blood banking in the case of donated samples for the purposes of 

allogeneic  transplantation  or  research  are  the  same  as  for  any  tissue  bank.  This  issue  has 

already been addressed in the EGE Opinion no. 11 on the ethical aspects of tissue banking (21 

July 1998). The ethical values underlined in this opinion are the following: body integrity, respect 

of privacy and confidentiality of data, promotion of solidarity, fairness of access to healthcare and 

information and consent of the donors. 

Regarding umbilical cord blood, the opinion no. 11 provides that “the information provided to the 

woman or to the couple must clearly explain these prospective new treatments, but stress that 

they are still very much at the experimental stage”. This opinion also provides that “in principle, 

tissue  bank  activities  should  be  reserved  to  public  health  institutions  or  non-profit  making 

organisations” but that “tissue banks set up by industry should be subject to the same licensing  

17

 
 
 
 
 
and  monitoring  requirements  as  non-commercial  operators”.  The  Group  insists  on  the  ethical 

imperative to protect health by appropriate quality and safety rules and calls for a European legal 

framework in that field and finally recommends that “the European Union should promote periodic 

surveys in the Member States to obtain and diffuse data on practices relating to human tissues, 

from  procurement  to  distribution,  the  organisation  of  tissue  banks,  particularly  concerning  the 

profit-making or non-profit making aspect … “. 

1.22. Specific concerns raised by cord blood banking for autologous uses 

Cord  blood  banking  for  potential  future  autologous  uses  raises  additional  ethical  concerns.  

Tissue  banks  were  up  till  now  relying  on  free  donation  for  treatment  to  the  benefit  of  other 

persons  or  for  research,  and  by  the  fact  that  it  implies  an  act  of  solidarity  or  generosity  it 

contributes to the social cohesion, while the commercial cord blood banks are running for profit.  

This reflects a more general shift to a privately funded health care system from a health system 

based  on  solidarity  and  motivated  by  public  health  considerations,  which  has  characterised 

Europe in the last decades. 

The services proposed by these banks and for which parents pay do not have any realistic use in 

the foreseeable future. If proposed and endorsed by medical doctors, it may raise a problem of 

trust. 

1.23. Information to consumers/citizens 

Citizens may be tempted to take advantage of all possibilities proposed for health even if they are 

not  validated.  Furthermore,  time  of  pregnancy  and  of  birth  represents  a  period  when  women  / 

parents might be vulnerable. This vulnerability and the sense of guilt in the parents who wish to 

do everything possible for their child’s good, induced by providing misleading or over optimistic 

information  may  lead  people  to  invest  money  for  something  that  they  cannot  really  afford,  and 

that may not be worth the money invested.   

1.24. Protection of vulnerable groups 

Special  attention  should  also  be  made  to  gender  aspects  because  the  collection  takes  place 

within the delivery process. The pressure to perform the collection to satisfy a pressing request 

from the parents may be heavier than when the cord blood collection is a systematic procedure in 

the context of donation. It might then distract the attention of the practitioners from care of mother 

and child. 

18

 
 
 
 
 
1.25. Reliability of the bank 

Commercial cord blood banks offer long-term storage but they might go bankrupt or at any time 

stop their activities. That could be detrimental to the customers’ interest, should they not get what 

they think they have paid for. 

1.26. Recruitment of donors 

Public banks need a great diversity of samples representing as many HLA types as possible in 

order to be able to find a suitable match for any recipient. However, if the number of private cord 

blood banks proliferates and their success increases, public banks could be deprived of potential 

donors who will prefer to have the newborn's cord blood stored for autologous use rather than to 

donate it. Therefore one may fear that public banks may have more difficulty to collect enough 

samples to reach the necessary critical mass.   

On  the  other  hand,  if  public  cord  blood  banks  are  sufficiently  supplied  with  diversified  types  of 

blood,  including  the  rare  ones,  and  if  there  is  a  good  networking  of  existing  banks  and 

development  of  registries,  any  individual  will  have  a  reasonable  chance  to  find  a  compatible 

donor and to have access to the transplants necessary for his/her treatment in case of need.  

1.27. Fairness of access to healthcare 

The  use  of  one’s  own  cord  blood  cells  is  currently  highly  hypothetical,  but  if  in  the  future 

regenerative  medicine  developed  in  such  a  way  that  using  autologous  stem  cells  became 

possible,  then  the  fact  to  have  one’s  own  cord  blood  being  stored  at  birth  could  increase  the 

chance of having access to new therapies. This would depend on the suitability of the autologous 

cord  blood  sample  for  the  particular  therapy  needed.  Not  everyone  may  be  able  to  afford  the 

costs of storage. In that case, access would be related to financial resources.  

19

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. OPINION 

The  ethical  aspects  of  human  tissue  banking  in  general  have  been  addressed  in  the  opinion 

no. 11 of the European Group on Ethics in Science and new Technologies on 21 July 1998. The 

statements made in this opinion n° 11 31 are also valid for cord blood banking. There are however 

also specific ethical aspects of cord blood banking on which is the focus of this opinion, with a 

special attention to commercial banking for autologous use. 

The Group submits the following opinion:  

2.1.  

The legitimacy of commercial cord blood banks for autologous use should be questioned as they 

sell a service, which has presently, no real use regarding therapeutic options. Thus they promise 

more than they can deliver. The activities of such banks raise serious ethical criticisms.  

2.2. 

While some members of the Group consider that this activity should be banned, the majority of the 

Group  considers  that  the  activities  of  these  banks  should  be  discouraged  but  that  a  strict  ban 

would represent an undue restriction on the freedom of enterprise and the freedom of choice of 

individuals/couples. These banks should operate under strict conditions. 

2.3. 

The  Group  notes  that  at  least  one  Member  State  has  already  forbidden  such  commercial  cord 

blood banks.  Such banks could be considered illegal and the contracts voidable or unenforceable 

in other Member States. If commercial cord blood banks are allowed by a State, such activity must 

be subject to strict regulation. Such regulation should include previous licensing by the competent 

State Authority and close supervision of the procedures followed both in the public and the private 

domain. 

31 see point 1.20 

20

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
 
 
2.4.  

If  commercial  cord  blood  banks  are  allowed,  appropriate  information  should  be  given  to  the 

consumers willing to use their services, including the fact that the likelihood that the sample may 

be used to treat one’s child is currently negligible, that the future therapeutic possibilities are of a 

very hypothetical nature and that up until now there is no indication that the present research will 

lead to specific therapeutic applications of one's own cord blood cells. Therefore, information has 

to be particularly explicit that the auto conservation has little value in the current state of scientific 

knowledge.  This  information  should  be  made  clear  on  all  media,  including  Internet,  and  in  any 

contracts linking commercial banks to their customers. 

2.5.  

Any  kind  of  advertising  made  by  commercial  cord  blood  banks  in  the  media,  including  on  the 

Internet, must be adequately controlled by public authorities.  

2.6.  

Commercial  cord  blood  banks  have  to  observe  the  same  quality  standards  as  any  other  tissue 

bank. Therefore, the EGE welcomes the Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council 

adopted  on  2nd  March  2004  on  "setting  standards  of  quality  and  safety  for  the  donation, 

procurement,  testing,  processing,  preservation,  storage  and  distribution  of  human  tissues  and 

cells", which provides for a legal European framework, namely in terms of authorization, licensing, 

accreditation, inspections, controls, promotions and publicity and staff experience. 

2.7.  

Given the possibility of termination of business or bankruptcy of a commercial cord blood bank, 

information should be provided to the customers and insurances should guarantee the continuity 

of the storage and the transfer of the samples to another bank, or the indemnity of the customers. 

21

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.8.   

The collection of cord blood must not disturb the process of delivery and should not present any 

risks for the mother and child. 

2.9.  

At present, in the exceptional cases where cord blood storage for autologous use may be justified 

for families at risk of specific diseases or with rare HLA types, it should be proposed to them that 

storage should be by public cord blood banks in order to ensure fair access to healthcare services 

to everybody needing it. 

2.10.  

Considering that the European population is increasingly multi-ethnical,  and  in  order to allow a 

fair  access  to  transplantation  for  any  citizen  whatever  his/her  ethnic  origin,  specific  measures 

should be taken by public authorities to have enough donation from different ethnic groups with 

different  HLA  patterns  so  that  for  any  patient  needing  a  transplantation,  an  appropriate  donor 

could be found.  

2.11. 

In the future, should the development get to the point where the use of one’s own cord blood cells 

may be of value, the storage should not be a service left to commercial banks but should be taken 

over by the public sector in order to ensure fair access to healthcare services for everybody.   

2.12.  

Support for public cord blood banks for allogeneic transplantations should be increased and long 

term  functioning  should  be  assured.  However  cord  blood  banks  are  of  limited  use  as  long  as 

networks  and  registries  are  not  also  supported.  Indeed,  in  order  to  make  sure  that  any  patient 

needing transplantation will find a suitable sample, the development of networks between banks 

and registries of donors is essential to be able to find rapidly a matching donor and they should 

be encouraged and supported. 

22

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.13.  

A wide European debate on the increasing role  of the market in the healthcare system and its 

advantages and disadvantages should allow European citizens to be aware of the present trends 

and their implications, in particular on the issues raised in the present opinion. 

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 

The Chairperson : Göran Hermerén 

The Members: 

Nicos C. Alivizatos 

Inez de Beaufort 

Rafael Capurro 

Yvon Englert 

Catherine Labrusse-Riou 

Anne McLaren 

Linda Nielsen 

Pere Puigdomenech-Rosell 

Stefano Rodota 

Günter Virt 

Peter Whittaker 

23

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
