The European Group on Ethics  
in Science and New Technologies 
to the European Commission 

EGE Secretariat  

ETHICS 

IN 

THE NEW MEMBER STATES 

– June 2004 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ETHICS IN THE NEW MEMBER STATES 

Introduction 

In order to get to know the EGE counterparts in the new Member States the Chairman of the 
European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New  Technologies  took  the  initiative  to  invite 
representatives of their National Ethics Committees to Brussels. 
The  EGE  Chairman  together  with  the  secretariat  received  these  representatives  usually  by 
groups  of  two  or  three,  extending  over  a  period  of  about  six  months  starting  in 
November 2003.  
During the meetings each representative was asked to explain the role, functioning and work 
of the national ethics committee of his/her country as well as of other ethics committees. The 
EGE  Chairman  also  presented  them  the  role,  functioning  and  work  of  the  Group.  The 
discussions allowed clarification of the specific challenges and difficulties met by the national 
ethics committees, and consideration of possible ways of collaboration or exchange. 
The  representatives  of  the  ethics  committees  of the  new Member  States  who participated in 
the meetings were the following : 

(cid:190)  Ms Rena Petridou, President of the Cyprus National Bioethics Committee 

(cid:190)  Dr.  Josef  Kŭre,  member  of  the  Bioethics  Committee  of  Research  and  Development 

Council of the Czech Republic 

(cid:190)  Prof. Arvo Tikk, Chairman of the Council on Bioethics of Estonia 

(cid:190)  Prof.  Laszlo  Szonyi,  Secretary  of  the  Scientific  and  Research  Ethics  Committee  of 

Hungary 

(cid:190)  Dr. Laima Rudze, Secretary of the Central Medical Ethics of Latvia 

(cid:190)  Prof. Eugenijus Gefenas, Chairman of the Bioethics Committee of Lithuania 

(cid:190)  Dr. Bridget Ellul, member of the Bioethics Consultative Committee of Malta  

(cid:190)  Fr. Paul Pace, Chairman of the Research Ethics Committee of the University of Malta 

(cid:190)  Dr.  Jerzy  Umiastowski,  Chairman  of  the  Medical  Ethics  Committee  of  the  Polish 

Medical Board 

(cid:190)  Prof. Jozef Glasa, Chairman of the Central Ethics Committee of the Ministry of Health 

of the Slovak Republic 

(cid:190)  Prof. Jože Trontelj, Chairman of the National Medical Ethics Committee of Slovenia. 

The main information resulting from these meetings is summarized hereafter. 

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Visit to Brussels of Ms Rena Petridou, Chairperson of the National Bioethics Committee 
of Cyprus 

Date : 19th April 2004 

Participants : Göran Hermerén, Christiane Bardoux, Patricia Mommens 

Creation  :  The  law  establishing  the  National  Bioethics  Committee  has  been  in  force  since 
December 2001. The Committee really started to work in October 2002.  

Composition  :  The  Committee  is  independent  and  multidisciplinary.  It  is  composed  of  13 
members who are appointed by the Council of Ministers. The representation of the private and 
the public sector is more or less balanced.  

Meetings : There is a meeting more or less every month, but sometimes more.  

Resources : The Committee has no resources at all, no office, no staff and no equipment. The 
chairperson has to do all the work alone in addition to her own job.  

Issues : The issues to be discussed are decided by the members of the Committee. Sometimes 
the Ministry of Health or the House of Parliament can have specific requests. The Committee 
has  so  far  given  opinions  on  a  proposal  to  amend  the  legislation  on  organ  and  tissue 
transplantation and on the bioethical acceptability of preimplantation genetic diagnosis on in 
vitro  fertilized  embryos,  and  their  subsequent  selection  on  the  basis  of  their  HLA 
compatibility with a sick sibling, in order to use the cord blood cells of the new born child for 
transplantation.  The  Committee  is  currently  working  on  the  ethical  acceptability  of  private 
cord blood banks and on the principles and values that must be safeguarded in the context of 
the legislation on medically assisted procreation.  

Legislation : There is no legislation on research on human embryos.  

Level  of  debate  :  There  is  a  lot  of  interest  from  the  public.  Citizens  often  write  to  the 
Committee about problems that they are facing. There is currently a public debate going on 
concerning research on human embryos.  

2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Visit to Brussels of Dr. Josef Kuře, member of the Bioethics Committee of Research and 
Development Council at the Czech Government 

Date : 17th November 2003 

Participants : Göran Hermerén, Christiane Bardoux 

Creation : The Bioethics Committee was established in 1997. 

Mandate  :  It  is  a  consultative  body  to  the  Czech  Government  via  the  Research  and 
Development  Council.  There  is  no  set  duration  of  the  mandate.  Its  areas  of  activity  are 
research ethics, genetics, genomics, GMOs and legislation on research. 

Composition : There are 15 members.  

Meetings : The Committee meets at least twice a year.  

Resources : There is a lack of resources. 

Recent issues : preparatory work on law on GMOs and on embryonic stem cell research. 

Other ethics committees : There is no committee which can be regarded as national. Beside 
the Bioethics Committee, there is also the Ethics Committee of the Ministry of Health which 
was  established  earlier,  in  1990.  It  is  composed  of  23  members,  amongst  whom  half  are 
physicians. The mandate is for four years with a maximum of two subsequent terms. It is a 
consultative  body  to  the  Ministry  of  Health.  Its  areas  of  activity  are  medical  ethics,  human 
subject  research  and  legislation  on  health  care.  The  recent  issues  were  on  the  proposed 
national 
international  conventions,  protocols  and 
recommendations  concerning  health  care,  on  review  of  drug  trials  and  on  new  therapeutic 
methods. There are also ethics committees  at  hospitals. The ethics committees of  university 
hospitals usually fulfil the role of regional ethics committees required by law since 2003 as 
review boards on drug trials. There is also the ethics committee of the Medical Association.  

to  health  care,  on 

law  related 

Obstacles  :  While  the  organization  of  ethics  committees  is  relatively  well  developed  in  the 
Czech  Republic,  the  ethical  debate  within  the  scientific  community  or  among  the  public  is 
not. There is also a significant lack of awareness of ethical issues among scientists. The image 
of ethics is impaired by the morality preached by some radical religious groups.  

Education : For the first time, in this academic year, a course on bioethics has been provided 
for  the  students  of  the  Faculty  of  Science  of  the  University  of  Brno.  Concerning  medical 
ethics,  the  majority  of  Medical  Faculties  have  compulsory  courses  in  medical  ethics  for 
medical students. No training exists for members of ethics committees.  

3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Visit to Brussels of Prof. Arvo Tikk, Chairman of the Estonian Council on Bioethics and 
Chairman of the Ethics Committee of the Estonian Genome Project Foundation  

Date : 19th January 2004 

Participants : Göran  Hermerén,  Catherine  Labrusse-Riou,  Christiane  Bardoux, 

Patricia Mommens 

Creation : The Estonian Council on Bioethics has been set up in 1998.  

The mandate : The mandate of the Council is for 2 or 3 years and can be renewed.  

Composition  :  The  Council  has  11  representatives  and  a  member  of  the  Parliament  is  also 
attending the meetings, but he is not very active. The intention is to increase the number of 
representatives to 15 with laypersons and ethicists. New members are chosen by the chairman.  

Meetings  :  The  Council  is  usually  holding  two  to  four  meetings  per  year.  Meetings  are 
organised  to  discuss  current  bioethical  problems  in  Estonia,  among  them  also  the  draft 
legislations in preparation.  

Resources : There is no remarkable financial support from the government. 

Link with government : The contacts with the government are made through the Ministry of 
Social Affairs.  

Other ethics committees : There are also several other ethics committees of which the most 
active  are  two  research  ethics  committees  and  two  clinical  ethics  committees.  The  medical 
association also has also its own ethics committee to deal with specific problems. 

Recent issues : The most recent issues addressed by the Council are cloning, at the request of 
the government, and transplantation for which a new specific legislation has been adopted. 

Legislation : There is no legislation on research. The only reference available is the Oviedo 
Convention, which Estonia ratified. The clinical trials are regulated by the Act of Medicinal 
Products. 

Main  obstacles  :  The  lack  of  support  from  the  Government  is  the  main  obstacle  to  the 
efficiency  of  the  functioning  of  the  Estonian  Council  on  Bioethics.  Another  obstacle  is  the 
lack of legislation on research.  

The  Genome  Project  :  Prof.  Tikk  is  also  the  Chairman  of  the  Ethics  Committee  of  the 
Estonian  Genome  Project  Foundation.  There  are  six  other  members.  The  objective  of  the 
project  is  the  creation  of  a  central  gene  bank  database  of  health  and  genetic  data  of  the 
Estonian population. Concerning data protection, Prof. Tikk said that the monitoring of data is 
ensured in accordance with international standards and has been prepared pursuant to the ISO 
international  quality  management  system.  The  Genome  Project  Foundation  is  a  public 
foundation. However, the scale of the project requires both public and private input. In order 
to secure funding for the project and deliver tangible pharmaceutical and healthcare products, 
a for-profit entity, Egeen International, was created. In exchange for funding and granting the 

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Estonian Genome Project Foundation a stake in the company, EGeen was granted exclusive 
commercial access to all data emerging from the Estonian Genome Project, but research with 
anonymous  gene  data  is  free  for  other  scientists.  The  project  is  currently  at  the  collection 
stage. It will start when there are approximately 30 to 40 000 blood samples collected. Data 
cannot be patented and the research must be carried out in Estonia. 

Miscellaneous : About 25 % of the population are Russian-speaking. There are no divergent 
opinions in the population about ethical issues. 

5

 
 
 
Visit  to  Brussels  of  Dr.  László  Szőnyi,  Secretary  of  the  Hungarian  Medical  Research 
Council, Scientific and Research Ethics Committee 

Date : 15th December 2003 

Participants : Göran Hermerén, Christiane Bardoux, Patricia Mommens 

Creation : The Medical Research Council in this form was created in 1989 by the Ministry of 
Health, as an advisory board. It is composed of 4 committees:  

•  Medical Research Council, Scientific and Research Ethics Committee,  

•  Medical Research Council, Ethics Committee for Clinical Pharmacology, 

•  Medical Research Council, Ethics Committee for Human Reproduction, 

•  Medical Research Council, Committee for Forensic Medicine.  

Composition : Dr. Szőnyi is the Secretary of the Scientific and Research Ethics Committee of 
the Medical Research Council. There are 24 members and a Chairman. They are appointed by 
different  authorities  for  their  personal  skills.  They  are  nominated  by  the  Medical  Research 
Council  and  by  the  Ministry  of  Health.  There  are  biologists,  physicians,  lawyers, 
representatives of religions, geneticists, bioethicists. There are also a journalist, a nurse and an 
invited member who is a representative from the Ministry of Health. 

Meetings  :  The  meetings  are  not  public  but  there  are  sometimes  hearings  of  experts.  The 
Committee can decide which issues to address. 

Resources : The Ministry of Health provides support for the secretariat. 

Diffusion of information : There is a website (only in Hungarian). Usually opinions are not 
published  but  there  has  been  a  publication  on  the  activities  at  the  occasion  of  the  10th 
anniversary.  

Addressed issues : The two last statements of the Council were respectively on biobanks and 
on stem cells. In future, the Council intends to work on euthanasia, human reproduction and 
genetics. 

Other  ethics  committees  :  There  are  regional  ethics  committees  dealing  with  ethics  and 
pharmacology. 

Miscellaneous : Hungary is a multicultural country. Several ethnic groups are living together. 
The largest minority is the Gipsy (about 6-8 % of the population). Of course this minority is 
heterogeneous as well. The life style and living standards are sometimes different. This raises 
problems,  in  particular  in  the  areas  of  education  and  healthcare.  The  unemployment  rate  is 
high  among  the  men.  The  women  and  children  have  to  work  around  their  home.  The 
achievement  of  the  children  in  primary  school  is  not  the  best.  This  raises  an  important 
education problem, which in turn raises a healthcare problem because they need special help 
to follow the medical treatment and regular financial aid to buy the necessary medicines. Dr. 
Szőnyi  underlined  that  these  are  his  personal  experiences  from  his  paediatric  liver 

6

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transplantation  practices.  Solutions  depend  upon  the  education  pace  of  the  mothers.  The 
problems  are  mostly  connected  with  the  low  living  standard  and  they  have  no  ethnic 
specificity. 

7

 
 
Visit to Brussels of Dr. Laima Rudze, Secretary of the Latvian Central Medical Ethics 
Committee  

Date : 19th January 2004 

Participants : Göran  Hermerén,  Catherine  Labrusse-Riou,  Christiane  Bardoux, 

Patricia Mommens 

Creation : The Latvian Central Medical Ethics Committee was set up in 1998. 

The mandate : The mandate of the Committee is for four years and can be renewed.  

Composition : Since 2003 Dr. Rudze was the chairman of the Committee but now the State 
Secretary  for  Health  is  the  chairman.  It  is  however  difficult  for  him  to  devote  much  of  his 
time to this task. The Committee has 14 members. The names are approved by the Cabinet of 
Ministers.  Dr.  Rudze  is  also  representing  Latvia  in  the  Steering  Committee  on  Bioethics 
(CDBI) of the Council of Europe. 

Meetings : There is at least one meeting per month, but sometimes more. 

Other  ethics  committees  :  There  are  ethics  committees  in  every  clinic  and  medical 
association. There are also 6 committees reviewing research projects.  

Recent  issues  :  The  most  recent  issues  addressed  by  the  Committee  are  on  human  tissue 
banking, transplantation and reproductive health. 

Legislation  :  Latvia  signed  the  Oviedo  Convention  but  has  not  ratified  it  yet.  There  is  no 
other legislation on research. As there is no law on research, the opinions are considered as 
recommendations  but  are  not  binding.  There  is  however  an  agreement  with  the  academy  of 
science  and  grants  for  research  projects  are  refused  if  the  projects  are  not  accepted  by  the 
Ethics  Committee.  For  tissue  donation,  consent  must  be  given  before  death,  and  can  be 
withdrawn. 

Diffusion  of  information  :  Opinions  are  sent  to  the  Parliament  as  well  as  to  several 
Ministries. The opinions are written in two languages : Latvian and Russian. Ethics seminars 
are organised between the three Baltic States.  

Main obstacles : The remarks for Estonia, namely, the multiplicity of ethics committees and 
the  lack  of  support  from  the  Government  are  the  same  for  Latvia.  As  members  of  the 
Committee  are  not  paid,  young  people  are  not  interested  to  become  members.  Hence,  the 
current members are rather elderly. 

Education  :  Ethics  is  important  in  education.  There  are  post-graduate  studies  for  medical 
doctors as well as seminars. People taking part in research projects must have a certificate that 
they have attended medical ethics courses.  

Miscellaneous : Around 30 % of the population is of Russian origin. There are no divergent 
opinions in the population about ethical issues. Until now there were a significant number of 
Russian schools but now all primary schools have to teach in Latvian. 

8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There  is  also  a  project  similar  to  the  Estonian  Genome  Project  for  which  a  law  is  in  force 
since  January  2004,  after  long  discussions.  It  is  financed  by  the  Government.  The  Ethics 
Committee has a role of observer in the project. Dr. Rudze said that if Latvia had not done it, 
another country would have taken their genes. 

9

 
 
Visit  to  Brussels  of  Prof.  Eugenijus  Gefenas,  Chairman  of  the  Lithuanian  Bioethics 
Committee 

Date : 16th February 2004 

Participants : Göran Hermerén, Günter Virt, Christiane Bardoux, Patricia Mommens 

Creation  :  It  was  created  in  1995.  Even  though  in  the  beginning  the  impetus  to  set  up  a 
national ethics body was based on so-called “medical deontology” and the attempt to resolve 
difficult cases of medical negligence or to deal with complaints from patients, in the course of 
drafting the first statute of the committee its mandate was shifted towards broader bioethical 
issues. The present statute of the committee is about to be amended.  

The mandate : The Lithuanian Bioethics Committee is an advisory board to the Ministry of 
Health, however,  it also  gives its opinions to other governmental bodies (e.g., to the Health 
Committee  of  the  Parliament)  on  request.  The  mandate  is  for  four  years.  Draft  laws  are 
submitted to the Committee for opinion.  

Composition  :  The  statutes  lay  down  that  no  more  than  half  of  the  members  should  come 
from the medical field. The others should be philosophers, lawyers, ethicists, psychologists, 
theologians, etc. The Health Minister appoints the 17 members, who elect their chairman.  

Meetings : The Committee meets almost every month on an ad hoc basis. 

Obstacles  :  The  Chairman  indicated  that  being  attached  to  the  Ministry  of  Health  is  not  an 
ideal  situation  for  an  independent  debate.  It  would  be  much  more  preferable  to  have  a 
National  Bioethics  committee  established  as  a  body  representing  a  few  key  governmental 
institutions.  

Recent issues : The Committee must also give opinions regarding specific cases. In this case, 
as in Slovakia, the Chairman can answer in his name if there is no controversial discussion. 

Resources : The Committee has a very limited budget from the Ministry of Health. It has two 
full time positions for the secretariat. One of them is fully devoted to biomedical research and 
the other is dealing with the other issues. Another resource for the Committee is the fees that 
it  charges  to  pharmaceutical  companies  to  give  opinions  on  clinical  trials.  The  Chairman 
recognizes that it may be controversial; however, the fee is collected before the ethical review 
of  research  projects  and  therefore  does  not  influence  the  decision  of  the  reviewers.  The  fee 
collected for the ethical review of research projects is used to reimburse the experts as well as 
to  monitor  ongoing  research  projects  (with  the  help  of  external  researchers,  the  Lithuanian 
Bioethics Committee has recently conducted a study on informed consent of the participants 
of biomedical research project). Therefore, in the end of the day these resources increase the 
quality of the work. (comment: It would of course be preferable to have all the Committee’s 
activities  financed  from  the  state  budget  as  is  the  case  in  Western  and  Northern  European 
countries (e.g., Norway) where research ethics committee members are paid daily allowances 
and  are  released  from  their  direct  duties  for  the  whole  day  to  attend  the  research  ethics 
committee meeting.) The Chairman considers that the lack of resources is a limiting factor.  

Diffusion  of  information  :  The  Committee  has  no  financial  resources  to  write  and  publish 
reports. The Committee has a website : http://www.sam.lt/bioetika/indexeng.htm. 

10

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other ethics committees : There are also regional research ethics committees (one is based at 
Kaunas  Medical  University,  another  one  is  due  to  be  established  in  the  near  future  at  the 
Medical Faculty of Vilnius University) and ethics committees exist in the largest Lithuanian 
hospitals. The main function of regional ethics committees is to review biomedical research 
projects  carried  out  in  the  various  regions  of  the  country,  while  hospital  ethics  committees 
(HECs)  are  supposed  to  facilitate  the  clinical  ethics  discourse  in  the  largest  health  care 
institutions  of  the  country.  It  should  be  noted  that  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  there  are  special 
guidelines  on  the  mission  of  HECs  issued  by  the  Ministry  of  Health  a  few  years  ago,  the 
functioning  of  many  HECs  is  very  vague.  In  general  it  reflects  the  situation  in  many  other 
Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  (e.g.,  to  paraphrase  the  words  of  Hungarian 
bioethicists Bela Blasshauer, HECs in his country exist more on paper than in reality). There 
are  most  probably  two  main  reasons  for  that:  lack  of  support  (including  financial)  from  the 
administration of health care institutions as well as lack of clinical ethics education. 

Legislation : There have been several laws passed by the Lithuanian Parliament which cover 
“bioethically sensitive” areas of biomedicine and health care. These are, for example, the laws 
on  patients’  rights,  transplantation  of  human  organs  and  tissues,  mental  health,  critical  care 
and  diagnosing  death,  biomedical  research  (the  texts  are  in  English  on  the  Bioethics 
Committee website). In particular, Lithuania is one of the countries which has passed the law 
on  ethical  review  of  biomedical  research.  This  law  reflects  basic  principles  of  the  Oviedo 
Convention,  which  Lithuania  has  ratified.  The  Committee  gave  a  positive  opinion  on  the 
Convention. It should be noted, however, that public debate on important bioethical issues not 
always reaches the level of informed and active public discourse. For example, there was no 
public debate on the Oviedo Convention comparable to that taking place in Germany or the 
United Kingdom. On the other hand, public debate on the issues of artificial reproduction and 
sex change has been quite active. For example, there was a draft law on sex change, which 
was  stopped  in  Parliament  due  to  strong  opposition  supported  by  the  public.  There  are 
currently two draft laws on artificial reproduction. One is very restrictive and does not even 
allow  sperm  banks  and  the  other  more  liberal.  There  is  currently  a  public  debate  and  even 
inside the Committee there is no consensus. The Catholic Church plays an active role in the 
debate on abortion and sex related issues.  

11

 
 
 
 
Visit to Brussels of Dr. Bridget Ellul, member of the Bioethics Consultative Committee 
of  Malta  and  of  Fr.  Paul  Pace,  Chairman  of  the  Research  Ethics  Committee  of  the 
University of Malta 

Date : 19th April 2004 

Participants : Göran Hermerén, Christiane Bardoux, Patricia Mommens 

Creation  :  The  Bioethics  Consultative  Committee  was  created  in  1989  with  Terms  of 
Reference  which  include  the  assessment  of  bioethical  issues  relevant  to  the  community  and 
the formulation of advice to the Minister of Health. 

Composition : The Committee is multidisciplinary. There are 12 members and a Chairman, 
all appointed by the Minister of Health. Members come from the medical, scientific, legal and 
ethical  fields  and  are  appointed  on  their  personal  merit  and  do  not  represent  specific 
organisations. There is also one member from the general public.  

Meetings  :  There  is  a  meeting  once  a  month.  Sub  committees  dealing  with  specific  issues 
meet separately and report to the Committee. 

Resources  :  The  Committee  has  no  office  and  no  administrative  back  up.  Its  address  is  the 
address of the secretary. There is however money available for publications.  

Issues : The Committee works independently and sets its own agenda but a lot of issues arise 
from  the  Ministry  or  Department  of  Health  and  therefore  most  of  them  are  related  to  the 
medical  field.  Examples  of  issues  which  have  been  dealt  with  are  transplantation,  consent, 
euthanasia,  etc.  Issues  also  arise  from  correspondence  or  from  requests,  for  guidance  on 
ethical issues, received from other bodies. When opinions are sent to the Minister of Health, 
they  are  not  legally  binding  and  the  Committee  is  not  always  informed  if  the  advice  is 
followed.  

Diffusion  of  information  :  The  minutes  of  the  meetings  are  not  public  but  once  a  year  a 
public seminar is organised and the proceedings are published as a book. The Committee has 
a newsletter with three issues per year. It is sent to medical doctors. 

Level of debate : There is very little public debate on ethical issues but individual members 
of the Committee have been active in promoting bioethical issues in the media. The public is 
usually not informed of the work of the Committee.  

Legislation : Malta did not sign the Oviedo Convention. No legislation exists on biomedical 
issues such as euthanasia, medical assisted reproduction or transplantation. The only existing 
legislation is on professional ethics. There is a new Data Protection law but confidentiality is 
a problem in a small country like Malta. 

Other  ethics  committees  :  The  University  of  Malta  has  a  new  official  Research  Ethics 
Committee.  The  Faculty  of  Medicine  has  had  its  own  research  ethics  committee  for  some 
years but it had to set its own guidelines. 

Education : Medical ethics teaching forms a very small part of the medical curriculum and 
there is a great need for a formally structured course. 

12

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Visit to Brussels of Dr Jerzy Umiastowski, Chairman of the Medical Ethics Committee 
of the Polish Supreme Medical Council 

Date : 19th April 2004 

Participants : Göran Hermerén, Christiane Bardoux, Patricia Mommens 

The  Medical  Ethics  Committee  of  the  Polish  Supreme  Medical  Council  is  not  the 
National Ethics Committee of Poland which still has to be created. 

Creation  :  The  Medical  Ethics  Committee  was  created  in  1990  by  the  Polish  Supreme 
Medical  Council,  following  the  recommendation  of  the  first  General  Assembly  of  Polish 
Doctors. 

Composition : It is not an interdisciplinary body. It is only composed of medical doctors.  

Meetings :  The meetings are usually held every two months. 

Resources  :  Financial  resources  are  covered  by  the  Polish  Supreme  Medical  Council.  All 
doctors pay a fee to the Medical Council. 

Issues :  

•  The Committee prepared the draft of the Code of Medical  Ethics, which  was debated by 
Polish  doctors,  and  within  the  general  public,  and  finally  adopted  by  the  II  General 
Assembly  of  Polish  Doctors  in  December  1991.  The  Code  was  amended  in  1993.  The 
project  of  the  amendment  was  worked  out  by  the  Committee.  In  2001  the  General 
Assembly  of  Polish  Doctors  requested  the  Medical  Ethics  Committee  to  draft  the  next 
amendment.  The  Committee  organised  the  debate  about  medical  ethics  and  deontology 
among doctors and among the general public. During 2003 three consecutive drafts of the 
Code  were  published.  The  amendment  was  adopted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  Polish 
Doctors. The new articles of the code deal with the relationship between doctors and the 
the  human  genome  protection,  biomedical 
medical  and  pharmaceutical 
experiments,  including  human  embryo  experiments,  human  cloning,  prenatal  diagnostics, 
and some other  problems. The  Code  of  Medical Ethics  is not  a  legislative document  – it 
only presents ethical principles connected with medicine and patients rights.1 

industry, 

•  The representative of the Committee participates in the COMETH meetings. 

•  The Committee cooperates with the Standing Committee of European Doctors. 

•  The Committee worked out the program of bioethical education for young medical doctors. 

Diffusion of the information : The decisions of the Medical Ethics Committee are public. 

1 An English version of the amended Code is available at the EGE Secretariat. 

13

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
Legislation : The Medical Ethics Committee appealed to the Parliament for the ratification of 
the  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine.  Unfortunately  the  Convention  has  not 
been ratified by Poland yet. The Committee presented to the Parliament the opinions about the 
additional articles to the Convention. The Committee presents to the Parliament the opinions 
about the bioethical problems connected with the objects of legislation. The Committee is in 
favour of the idea to call into being a Multidisciplinary Bioethical Advisory Committee. The 
Committee  cooperates  with  the  Parliament  in  this  field.  The  Committee  will  continue  the 
public debate on bioethical problems, particularly in the fields where legislative regulation is 
urgently  needed  –  for  example  the  problems  of  medically  assisted  procreation,  human 
cloning, or stem cells. 

Other  Committees  :  There  are  several  local  committees  for  biomedical  research,  and  one 
central.  There  is  the  ethical  committee  of  the  Polish  Academy  of  Science.    There  are  also 
some  other  committees  connected  with  particular  medical  societies,  and  with  some  other 
bodies. 

14

 
 
 
 
Visit to Brussels of Assoc. Prof. Jozef Glasa, Chairman of the Central Ethics Committee 
of  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  Co-Founder  and  Director  of  the  Institute  of  Medical 
Ethics and Bioethics n f. in Bratislava, Slovakia 

Date : 16th February 2004 

Participants : Göran Hermerén, Günter Virt, Christiane Bardoux, Patricia Mommens 

Creation  and  major  developments  :  The  Central  Ethics  Committee  was  first  created  in 
1990, soon after the „Velvet Revolution”. At that time, Dr. Glasa served as its Secretary (1990 
–  1993).  In  1992,  there  was  a  new  government  installed,  which  brought  a  lot  of  political 
changes.  In  1993,  some  personal  changes  were  introduced  concerning  the  Committee’s 
membership.  Since  then,  during  almost  ten  years,  the  Committee  had  not  been  very  active. 
The continuity of its work, however, and of the international contacts and collaboration were 
sustained. (Leading role in bioethics development in Slovakia during that period was taken by 
the Institute of Medical Ethics and Bioethics in Bratislava.). In 1997, an attempt was made to 
‘revitalise’ the Committee’s work. The activities of the Committee, however, remained very 
limited. In June 2002, the new Committee was appointed. Before that, the new Statutes were 
elaborated  and  issued  by  the  minister  of  health  (the  ad  hoc  working  group  was  led  by  Dr. 
Glasa).  

The mandate : The new Statutes of the Central Ethics Committee entered into force on 21st 
July 2003. The duration of the Committee’s mandate is four years. The Committee has been 
set up to advise the Minister of Health, other departments of the Ministry of Health, and also 
other  ministries  and  the  top  state  institutions  in  Slovakia  (the  parliament,  Office  of  the 
President,  etc.)  on  ethical  questions  connected  with  health  care,  medicine  and  biomedical 
research, in particular on the new legislative proposals in these specific areas.  

Composition  :  The  Committee  is  composed  at  present  of  19  members,  amongst  which  are 
doctors,  humanists  (2),  lawyers  (1),  representatives  of  religions  (2).  All  members  are 
appointed by the Minister of Health. The chairman and vice-chairman have been elected by 
the  members  and  their  election  confirmed  by  a  ministerial  decree.  The  chairman  and  vice-
chairman can be re-elected for a maximum of one additional term. The members can be re-
elected without limit. 

Meetings : The statutes foresee a meeting every two months (maximum every three months). 
The Committee met almost every three-four weeks between November 2003 and April 2004 
having been asked by the minister to help in drafting (and discussing the ethical aspects) of 
the  new  health  legislation  now  in  preparation  in  Slovakia.  The  meetings,  at  present  are 
frequently attended by the minister himself. The minutes of the meetings are confidential. 

Recent issues : Although most of the time at present is devoted to drafting and discussing the 
new legislation proposals, amongst the issues dealt with by the Committee since its revival in 
June  2002  have  been  the  following  problems:  program  of  re-vitalisation  of  the  system  of 
ethics committees for research (including drug clinical trials), and hospital ethics committees, 
a rare case of scientific misconduct, alleged forced sterilisations of Roma women in Eastern 
Slovakia  (some  members  were  even  participating  in  the  investigation  teams;  no  allegations 
were  confirmed),  current  public  debate  on  bioethics  questions  (e.g.  euthanasia,  abortion, 
abortion  of  the  handicapped  foetus,  cloning,  transplantation,  etc.).    A  lot  of  requests  or 
questions  are  also  sent  to  the  Committee  by  private  individuals,  municipal  officers,  ethics 

15

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
committee  members,  researchers  and  monitors  in  clinical  drug  research,  and  other  persons. 
These  are  dealt  with  either  directly  by  the  chairman,  who  informs  the  Committee  about  the 
problem and the advice given, or the case is presented and discussed by the Committee and an 
opinion letter is sent in response. The Committee had also to deal with three major petitions in 
the  country  (on  abortion,  violence  in  media,  and  respect  of  human  life,  including  embryo 
research  and  assisted  reproduction  techniques).  There  has  also  been  a  public  debate,  mostly 
media driven, on human cloning, which is at present a penal offence in Slovakia (according to 
the Penal Law (Law No. 140/1960 Coll. as later amended) amendment passed in 2003 – new 
§246a). 

Resources : An office and a secretary have been put at the disposal of the Committee by the 
Ministry of Health.  

Diffusion of information : The journal for medical ethics and bioethics (“Medical Ethics & 
Bioethics”)  is  published  both  in  Slovak  and  English  by  the  Institute  of  Medical  Ethics  and 
Bioethics n.f. in Bratislava. Every meeting of the Committee is followed by a press release. 
The  Committee  has  a  website,  which  is  part  of  the  website  of  the  Ministry  of  Health 
(www.health.gov.sk). 

Other ethics committees : In the early 1990’s, the first local ethics committees were created. 
There  are  local  ethics  committees  attached  to  health  care  facilities  or  biomedical  research 
institutions  reviewing  protocols  of  drug  clinical  trials  or  biomedical  research  projects  to  be 
performed locally. 
Regional  Ethics  Committees  will  also  be  created  in  accordance  with  Directive  2001/20/EC2 
on  the  approximation  of  the  laws,  regulations  and  administrative  provisions  of  the  Member 
States relating to the implementation of good clinical practice in the conduct of clinical trials 
on medicinal products for human use. Their task will be to review and follow up multicenter 
clinical trials and multicenter biomedical research projects. 

Legislation  :  A  lot  of  legislations  have  already  been  changed  to  be  in  conformity  with 
European  Union  law.  At  the  same  time,  the  health  care  system  is  undergoing  substantial 
changes and a new legislation introducing those will come soon before the Parliament. There 
is a new amendment of the Slovak law on drugs (Law No. 140/1998 Coll. as later amended), 
in force since 1st January 2004, which has fully harmonised the national legislation relating to 
drugs  and  drug  clinical  trials  with  the  relevant  EU  directives.  Slovakia  ratified  the  Oviedo 
Convention. Human cloning is a penal offence. 

Future  issues  :  In  the  future,  the  Committee  will  have  to  deal  with  euthanasia,  justice  in 
health care, research on embryos, genetics research and applications, and abortion. Opinions 
of  the  Committee  on  these  issues  may  be  requested  by  the  Ministry  of  Health  in  the  near 
future.  A  new  challenge  for  the  Committee  will  be  to  prepare  a  draft  proposal  of  the  new 
“bioethics law” to deal with most of the pressing ethical issues in contemporary biomedicine. 

2 Official Journal L 121 , 01/05/2001 P. 0034 - 0044 

16

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
Visit  to  Brussels  of  Prof.  Jože  Trontelj,  Chairman  of  the  National  Medical  Ethics 
Committee (NMEC) of Slovenia 

Date : 17th November 2003 

Participants : Göran Hermerén, Christiane Bardoux 

Creation : The NMEC has been created in 1977.  

Mandate  :  The  NMEC  is  a  consultative  body,  whose  task  is  to  study  ethical  issues  in 
medicine  and  give  opinions  upon  request  by  the  Parliament,  the  Minister  of  Health,  the 
National Health Council, the Chamber of Physicians, various health institutions and citizens, 
or upon its own initiative. The Committee’s decisions are reached by consensus, although the 
statutory  regulation  allows  for  voting.  Unanimous  agreement  could  so  far  be  reached  in  all 
cases. 

Composition  :  There  are  13  members  appointed  by  the  Minister  of  Health.  The  present 
membership  includes  9  medical  doctors,  a  clinical  psychologist,  a  lawyer,  an  ethicist,  a 
Roman  Catholic  priest,  a  sociologist  and  a  lay  person.  Prof.  Trontelj  is  also  representing 
Slovenia in the Steering Committee on Bioethics of the Council of Europe (CDBI). 

Meetings : There is one meeting per month. 

Issues  :  The  main  issues  dealt  with  by  the  NMEC  are  euthanasia,  non-academic  medical 
practices, brain death and organ donation, parental refusing of necessary medical treatment of 
minors,  freedom  of  choice  in  the  obligatory  immunisation  programme,  therapeutic  cloning, 
biomedical research on persons unable to consent, the rights of patients with terminal disease 
to comprehensive palliative care , the use of placebo in clinical drug studies in psychiatry. The 
Committee is presently preparing an opinion on withdrawal of treatment and nursing care of 
patients in permanent vegetative state. 

Diffusion of information : All chairman’s and committee’s decisions are given in writing and 
the reasons are explained and are also accurately recorded in the minutes of the meetings. The 
opinions are published. The members are active in public debate on a number of issues and 
often present the Committee’s views in public media.  

Other  ethics  committees  :  All  research  projects  involving  experimentation  on  human 
subjects  must  be  reviewed  for  ethical  acceptability.  Currently,  the  NMEC  reviews  the 
majority of research projects involving human subjects. However, it is envisaged to set up a 
specialised  research  ethics  committee.  Between  1  and  2  %  of  all  projects  are  rejected  on 
grounds  of  being  considered  ethically  unacceptable.  Research  associated  with  gene 
technology will be first reviewed by a specially appointed committee for human genetics, in 
accordance with the new law, and after approval submitted to the NMEC. Similarly, research 
associated with medically assisted procreation has to be first approved by a special advisory 
committee for medically assisted procreation. An independent committee for ethical issues in 
transplantation has also been set up. During the past five years, a few local ethics committees 
based at the university and regional hospitals were founded. They review some of the projects 
for which an approval by the NMEC is not explicitly required and they preview some multi-
centre  studies  prior  to  their  submission  to  NMEC.  It  is  also  planned  that,  as  the  local 

17

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
committees  acquire  more  experience,  they  should  assume  more  responsibility  for  reviewing 
research performed locally.  

Legislation : In recent years, the NMEC has substantially contributed to drafting the laws on 
organ  transplantation,  on  medically  assisted  procreation  and  on  gene  technology    A 
substantial reform of the health care system is planned in the near future.  

18

 
 
 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS 

All countries, except Poland, have some kind of national ethics committee as well as local and 
regional ethics committees. Poland is in the process of creating its national ethics committee. 
The meetings have shown that, apart from Slovenia which has a long tradition in the ethical 
field, all countries are facing a number of obstacles. The most recurrent problem and also the 
source of other obstacles is the lack of resources. In one case, the legal decision creating the 
committee explicitly holds that no means are granted to the ethics committee. In another case, 
the  committee  charges  fees  to  give  opinions  for  pharmaceutical  companies,  which  is  rather 
unusual for an ethics committee and could be controversial. The lack of resources of course 
generates problems like restricting the number of activities or the diffusion of information.  
Another  drawback,  apparently  quite  common  in  many  countries,  is  the  lack  of  interest  and 
information of the public. One can observe that there could be a vicious circle here. Indeed, 
the  lack  of  resources  prevents  good  diffusion  of  information  and  hence  there  is  no  great 
interest among the public and therefore ethical issues are little debated.  
This lack of interest in turn does not lend much credibility to ethics in general. This in turn 
can have a negative effect on the representativeness of the ethics committees as there is little 
motivation to endorse the responsibility of being a member of a national ethics committee, in 
particular among the young generation.  
Another  problem  often  mentioned  is  the  lack  of  independence,  notably  when  the  ethics 
committees are directly attached to a ministry, usually the Ministry of Health or even when 
the Minister himself attends the meetings of the ethics committee.  

Suggestions for actions 
After  having  met  the  representatives  of  all  countries,  the  EGE  Chairman  offered  to  think 
about  the  ways  the  EGE  could  collaborate  with  the  national  ethics  committees  of  the  new 
Member States. Hereafter are some suggestions. 
•  Twice yearly the EGE holds one of its meeting in the country of the Presidency. It is the 
occasion to meet with the national ethics committee, as well as with political personalities 
or experts in the issues dealt with by the EGE. If political personalities were to be met, it 
would  be  an  opportunity  to  present  the  way  the  EGE  is  functioning  and  to  explain  the 
requirements of an independent and multidisciplinary ethics committee.  

•  The  EGE  usually  organises  one  or  two  round  table  every  year  focused  on  the  issue  the 
EGE is dealing with. Representatives of national ethics committees of the Member States 
are always invited to round tables.  

•  In the margin of the EGE round tables a day or half day meeting could be organised with 

the representatives of the national ethics committees with an agreed agenda. 

•  Representatives  of  national  ethics  committees  could  be  invited  to  participate  in  EGE 

meetings when they are or have been working on a similar issue. 

•  All national ethics committees are asked to contribute to the EGE Newsletter. 

•  When an event is organised in a Member State, EGE members can be invited to speak and 
as far as possible an EGE member could come to represent the EGE and present its work. 

19

 
 
 
 
For more information 

European Commission 
Secretariat of the European Group on Ethics 
Office BREY 10/118 
B – 1049 Brussels 

Patricia Mommens,  
tel. 32 2 296 84 74,  
e-mail : patricia.mommens@cec.eu.int 

Joëlle Bezzan,  
tel. 32 2 296 19 48,  
e-mail : joelle.bezzan@cec.eu.int  
Fax: 00 32 2 299 45 65 

Website:  
http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics 

20

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
