Publications.europa.eu

How to obtain EU publications 
Our priced publications are available from EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu/), where you 
can place an order with the sales agent of your choice. 

The Publications Office has a worldwide network of sales agents. You can obtain their contact 
details by(cid:1)sending a fax to (352) 29 29-42758. 

 
The European Group on Ethics in Science and New  
Technologies to the European Commission 

Opinion on the ethical aspects of  
ICT implants in the human body 

- Opinion N° 20 - 

-  16 March 2005  - 

..

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers  
to your questions about the European Union 

Freephone number (*): 
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11 

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers or these calls 

may be billed. 

A great deal of additional information on the European Union is available on the Internet. 
It can be accessed through the Europa server (http://europa.eu). 

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication. 

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, 2005 

ISBN 92-894-9351-8 

© European Communities, 2005 
Reproduction of the text of the Opinion Nr 20 is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. Reproduction of 
the Study ’’ICT implants in the Human Body, A review’’ (pages 115-154) is prohibited. 

Printed in Luxembourg 

PRINTED ON WHITE CHLORINE-FREE PAPER 

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

OPINION N° 20:  

ENGLISH VERSION  ............................................................................................................3 
FRENCH VERSION............................................................................................................37 
GERMAN VERSION……....................................................................................................75 

STUDY INITIATED WITHIN THE PREPARATION OF THE OPINION: 

"ICT IMPLANTS IN THE HUMAN BODY, A REVIEW", ....................................................115 
by Dr Fabienne Nsanze, European Commission Trainee with the Secretariat of 
the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 
February 2005 

APPENDIX: 

THE SECRETARIAT OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS..............................155 

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
..

The Text of the Opinion N° 20 

ETHICAL ASPECTS OF ICT IMPLANTS IN THE HUMAN BODY 

Delivered by the European Group on Ethics 
in Science and New Technologies 
to the European Commission 

on 16 March 2005 

.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.

 
 
OPINION  OF  THE  EUROPEAN  GROUP  ON  ETHICS  
IN  SCIENCE  AND  NEW  TECHNOLOGIES  
TO  THE  EUROPEAN  COMMISSION 

No 20   

Original in English 

16th March 2005 

******************************************************************************** 

ETHICAL ASPECTS OF ICT IMPLANTS IN THE HUMAN BODY 

Reference:  
Rapporteurs:   Professor Stefano Rodotà and Professor Rafael Capurro 

Opinion produced on the direct initiative of the EGE 

******************************************************************************** 

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE), 

Having regard to the European Union Treaty and in particular Article 6 of the common provisions 

concerning the respect for fundamental rights; 

Having regard to the EC Treaty and in particular Article 152 on public health; 

Having  regard  to  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  rights  of  the  European  Union  of  28 September 

2000,  approved  by  the  European  Council  in  Biarritz  on  14th October 2000  and  proclaimed 

solemnly in Nice by the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission on December 7th 

2000, in particular Article 1 on « Human dignity », Article 3 on the « Right to the integrity of the 

person », and Article 8 on « Protection of personal data »; 1 

Having regard to Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 

2002 concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic 

communications sector; 2 

1  Official Journal C 364 of 18th November 2000, p. 1 - 22 
2  Official Journal L 201 of 31 July 2002, p 37-47 

3

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Having  regard  to  Directive  95/46/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  the 

European Union of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing 

of personal data and on the free movement of such data; 3 

Having regard to the Council Directive 90/385/EEC of 20 June 1990 on the approximation of the 

laws of the Member States relating to active implantable medical devices; 4 

Having regard to the Council of Europe Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, signed on 

4  April  1997  in  Oviedo;  in  particular  Article  1  “Purpose  and  object”,  Article  2  “Primacy  of  the 

human being”, Articles 5 to 9 on consent and Article 10 “Private life and right to information”; 5 

Having regard to the Universal Declaration on the human genome and the rights of man adopted 

by the UNESCO on 11 November 1997; 6 

Having  regard  to  the  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Individuals  with  regard  to  Automatic 

Processing of Personal Data of the Council of Europe of 1 January 1981; 7 

Having regard to the Declaration of Principles of the World Summit on the Information Society of 

12 December 2003, in particular Article 58 on the use of ICTs and Article 59 on the abusive uses 

of ICTs; 8 

Having regard to the hearings of experts and Commission Services by the EGE on 15/12/2003, 

16/03/2004 and 15/06/2004 in Brussels; 

Having  regard  to  the  report  by  Dr  Fabienne  Nsanze  “ICT  implants  in  the  human  body  –  A 

Review”, February 2005; 9 

Having regard to the Roundtable organised by the EGE on 21st December 2004 in Amsterdam; 10 

Having heard the EGE rapporteurs, Professor Stefano Rodotà and Professor Rafael Capurro; 

3   Official Journal L 281 of 23rd November 1995, p. 31 – 50 
4  Official Journal L 189 of 20th July 1990, p. 17 - 36 
5  http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/en/treaties/html/164.htm 
6  http://portal.unesco.org/shs/en/ev.php-URL_ID=2228&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html 
7  http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Treaties/Html/108.htm 
8  http://www.itu.int/wsis/ 
9  Annexed to this Opinion 
10  Proceedings of the Round Table Debate – The ethical aspects of ICT implants in the human body dated 

21st December 2004 

4

.

 
 
                                                 
WHEREAS: 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Information  and  communication  technologies  (ICT)  pervade  our  lives.  Thus  far,  this  pervasive 

influence has mainly involved devices that we use for private purposes or at the work place such 

as  personal  computers,  mobile  phones,  laptops  and  the  like.  Due  to  new  developments  these 

devices are becoming more and more part of our bodies, either because we wear them (wearable 

computing) or because they are implanted in our bodies. 

At  first  sight  ICT  implants  are  ethically  unproblematic  if  we  think  for  instance  about  cardiac 

pacemakers. However, although ICT implants may be used to repair deficient bodily capabilities 

they can also be misused, particularly if these devices are accessible via digital networks. One 

might even think of such devices as a threat to human dignity and particularly to the integrity of 

the  human  body  (see  Section  5),  while  for  others  such  implants  might  be  seen  primarily  as  a 

means for restoring damaged human capabilities and therefore as a contribution to the promotion 

of human dignity. 

The idea of letting ICT devices get under our skin in order not just to repair but even to enhance 

human capabilities gives rise to science fiction visions with threat and/or benefit characteristics. 

However, in some cases, the implantation of microchips is already taking place with the potential 

for individual and social forms of control. 

The  intimate  relation  between  bodily  and  psychic  functions  is  basic  to  our  personal  identity. 

Modern  neurosciences  are  emphasising  this  view.  Language  and  imagination  influence  in  a 

unique way our perception of time and space; the way we perceive ourselves and others; the way 

we  relate  to  other  non-human  living  beings  and  to  the  natural  environment;  the  way  we  create 

historically, culturally, politically, legally, economically, and technically our societies; the way we 

acquire knowledge about ourselves and about the world; and the way we produce, create, and 

exchange things. 

ICT  devices  are  the  products  of  human  invention.  The  functions  they  achieve  are  based  on 

programmable or algorithmic calculations mostly using non-biological substances such as silicon. 

This allows a simulation of some biological and psychic functions11. Furthermore, it is in principle, 

and  today  also  in  practice,  possible  to  implant  ICT  devices  in  the  human  body  in  order  for 

11  It should be noted that there is a lively debate about the mechanistic view of the brain, which is not 

addressed in this Opinion. 

5

.

 
 
 
                                                 
instance  to  restore  bodily  functions  or,  as  in  the  case  of  prostheses  and  artificial  limbs,  to 

substitute some body parts. 

These are the essential reasons why potential and actual ICT implants in the human body have 

large and important ethical consequences. 

Consequently,  the  objective  of  this  Opinion  is  primarily  to  raise  awareness  and  questions 

concerning  the  ethical  dilemmas  created  by  a  range  of  ICT  implants  in  this  rapidly  expanding 

field. Ethical awareness and analysis must take place now in order to ensure an appropriate and 

timely  impact  on  the  various  technological  applications.  Nevertheless,  where  necessary  this 

Opinion  proposes  clear  ethical  boundaries,  legal  principles  and  suggests  several  steps  that 

should be taken by responsible regulators in Europe. The Opinion focuses on ICT implants in the 

human body (see Section 6.1). 

2. GLOSSARY 

ICT  devices:  Devices  using  information  and  communication  technologies  usually  based  on 

silicon chip technology. 

Active  medical  device:  Any  medical  device  relying  for  its  functioning  on  an  internal  and 

independent source of electrical energy or any source of power other than that directly generated 

by the human body or gravity.12 

Active implantable medical device: Any active medical device which is intended to be totally or 

partially introduced surgically or medically, into the human body or by medical intervention into a 

natural orifice, and which is intended to remain after the procedure.13 

Passive ICT implants: ICT implants in the human body that rely on an external electromagnetic 

field for their operation (see for example Section 3.1.1 the “Verichip”). 

Online ICT implants: ICT implants that rely for their operation on an (“online”) connection to an 

external  computer  or  which  can  be  interrogated  (“online”)  by  an  external  computer  (see  for 

example Section 3.1.2 Biosensors). 

Offline ICT implants: ICT implants that operate independently of external ICT devices (perhaps 

after an initial setting up operation) (see for example Section 3.1.1 Deep Brain Stimulation). 

12  Definition taken from Council Directive 90/385/EEC on active implantable medical devices. 
13  Definition taken from Council Directive 90/385/EEC on active implantable medical devices. 

6

.

 
 
 
 
                                                 
3. SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL BACKGROUND 

(See  detailed  report  by  Dr  Fabienne  Nsanze  “ICT  implants  in  the  human  body  –  a  review”  of 

February 2005 – annexed to this Opinion) 

3.1. Current Applications and Research 

3.1.1. Applications: ICT implants on the market 

This  section  contains  information  about  implants  in  the  human  body  that  are  available  in 

commercial form and have been researched, in some cases, for decades. 

Active medical devices 

The history of implantable devices in clinical practice started in the 1960s with the development of 

the  first  heart  pacemakers  to  replace  the  autonomic  rhythm  of  the  heart.  Systems  for  bladder 

stimulation  that  allow  paraplegics  (paralysis  of  the  lower  limbs  often  resulting  from  spinal  cord 

injuries) to control voiding followed in the 1980s. The most recent examples of active implants for 

functional electrical stimulation are stimulators to treat pain in patients with tumours and trembling 

caused  by  Parkinson’s  disease,  and  to  restore  the  grasp  function  in  quadriplegics  (paralysis  of 

the  arms,  legs  and  trunk  below  the  level  of  an  associated  spinal  cord  injury).  Typical  devices 

include the following: 

•  Cardiovascular pacers for patients with conduction disorders or heart failure 

•  Cochlear  implants:  the  cochlear  implant  differs  from  the  hearing  aid  in  that  it  does  not  amplify 

sound and bypasses the damaged part to send sound signals directly to the auditory nerve. 

•  Auditory Brainstem implant (ABI) is an auditory prosthesis that bypasses the cochlea and auditory 

nerve to help individuals who cannot benefit from a cochlear implant because the auditory nerves 

are  not  working.  The  brainstem  implant  stimulates  directly  the  cochlear  nucleus  situated  in  the 

brainstem. 

• 

Implantable programmable drug delivery pumps: 

(cid:57)  Administration  of  Baclofen  for  patients  with  Multiple  Sclerosis  with  severe  spasticity 

(intrathecal administration i.e. within the spinal canal) 

(cid:57)  Insulin pump for Diabetes 

.

7

 
 
 
 
• 

Implantable Neurostimulation Devices: the term “neurostimulation” relates to technologies that do 

not  directly  stimulate  a  muscle  as  a  functional  electrical  stimulation  device  (i.e.,  cardiac 

pacemakers). Rather, neurostimulation technologies modify electrical nerve activity. 

(cid:57)  Spinal cord stimulation for chronic pain management 

(cid:57)  Sacral nerve stimulation for treatment of refractory urinary urge incontinence 

(cid:57)  Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) for seizure control in epilepsy or for mood control in severe 

depression cases 

•  Deep brain stimulation (DBS): 

(cid:57)  for tremor control in patients with Parkinson's disease 

(cid:57)  for  essential  tremor:  Patients  with  essential  tremor  have  no  symptom  other  than  tremor, 

which may occur in their hands, head, legs, trunk or voice. As for patients with Parkinson’s 

disease, they can be helped with deep brain stimulation therapy. 

•  Artificial chip-controlled leg: the German company Otto Bock Healthcare GmbH has developed a 

prosthesis called “C-Leg®” which is a chip-controlled leg. 

Identification and location devices 

Microchip devices come in three forms: 

1)  Read-Only: this is the simplest form of devices that have a read-only character, similar to that 

now  used  for  identification  of  animals.  Even  this  most  basic  form  would  have  numerous 

applications,  for  example,  to  identify  Alzheimer’s  patients,  children  and  the  unconscious.  A 

broader use would be as a sort of national identification card, based upon the identifying number 

carried on the microchip. 

2)  Read-Write: this type of microchip would be capable of carrying a set of information which could 

be expanded as necessary. It allows the storage of data and is programmable at distance. For 

example,  when  the  microchip  carries  a  person’s  medical  history  and  the  history  evolves,  the 

subsequent information could also be added to the microchip without the necessity of removing 

the implanted chip. It could also facilitate and record financial transactions. The third important set 

of information that a read-write microchip could carry might be criminal records. 

3)  Devices  with  tracking  capabilities:  besides  the  read-write  capabilities  described  above,  a 

device  can  also  emit  a  radio  signal  which  could  be  tracked.  Applications  would  again  be 

numerous as evidenced by the less advanced technologies already in existence. Such a device 

.

8

 
 
needs  a  power  source  that  has  to  be  miniaturized  before  being  implantable.  With  a  microchip 

implant,  constant  monitoring  would  be  possible.  If  each  chip  emitted  a  signal  of  a  unique 

identifying  frequency,  implanted  individuals  could  be  tracked  by  simply  dialling  up  the  correct 

signal. Because the receiver is mobile, the tagged individual could be tracked anywhere. 

Typical devices include: 

•  RFID  devices:  millions  of  Radio  frequency  identification  (RFID)  tags  have  been  sold  since  the 

early  1980s.  They  are  used  for  livestock,  pet,  laboratory  animals,  and  endangered-species 

identification. This technology contains no chemical or battery. The chip never runs down and has 

a life expectancy of 20 years. 

•  VeriChip™  or  the  “human  bar  code”:  VeriChip™  (www.4verichip.com)  is  a  subdermal  RFID 

device, about the size of a grain of rice, which is implanted in the fatty tissue below the triceps. 

Current applications of the VeriChip include: 

(cid:57)  Medical  records  and  healthcare  information  (blood  type,  potential  allergies  and  medical 

history) 

(cid:57)  Personal  information/identity:  In  the  Baja  Beach  Club  (in  Spain  and  The  Netherlands, 

http://www.baja.nl), people use the VeriChip™ like a smartcard to speed up drink orders and 

payment. 

(cid:57)  Financial information (secondary verification) 

Besides these areas, the extended applications include public transportation security, access to 

sensitive buildings or installations and tracking down people on parole, ex-convicts, criminals, etc. 

Currently, a person has to stand within a few feet from a scanner for the tag to “wake up”. Thus, 

the  tags  can  be  used  to  follow  someone's  steps  only  when  they  are  near  scanners. 

Consequently,  the  VeriChip™  is,  for  the  moment,  not  an  implantable  GPS  (Global  Positioning 

System) device. 

•  The  Bavarian  company  Ident  Technology  (http://www.ident-technology.com)  offers  tracking 

devices using the human body (particularly the skin) as a digital data transmitter. 

•  Female  remote-control  Orgasm  Implant:  A  machine  that  delivers  an  orgasm  at  the  push  of  a 

button was patented in the US in January (2004). 

.

9

 
 
3.1.2. Research on ICT Implants 

Medical devices 

•  Biosensors:  Biosensors  or  MEMS  (Micro  Electro-Mechanical  System)  devices  are  sensors 

implanted inside the human body for accurate monitoring of inaccessible parts of the body. The 

biosensors form a network and collectively monitor the health condition of their host. This involves 

the collection of data about physiological parameters like blood pressure or glucose levels and 

making decisions based on it, such as alerting doctors to a potential medical crisis. 

The  information  to  be  transmitted  is  crucial  medical  information  that  is  required  by  law  to  be 

secure. Consequently, information technology is a critical component of these biological implants 

that,  with  the  energy,  memory  and  computational  capabilities,  present  challenging  research 

issues. 

There are several biomedical applications where this technology will be useful. Examples include 

sensors  implanted  in  the  brain  of  patients  with  Parkinson's  disease  or  epilepsy,  acoustic  and 

optical  biosensor  arrays  for  blood  analysis,  and  sensors  implanted  in  the  body  of  a  recovering 

cancer patient to detect cancer cells. 

•  Artificial hippocampus: an example of a future brain prosthesis is the implantable brain chip that 

could  restore  or  enhance  memory.  The  hippocampus  plays  a  key  role  in  the  laying  down  of 

memories. Unlike devices such as cochlear implants, which merely stimulate brain activity, this 

chip implant will perform the same processes as the damaged part of the brain it is replacing. It 

promises to be a way to help people who have suffered brain damage due to stroke, epilepsy or 

Alzheimer's disease. 

•  Cortical implant for the blind: it has been known for many years that electrical stimulation of the 

eyes evokes phosphenes leading to visual perception. With a cortical implant, information from a 

tiny  digital  camera  could  be  transmitted  to  electrodes  implanted  in  the  visual  cortex,  bypassing 

the non-working retina or optic nerve. 

•  Ocular implant or artificial retina: other researchers are focusing on new technologies to replace 

damaged retina, the light-sensitive cell layer in the eye. 

A  retinal  prosthesis  involves  electrically  stimulating  retinal  neurons  beyond  the  receptor  layer 

with signals (light) from a microscopic digital camera; it is feasible when the inner retina and optic 

nerve  remain  intact.  In  fact,  currently  two  approaches  are  being  investigated  for  retinal 

prosthesis: sub-retinal and epi-retinal. 

.

10

 
 
•  Brain-computer  interfaces  (BCI)  or  direct  brain  control:  the  technologies  involved  above  are 

communication  technologies;  they  take  information  from  the  brain  and  externalize  it.  There  are 

internalizing technologies (cochlear or optic-nerve implants) whose purpose is to take information 

from the outside and provide individual access to it. These two technologies will eventually come 

together  to  form  interactive  technologies  which  would  allow  input-output  interactions.  These 

systems could allow people to use signals directly from the brain for communication and control 

of movement. 

Although  human  studies  demonstrate  the  feasibility  of  using  brain  signals  to  command  and 

control  external  devices,  researchers  emphasize  that  many  years  of  development  and  clinical 

testing  will  be  required  before  such  devices  -  including  “neuro-prosthetic”  limbs  for  paralyzed 

people, become available. 

Surveillance or tracking devices 

•  Wearable  ICT  devices  for  tracking  the  human  body:  such  a  device  allows  an  individual  with  a 

receiver to pinpoint someone's position worldwide. 

•  Subdermal  GPS  Personal  Location  Devices:  in  May  2003,  Applied  Digital  Solutions  (ADS) 

(http://www.adsx.com) claimed that “Digital Angel”, a prototype implantable GPS tracking device 

had  been  successfully  tested.  However,  technical  experts  are  questioning  whether  the  system 

could  really  work.  The  disc-shaped  "personal  location  device"  measures  6.35  centimetres  in 

diameter  and  1.27  centimetres  in  depth  -  roughly  the  same  size  as  a  pace-maker.  This  GPS 

monitoring  could  be  used  for  several  purposes,  such  as  for  example,  in  case  of  medical 

emergencies (heart attack, epilepsy or diabetes), or for identification and location purposes (for 

people in high risk occupations, children, stalkers or suspected terrorists). 

Enhancement or commodity devices 

Computer  scientists  have  predicted  that  within  the  next  twenty  years  neural  interfaces  will  be 

designed that will not only increase the dynamic range of senses, but will also enhance memory 

and enable “cyber think” — invisible communication with others. 

Possible devices include: 

•  Prosthetic  cortical  implant  (intelligence  or  sensory  “amplifiers”):  initially  developed  for  the  blind, 

the cortical implant will allow “healthy” people permanent access to information from a computer 

based either on what a digital camera sees or based on an artificial “window” interface. 

.

11

 
 
•  Artificial Vision: according to recent research undertaken to develop an artificial retina, it will be 

possible,  one  day,  to  see  light  in  the  infrared.  In  this  case,  instead  of  using  a  standard  video 

camera, an infrared camera could be used. 

•  Audio tooth implant or tooth phone: designed in 2002, the Audio tooth implant, still only exists in 

concept form. A micro-vibration device and a wireless low frequency receiver are implanted in the 

tooth during routine dental surgery. The tooth communicates with an array of digital devices, such 

as mobile telephones, radio and computers. Sound information is transferred from the tooth into 

the inner ear by bone transduction. Sound reception is totally discreet enabling information to be 

received anywhere at anytime. 

•  Artificial hippocampus: as mentioned above, this implantable brain chip could enhance memory. 

3.2. Other Potential Uses 

Other potential uses of implantable ICT devices include: 

•  Microsoft patent number 6,754,472 (June 22, 2004) concerns the human body as a medium for 

transmission  of  data  (and  energy)  to  “other  devices”  like  PDAs  (Personal  Digital  Assistant), 

cellular phones, medical devices (for surveillance purposes: like for instance in retired people’s 

homes), RFID making possible to localize other persons. In a family website your children could 

log onto the surveillance system and look at what their parents or grandparents are doing. The 

patent does not describe any specific device. 

• 

“Smart guns”: Applied Digital Solutions (ADS), which created the VeriChip™, announced in April 

2004 a partnership with gun manufactures FN Manufacturing to produce so-called “smart guns”. 

Such weapons can be fired only if operated by their owner with a RFID-chip implanted in his or 

her hand. 

3.3. The 6th Research and Development Framework Programme (FP6) 

“The  objectives  of  the  Information  Society  Technologies  (IST)  theme  within  FP6  are  to  ensure 

European leadership in generic and applied technologies at the heart of the knowledge economy. 

It aims to increase innovation and competitiveness in European businesses and industry and to 

contribute to greater benefits for all European citizens. 

The  focus  of  IST  in  FP6  is  on  the  future  generation  of  technologies  in  which  computers  and 

networks  will  be  integrated  into  the  everyday  environment,  rendering  accessible  a  multitude  of 

services  and  applications  through  easy-to-use  human  interfaces.  This  vision  of  “ambient 

.

12

 
 
intelligence”  places  the  user  at  the  centre  of  future  developments  for  an  inclusive  knowledge-

based society for all”.14 

Examples of Projects funded by the FP6 

Nano scale materials and sensors and Microsystems for medical implants improving health and 

quality of life 

In this project key micro system technologies and communication methods will be developed that 

bring  intelligence  directly  to  the  human,  in  the  form  of  medical  implants  and  ambulatory 

measurement systems, and also enable information from these devices to be transmitted out into 

the wider environment. The overall objective is to develop the technologies that go to make up a 

micro system, and then to produce specific medical devices to exploit these technologies. 

The  resulting  final  medical  products  include  cochlear  and  retina  implants,  nerve  stimulation, 

bladder control and pressure monitoring systems. It is estimated from the available statistics that 

around 50% of the western population i.e. around 500 million citizens, will suffer from at least one 

of the health problems targeted in this project. 

The OPTIVIP project 

The  aim  of  OPTIVIP  is  the  optimization  of  an  implantable  visual  prosthesis  based  on  the 

stimulation of the optic nerve and its demonstration within a pre-clinical study. 

Ethical issues are tackled in this project by specific project tasks being devoted to obtaining input 

from the blind community and especially from patients and their representatives. Various aspects 

of the prosthesis, namely functionality, appearance and ethics are covered. This is essential in 

order to direct research efforts in accordance with real needs. 

4. LEGAL BACKGROUND 

4.1. General Principles 

The innovative features of the issues addressed in this Opinion make it difficult to pinpoint rules 

that  are  specifically  applicable  to  ICT  implants  in  the  human  body.  Therefore,  the  legal 

background  should  be  derived  from  general  principles  underlying  national  legislation  and 

international  instruments.  Such  general  principles  can  provide  the  guidance  required  to  outline 

the legal standards necessary for the regulation  of a technology that modifies the body and its 

relationship with the environment and thereby impacts deeply on personal identity and life. These 

14 FP6 2003-2004 work Programme IST theme, http://www.cordis.lu/ist/workprogramme/en/2_2.htm 

13

.

 
 
 
                                                 
legal  principles  can  be  found  in  texts  concerning  different  subject  matters:  from  bioethics  to 

electronic  information  processing,  from  the  limitations  on  consent  to  the  definition  of  medical 

devices. 

As for the European legal background, specific importance should be attached to the Charter of 

Fundamental Rights of the EU, which is currently Part II of the Treaty Establishing a Constitution 

for Europe. This sets out the general principles of dignity, freedom, equality, solidarity, citizenship 

and  justice,  as  well  as  integrity  and  inviolability  of  the  body,  with  particular  regard  to  informed 

consent (Article 3), and personal data protection (Article 8). Data protection issues are developed 

in Directives 95/46 and 2002/58. The precautionary principle is expressly referred to in Article 174 

of the EC Treaty as well as, in greater detail, by the Commission’s Communication (2000/1) of 2 

February 2000.15 Active medical devices are defined and regulated by Directive 90/385. 

Among  international  instruments,  specific  importance  is  to  be  attached  to  the  Convention  on 

Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine  of  the  Council  of  Europe  (1997)  and  UNESCO’s  Universal 

Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights (1997), in particular as regards respect for 

the dignity and integrity of individuals and the informed consent principle. Significant guidelines 

are also provided by points 58 and 59 of the Declaration of Principles of the World Summit on the 

Information Society (2003), which point out the need for ICT to be always implemented in such a 

manner as to respect fundamental rights and private life. 

National constitutional charters and domestic laws contain several provisions applying to respect 

for  dignity,  protection  of  physical  integrity  and  health,  informed  consent,  and  transplantation 

matters. 

A  number  of  judicial  and  administrative  decisions  deal  directly  or  indirectly  with  the  issues 

addressed in this Opinion, such as the judgment of 14 October 2004 by the European Court of 

Justice  in  the  Omega  v.  Oberbürgermeister  Bonn  case  (Case  C-36/0216)  and  the  Order  of  12 

October 2004 by the US Food and Drug Administration on the testing of the VeriChip for medical 

purposes. 

On  the  whole,  these  instruments  allow  one  to  derive  a  set  of  principles  on  which  the  legal 

framework can be built and on which the lawfulness of ICT implants in the human body can be 

assessed. 

15 http://europa.eu.int/comm/dgs/health_consumer/library/pub/pub07_en.pdf 
16 http://curia.eu.int/jurisp/cgi-bin/form.pl?lang=en&Submit=Submit&alldocs=alldocs&docj=docj 

&docop=docop&docor=docor&docjo=docjo&numaff=36%2F02&resmax=100 

14

.

 
 
 
                                                 
4.2. Human Dignity 

The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union opens with the dignity principle. Article 

1 of which states that “human dignity is inviolable”. This is modelled on the German Grundgesetz 

and is in line with the declaration made in the Preamble to the Charter, whereby the Union is said 

to  “place  the  individual  at  the  heart  of  its  activities”.  This  principle  was  upheld  as  an  absolute 

boundary in the Omega decision, which considered it lawful for German authorities to prohibit a 

game called “Playing at Killing” because it was found to be “a threat to public policy by reason of 

the  fact  that,  in  accordance  with  the  concept  prevailing  in  the  public  opinion,  the  commercial 

exploitation  of  games  involving  the  simulated  killing  of  human  beings  infringed  a  fundamental 

value, enshrined in the national constitution, namely human dignity”. 

This  “affront  to  human  dignity”  is  not  only  of  such  import  as  to  legitimise  a  prohibition  limiting 

freedom of enterprise; it also acts as a boundary on the freedom of individual choice, because it 

rules  out  that  the  players’  informed  consent  can  be  regarded  as  an  item  making  the  game  in 

question something that is socially and legally acceptable. Therefore, the dignity principle should 

be regarded as a tool to identify the cases in which the body should be absolutely “inviolable”. 

In the very well-known Census Act Case of Germany, it was stressed exactly that “the focus of 

the constitutional order is the value and dignity of the person, who operates in self-determination 

as  a  member  of  a  free  society”  (Judgement  of  the  Bundesverfassungsgericht  of  15  December 

1983). This is in line with the clear-cut guidance contained in the Preamble as well as in Article 1 

of  the  1948  Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights,  which  expressly  refers  to  dignity  as  an 

essential component of the human being and a condition  for freedom and equality. As regards 

more  recent  constitutional  experiences,  one  need  only  consider  Article  16  in  the  French  Civil 

Code or Article 2 in the Italian Data Protection Code, which expressly mention dignity. This also 

applies  in  international  instruments  such  as  the  Helsinki  Declaration  (1964),  the  Council  of 

Europe’s Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine (1997), which begins by re-affirming the 

principle of human dignity, and UNESCO’s Universal Declaration on the Human Genome (1997). 

Finally,  Article  1  of  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  EU  (2000)  states  that  “Human 

dignity is inviolable. It must be respected and protected”. 

One can therefore reach the conclusion that dignity is a universal, fundamental, and inescapable 

term of reference even though it should always be seen against a specific cultural background. 

This conclusion might be supported nowadays by underlining that dignity is referred to with ever-

increasing  frequency  in  the  instruments  adopted  by  international  organisations  representing  all 

world  cultures  –  such  as  UNESCO  (indeed,  dignity  is  mentioned  fifteen  times  in  the  Universal 

15

.

 
 
Declaration on the Human Genome). From this standpoint, dignity is bound to become a cross-

cultural concept. However, one should take into account that there is also a measure of ambiguity 

in  the  reference  made  to  this  word.  “Dignity”  is  used  both  to  convey  the  need  for  absolutely 

respecting an individual’s autonomy and rights and to support the claim to controlling individuals 

and  their  behaviour  for  the  sake  of  values  that  someone  plans  to  impose  on  other  individuals. 

Moreover, Article 1 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights provides that dignity is to be not only 

“respected”,  but  also  “protected”  –  after  the  pattern  followed  in  the  German  Grundgesetz.  This 

means that public authorities are required not only to refrain from tampering or interfering with an 

individual’s private sphere, but also to take steps actively in order to bring about the conditions 

allowing individuals to live with dignity. 

4.3. Human Inviolability 

The principle of inviolability of the body and physical and psychological integrity set out in Article 

3  of  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  rules  out  any  activity  that  may  jeopardise  integrity  in 

whole or in part - even with the data subject’s consent. WHO observes that “health is a state of 

complete  physical,  mental  and  social  well-being  and  not  merely  the  absence  of  disease  or 

infirmity”.  However,  here  one  has  to  deal  with  a  different  situation  because  integrity  is  not 

regarded as absolutely inviolable – reference being made to interventions that cause “permanent 

diminution” of one’s body (as per Section 5 of Italy’s Civil Code) or else are in conflict with public 

order and/or morals. 

This  is  the  framework  applying,  for  instance,  to  the  assessment  of  the  lawfulness  of  organ 

donation, which is limited by the loss of essential functions. This consideration might lead one to 

conclude  that  the  integrity  principle  should  not  be  referred  to  whenever  body  functions  are 

actually reintegrated and/or enhanced. Furthermore, the freedom to use one’s body is specifically 

limited  by  the  many  provisions  under  which  it  is  prohibited  to  turn  the  body,  its  parts  and/or 

products into sources of profit (Article 3 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights; Article 21 of the 

Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine;  Article  4  of  UNESCO’s  Universal  Declaration). 

Extensive construction of the principles of non-commodification and non-instrumentalisation might 

lead one to conclude that implanting ICT for purposes that are, broadly speaking, profit-related 

(e.g.  to  get  into  a  disco  under  preferential  conditions)  should  not  be  permitted.  (see  Opinion 

Section 6.4). 

4.4 Privacy and Data Protection 

The view that data subjects are not free to make whatever use of their own bodies they wish is 

confirmed,  albeit  indirectly,  by  Article  8(2)  of  EC  Directive  95/46  on  personal  data  protection. 

16

.

 
 
Here, it is stated that States can provide that the data subject’s express consent is not enough to 

allow others to use his/her “sensitive data” – concerning sex life, opinions, health, ethnic origin – 

without an ad hoc authorisation issued, for instance, by a supervisory authority (see Section 26 of 

the Italian Personal Data Protection Code). This is meant to protect the most sensitive portion of 

the “electronic body” by preventing data subjects themselves from making available parts of their 

electronic bodies in such a manner as to jeopardise their integrity. 

From  a  more  general  standpoint,  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  EU  has  drawn 

distinctions  between  the  protection  of  private  and  family  life  (Article  7),  and  the  protection  of 

personal data (Article 8), which consequently has become an autonomous individual right. Thus, 

one  has  to  deal  with  a  kind  of  protection  that  is  opposed  to  any  relevant  intrusion  into  one’s 

private  sphere  and,  on  the  other  hand,  confers  the  right  of  informational  self-determination  on 

each individual – including the right to remain master of the data concerning him or her. This is a 

veritable instance of “constitutionalisation of the individual”, which mandates respect for both the 

physical and the electronic body. More specifically, protection of personal data in the EU is based 

on EC Directive 95/4617 as well as on EC Directive 2002/5818. The latter also contains specific 

provisions applying to the location of individuals. The set of principles and rules on personal data 

protection  is  currently  shared  by  all  the  Member  States  of  the  EU  as  well  as  by  several  other 

states  that  –  from  Canada  to  Australia,  from  Japan  to  many  Latin  American  countries  –  have 

endorsed a strong data protection standard based first and foremost on the provision of detailed 

information coupled with the data subjects’ explicit consent. Therefore, any type of ICT implant 

requires a strict preliminary evaluation in order to assess the “privacy impact”. 

4.5. The Precautionary Principle 

The precautionary principle does not necessitate impassable boundaries or downright bans. It is 

a general risk management tool, which was originally restricted to environmental matters. In the 

Commission’s  Communication  of  February  2000  it  is stated that “The  precautionary  principle  is 

not  defined  in  the  Treaty,  which  prescribes  it  only  once  -  to  protect  the  environment.  But  in 

practice, its scope is much wider, and specifically where preliminary objective scientific evaluation 

indicates that there are reasonable grounds for concern that the potentially dangerous effects on 

the  environment,  human,  animal  or  plant  health  may  be  inconsistent  with  the  high  level  of 

17  Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the 

protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of 
such data Official Journal L 281, 23/11/1995, pages 31 - 50 

18  Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2002 concerning the 
processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector 
(Directive on privacy and electronic communications) Official Journal L 201, 31/07/2002 p. 37 - 47 

17

.

 
 
                                                 
protection chosen for the Community” (Communication Summary paragraph 3). Accordingly, the 

Commission believes that “the precautionary principle is a general one” (i.e. a general principle) 

(Section  3  of  the  Communication),  whose  scope  goes  beyond  the  EU  –  as  shown  by  several 

international instruments starting with the Declaration on Environment and Development adopted 

in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. 

The basic constituents and the prerequisites for the application of the precautionary principle are 

existence of a risk, possibility of harm, and scientific uncertainty concerning the realisation of this 

harm.  Having  invoked  the  precautionary  principle  the  risk  manager  has  to  decide  on 

precautionary actions that are proportionate to the potential harm being mitigated and which do 

not  attempt  to  create  “zero  risk”  situations.  The  risk  management  actions  should  be  aimed  at 

identifying the “acceptable risk” threshold with regard to the values at stake – and respect for the 

human body is undoubtedly one of the values deserving the highest legal protection. However, 

though rooted in fundamental requirements, the precautionary principle is of a “procedural” rather 

than “substantive” nature, which means that it is not applied to gauge an innovation as such but 

rather its effects. If the negative effects are found to be absent, or if the application mechanisms 

are modified, then a given scientific or technological innovation may be regarded as acceptable. 

Therefore, the precautionary principle is a dynamic tool that can follow the evolution of a sector 

and  continuously  verify  that  the  acceptability  conditions  of  a  given  innovation  are  fulfilled  – 

thereby enhancing governance in what has been called the “risk society”. 

The  risks  related  to  ICT  implants  were  highlighted  by  the  Order  of  the  US  Food  and  Drug 

Administration  in  respect  of  a  subcutaneous  chip  called  “VeriChip”  (see  Section  3):  “adverse 

tissue reaction; migration of the implanted transponder; compromised information security; failure 

of  implanted  transponder;  failure  of  inserter;  failure  of  electronic  scanner;  electromagnetic 

interference;  electrical  hazards;  magnetic  resonance  imaging  incompatibility;  and  needle  stick”. 

One might wonder that the tests on the VeriChip were authorised for medical purposes in the face 

of  such  a  detailed  list  of  potential  risks!  The  authorisation  might  have  been  denied  if  the 

precautionary principle had been taken into account in regard to those risks with high uncertainty. 

4.6. Data Minimisation, Purpose Specification, Proportionality Principle and Relevance 

Specific  importance  is  also  to  be  attached  to  the  principles  of  data  minimisation,  purpose 

specification, proportionality, and relevance. All of these principles are unrelated to the lawfulness 

of using the individual ICTs, but relate more to the specific conditions applying to their use – i.e., 

the context within which they are used. 

.

18

 
 
The data minimisation principle is expressly referred to, for instance, in Article 16(2) of the French 

Civil Code, where it is provided that “il ne peut être porté atteinte à l’integrité du corps humain 

qu’en cas de nécessité pour la personne” (it can only violate the integrity of the human body in 

the  case  of  personal  necessity).  Objectively,  this  principle  means  that  one  should  only  avail 

oneself of a given tool if the relevant target cannot be achieved by means of less “body-intrusive” 

tools. This is basically the “minimisation” principle set out in several privacy laws, such as Section 

3(a) of the German Bundesdatenschutzgesetz and Section 3 of the Italian data protection code. 

Subjectively, the data minimisation principle postulates the existence of a personal condition that 

cannot be coped with unless by using a specific tool, which proves indispensable. 

The purpose specification principle entails the need for selecting the targets to be achieved. For 

instance,  the  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine  provides  that  tests  predictive  of 

genetic diseases “may be performed only for health purposes or for scientific research linked to 

health  purposes”  (Article  12).  Basically,  a  relationship 

is  established  between  specific 

circumstances,  available  tools,  and  reference  values.  Only  those  tools  that,  within  a  given 

context, pass the consistency test with such values may be used lawfully. 

The proportionality principle is also grounded on the relationship between tools to be used and 

purposes sought. However, here emphasis is not put on the nature of the purposes in question, 

but on the proportionality of the tools that are used, i.e., even if the purpose as such is legitimate, 

it may not be pursued by using disproportionate tools. In fact, the aforementioned Communication 

by  the  Commission  sets  forth  an  express  relationship  between  precaution  and  proportionality 

when it says that “A total ban may not be a proportional response to a potential risk in all cases. 

However, in certain cases, it is the sole possible response to a given risk.” 

As for the relevance principle, which is expressly laid down in Article 6 of Directive 95/46, it can 

be taken into consideration with regard to ICT implants as well. Indeed, a given technology may 

be lawfully applied if it is closely and unambiguously relevant to the circumstances. This is meant 

to prevent excessive and/or inappropriate applications of the available tools. 

Ultimately, all these principles supplement one another. After identifying a legitimate purpose for 

using an ICT implant, one should establish whether this is actually necessary as well as whether 

the tools (to be) used are relevant and proportionate. 

4.7. Autonomy and Limits on ICT Implants 

The limitations on ICT implants in the human body as deriving from an analysis of the principles 

contained  in  various  legal  instruments  should  be  assessed  further  by  having  regard  to  general 

principles  and  rules  concerning  the  autonomy  of  individuals,  which  here  takes  the  shape  of 

19

.

 
 
freedom to choose how to use one’s body, to quote a well-known slogan, “I am the ruler of my 

own  body”,  freedom  of  choice  as  regards  one’s  health,  freedom  from  external  controls  and 

influence. 

As regards any choice related to one’s body, the considerations made in respect of integrity and 

inviolability principles still apply – in particular as for the consent requirement. Indeed, consent is 

necessary,  but  is  not  sufficient,  in  order  to  legitimise  use  of  implants  –  which  anyhow  should 

never be performed against the data subject’s wishes and/or unbeknownst to him/her. 

As regards any choice related to one’s health, the data subject has the right to always object to 

an implant and have it removed, if this is technically possible – without prejudice to the informed 

consent requirement as well as to the right to refuse medical treatment. 

As  regards  external  controls  and  influence,  autonomy  of  the  individual  becomes  especially 

important  in  connection  with  the  right  to  rule  out  that  a  person’s  conduct  may  be  determined 

and/or influenced by the entities managing electronic links – if the latter give rise to permanent 

connections with external entities. Even in the absence of this type of permanent connection, it 

should be taken into account that ICT implants may: 

a)  allow individuals to be located on a permanent and/or occasional basis; 

b)  allow  the  information  contained  in  electronic  devices  to  be  changed  remotely  without  the  data 

subject’s knowledge. 

These  risks  are  bound  to  increase  with  the  adoption  of  unified  technical  standards,  which  may 

allow  data  to  be  read  and  modified  also  by  entities  other  than  the  data  subject  and  the 

bodies/organisations lawfully managing the relevant plant or connection. Both circumstances are 

clearly  in  conflict  with  data  protection  rules  concerning  collection  and  processing  of  the 

information.  In  particular,  “re-writing”  the  data  impacts  on  the  right  to  personal  identity  that  is 

expressly recognised by Article 1 of EC Directive 95/46. 

4.8. Concluding Comments 

For the legal background, it should be noted that: 

a)  the existence of a recognised serious but uncertain risk, currently applying to the simplest types 

of ICT implant in the human body, requires application of the precautionary principle. In particular, 

one should distinguish between active and passive implants, reversible and irreversible implants, 

and between offline and online implants; 

.

20

 
 
b)  the  purpose  specification  principle  mandates  at  least  a  distinction  between  medical  and  non-

medical  applications.  However,  medical  applications  should  also  be  evaluated  stringently  and 

selectively,  partly  to  prevent  them  from  being  invoked  as  a  means  to  legitimise  other  types  of 

application; 

c)  the  data  minimisation  principle  rules  out  the  lawfulness  of  ICT  implants  that  are  only  aimed  at 

identifying patients, if they can be replaced by less invasive and equally secure tools; 

d)  the proportionality principle rules out the lawfulness of implants such as those that are used, for 

instance, exclusively to facilitate entrance to public premises; 

e)  the principle of integrity and inviolability of the body rules out that the data subject’s consent is 

sufficient to allow all kinds of implant to be deployed; and 

f) 

the dignity principle prohibits transformation of the body into an object that can be manipulated 

and controlled remotely – into a mere source of information. 

These  considerations  might  lead  one  to  conclude  that,  given  the  current  circumstances,  many 

actual or potential ICT implants in the human body are legally inadmissible, subject to the specific 

consideration of exceptional situations as set out hereunder in the Opinion Section (see Section 

6.4.6). 

5. ETHICAL BACKGROUND 

Contemporary  society  is  confronted  with  changes  that  have  to  do  with  the  anthropological 

essence  of  individuals.  There  is  a  stepwise  shift  in  progress  –  after  being  observed,  via  video 

surveillance and biometrics, individuals are being modified, via various electronic devices, under 

skin  chips  and  smart  tags,  to  such  an  extent  that  they  are  increasingly  turned  into  networked 

individuals. Thus we might be continuously connected and could be configured differently so that 

from time to time we would transmit and receive signals allowing movements, habits and contacts 

to  be  traced  and  defined.  This  would  be  bound  to  modify  the  meaning  and  contents  of  an 

individuals’ autonomy and to affect their dignity. 

This unrelenting erosion of personal prerogatives – going as far as transforming the body – co-

exists not only with the growing attention paid to dignity, but also with the already mentioned fact 

that the person is at the centre of the constitutional order (see Preamble and Articles 1, 3 and 8 of 

the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and see the Legal Background of this 

Opinion, Sections 4.2 and 4.4). 

.

21

 
 
5.1. Fundamental Ethical Principles 

As in former EGE Opinions, as well as in a number of Conventions, Declarations and Charters 

accepted  in  Europe  and  as  highlighted  in  the  Legal  Background  (Section  4),  the  fundamental 

principles  are  human  dignity  and  integrity.  These  fundamental  principles  entail  in  turn  several 

derived principles (described below) which are relevant in the context of this Opinion and which 

are closely related to one another. 

Human Dignity (also discussed in Legal Background Section 4.2) 

The EU’s draft Treaty Establishing a Constitution for Europe19, which states that “Human dignity 

is  inviolable.  It  must  be  respected  and  protected”  (Article  II-61),  goes  on  to  explain  that  “The 

dignity of the human person is not only a fundamental right in itself but constitutes the real basis 

of  fundamental  rights”  (Declaration  concerning  the  explanations  relating  to  the  Charter  of 

Fundamental  Rights).  This  explanation  doesn’t  strictly  define  human  dignity  and  so  various 

writers have attempted to fill this gap. One such attempt20 suggests that human dignity be defined 

as  follows:  “the  exalted  moral  status  which  every  being  of  human  origin  uniquely  possesses. 

Human  dignity  is  a  given  reality,  intrinsic  to  human  substance,  and  not  contingent  upon  any 

functional capacities which vary in degree. (…) The possession of human dignity carries certain 

immutable moral obligations. These include, concerning the treatment of all other human beings, 

the duty to preserve life, liberty, and the security of persons, and concerning animals and nature, 

responsibilities of stewardship.” 

This provides the essential context for the following derived ethical principles, which are of direct 

relevance to this Opinion on ICT implants. 

•  Non-instrumentalisation:  The  ethical  requirement  of  not  using  individuals  merely  as  a  means 

but always as an end of their own (see for example Opinion Section 6.4.2). 

•  Privacy:  The  ethical  principle  of  not  invading  a  person’s  right  to  privacy  (see  Charter  of 

Fundamental Rights of the European Union, Articles 7 & 821) (see for example Opinion Sections 

6.4.2 and 6.4.3). 

•  Non-discrimination:  People  deserve  equal  treatment,  unless  there  are  reasons  that  justify 

difference in treatment. It is a widely accepted principle and in this context it primarily relates to 

the distribution of health care resources (see for example Opinion section 6.3.5). 

19  Official Journal of the European Union, Volume 47, C 310, pages. 1 – 482, 16 December 2004 
20  William Cheshire, Ethics and Medicine, Volume 18:2, 2002 
21  Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, Official Journal of the European Communities, 

18.12.2000, C364, pages 1-22 

22

.

 
 
                                                 
• 

Informed Consent: The ethical principle that patients are not exposed to treatment or research 

without their free and informed consent (see for example Opinion Section 6.3.3). 

•  Equity:  The  ethical  principle  that  everybody  should  have  fair  access  to  the  benefits  under 

consideration. 

•  The  Precautionary  Principle:  The  EGE  has  stressed 

that  modern 

information  and 

communication technologies make mankind more powerful but at the same time more vulnerable. 

Ethics  should  aim  at  ensuring  the  respect  for  human  rights  and  freedoms  of  the  individual,  in 

particular  the  confidentiality  of  data.  In  other  words,  the  EGE  has  recommended  caution  as  a 

general  ethical  principle  with  regard  to  information  and  communication  technologies.  This 

principle  entails  the  moral  duty  of  continuous  risk  assessment  with  regard  to  the  not  fully 

foreseeable impact of new technologies as in the case of ICT implants in the human body22. This 

assessment concerns particularly the analysis of present and future situations in which the use of 

ICT  implants  in  the  human  body  may  be  considered  as  a  potential  risk,  or  even  as  a  potential 

threat  to  human  dignity  or  to  other  ethical  principles.  It  should  be  stressed  that  there  are  no 

reliable  scientific  investigations  concerning  the  long-term  health  impact  of  ICT  implants  in  the 

human body (cf. Legal Section 4.5) (see also for example Opinion Section 6.5.1). 

5.2. Value Conflicts 

There could be conflict between the personal freedom to use one’s economic resources to get an 

implant  that  will  enhance  one’s  physical  and  mental  capabilities  and  what  society  at  large 

considers desirable or ethically acceptable. Another value conflict concerns the potential conflict 

between  limiting  the  freedom  of  people  dangerous  to  others  by  surveillance  and  promoting  the 

safety of others. Freedom of researchers may conflict with the obligation to safeguard the health 

of  research  subjects.  Concern  for  economic  competitiveness  and  other  economic  values 

(economic  growth)  may  come  into  conflict  with  respect  for  human  dignity.  The  unrestricted 

freedom of some may endanger the health and safety of others. Therefore a balance has to be 

struck between values that are all legitimate in our culture. 

As in other areas, the freedom to use ICT implants in ones own body, i.e. the principle of freedom 

itself might collide with potential negative social effects. In these cases ethical counselling as well 

as social and political debate might be necessary. 

22  Precautionary Principle: Article 174 of the consolidated version of the Treaty establishing the 

European Community and Communication from the Commission on the precautionary principle 
(COM (2000)1 of 2nd February 2000). 

23

.

 
 
                                                 
The borderline between repairing and enhancing is not strict. (Although there are clear examples 

of  both  applications.)  Legislation  is  necessary  in  order  to  avoid  a  situation  in  which  society  is 

becoming  more  and  more  dependent  on  such  intrusive  technology  in  order  to  provide  social 

security while at the same time the technical perfection of such implants is helpful for all kinds of 

medical purposes as well as for legitimate social applications. Consequently, the EGE stresses 

the need for a continuing, inclusive debate on which kinds of enhancement should be allowed – 

under what conditions and in which situations (see Opinion Section 6.4.4). 

A  particular  case,  which  challenges  the  view  that  there  is  a  general  standard  for  human 

capabilities,  concerns  cochlear  implants  for  deaf  children.  The  technological  drive  to  promote 

cochlear implants raises ethical questions concerned with how this drive impacts on the individual 

and on the deaf community (and of the signing community in particular). It leaves unquestioned 

the  social  integration  of  the  deaf  person  with  the  deaf  community.  It  does  not  pay  sufficient 

attention to the psychological, linguistic and sociological issues. Above all it promotes a particular 

view  of  “normality”.  In  the  view  of  the  EGE  this  issue,  the  risk  benefit  assessment  and  the 

problem of fair access need further study (paying attention to  the distinction between unilateral 

and bilateral cochlear implants). 

5.3. Some Important Knowledge Gaps Regarding ICT Implants in the Human Body 

It is clear from the preceding sections that there are important knowledge gaps that are relevant 

both to future research programmes and to the primary ethical concerns. These include: 

Human Dignity, Integrity and Autonomy 

•  How far can such implants be a threat to human autonomy particularly when they are implanted 

in our brains? 

•  How  far  can  such  implants  have  irreversible  impacts  in  the  human  body  and/or  in  the  human 

psyche and how can reversibility be preserved? 

•  How will they influence human memory? 

•  Does a human being cease to be such a “being” in cases where some parts of his or her body – 

particularly the brain - are substituted and/or supplemented by ICT implants? Particularly as ICT 

implants can contribute to creating “networked persons” that are always connected and could be 

configured  differently  so  that  from  time  to  time  they  can  transmit  and  receive  signals  allowing 

movements, habits and contacts to be traced and defined. This is bound to affect their dignity. 

.

24

 
 
Privacy and Surveillance 

•  How far can ICT implants become a threat to privacy? 

•  How far can ICT implants give an individual, or a group, specific capabilities that could become a 

threat to society? 

•  What are the potential invasions of privacy through ICT implants as sources and/or receivers of 

information in a network environment? 

•  How  far  should  we  be  subject  to  the  control  of  such  devices  or  by  other  people  using  these 

devices? 

Enhancement and Human Self Awareness 

•  What lies behind the idea of an “enhanced” human being? 

•  What does perfectibility of human beings mean? 

Does the creation of an improved “race” on the basis of ICT enhancements mean necessarily a 

new form of racism? The potential industrial use of ICT implants raises the question of the limits 

of such implants for the creation of more efficient bodies and brains for economic purposes. The 

question of the use of ICT implants represents a cultural leap in human evolution, similar to the 

invention of machines or to the invention of devices complementing and enhancing such devices 

as human memory (through writing, printing, digital technology) or other human capabilities. 

•  How far should the use of such implants to enhance human capabilities be allowed? 

•  How far can such implants be considered as part of what could be called ‘body design’ including 

the personal free design of one’s (enhanced) bodily and psychic capabilities? 

Social Aspects 

•  How do we relate to persons with ICT implants that are connected online? 

•  How far should ICT implants remain invisible to an external observer? 

•  How far are such possibilities dependent on such values as control or efficiency that may lead 

human beings to become even more dependent on market forces and even on the possibility of 

their (legal) use in the work place? 

•  How far do we transform our social and cultural environment through ICT implants? 

•  How  far  can  they  be  used  in  order  to  track  human  beings  and  in  which  cases  should  this  be 

legally allowed? 

.

25

 
 
•  To what extent does this technology allow manipulation by and for advertising? 

•  To what extent might this technology be misused by the military? 

Risk Predictability 

•  How far can we predict today the benefits and threats of such ICT implants? 

ICT Implants for which Special Caution is Necessary 

• 

ICT implants that cannot be removed easily. 

• 

• 

ICT implants that influence, determine or change psychic functions. 

ICT implants that due to their network capability could be misused in several ways for all kinds of 

social  surveillance  and  manipulation,  such  as  for  instance  in  the  case  of  children,  or  disabled 

persons. 

• 

ICT implants influencing the nervous system and particularly the brain and thus human identity as 

a species as well as individual subjectivity and autonomy. 

•  Military applications. 

•  The  distinction  between  therapeutic  applications  and  enhancements  (see  Section  6.4.4)  is  not 

always clear. 

• 

• 

“Intrusive” technology that by-passes normal sensory experience. 

Implants that will influence biologically and/or culturally future generations. 

5.4. Previous Relevant EGE Opinions 

Opinion N° 14 on the ethical aspects arising from doping in sport 

In its Opinion N° 14, the EGE stated that “There is an urgent need for policy to take into account 

the profound change that has taken place in sport in this century due to the influences of growing 

economic interests and of the mass media on an increasingly global scale. These influences have 

accelerated  medical  and  technological  developments  in  sport  and  related  industries  as  well  as 

increased the pressure put on the sports person. As a result, all action concerning doping must 

take  into  consideration,  in  accordance  with  this  change,  the  realisation  that  today  performance 

and  victory  prevail  over  competition  and  participation.  The  Group  thus  intends  to  stress  the 

tension  that  exists  between  anti  doping  measures  and  an  unlimited  demand  for  enhanced 

performance.” 

.

26

 
 
A parallel can easily be drawn between doping in sport and implants, especially those dedicated 

to enhancement. 

Opinion N° 17 on the ethical aspects of clinical research in developing countries 

Most  of  the  recommendations  made  in  EGE  Opinion  N°  17  on  the  ethical  aspects  of  clinical 

research  in  developing  countries  are  relevant  to  this  Opinion  in  respect  of  clinical  trials  of  ICT 

implants.  This  is  particularly  important  as  medical  devices  are  not  covered  by  Directive 

2001/20/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 April 2001 on the approximation 

of  the  laws,  regulations  and  administrative  provisions  of  the  Member  States  relating  to  the 

implementation of good clinical practice in the conduct of clinical trials on medicinal products for 

human use23. 

5.5. General Ethical Questions Relating to ICT Implants in the Human Body 

In  former  Reports  and  Opinions  such  as  “Citizens  Rights  and  New  Technologies:  A  European 

Challenge” (23 May 2000), and “Ethical Issues of Healthcare in the Information Society” (Opinion 

N° 13, 30 July 1999), the Group has identified key ethical values with regard to information and 

communication technologies in particular: 

• 

to  improve  the  protection  of  privacy  (data  protection),  respecting  people’s  right  to  maintain 

boundaries and also to preserve privacy, autonomy and confidentiality; and 

• 

to  empower  individuals  against  the  introduction  of  systems  likely  to  reduce  their  freedom  and 

autonomy  (video  surveillance,  behaviour  control,  and  personal  profiling  based  on  Internet 

transactions)  or  likely  to  increase  people’s  dependency  on  selection  and  decision  mechanisms 

which are not transparent or understandable. 

Human  beings  are  neither  purely  natural  nor  purely  cultural  beings.  Indeed  our  very  nature 

depends  on  the  possibility  of  transforming  ourselves.  Information  technologies  have  been 

considered under this anthropomorphic bias as extensions of man. However, the transformation 

of  the  human  body  has  consequences  also  on  the  cultural  human  environment.  Under  these 

premises, human beings are seen as parts of a complex system of natural and artificial messages 

that function on a digital basis. In this sense the human body can be seen as data. This view has 

large cultural effects particularly as it precludes higher level phenomena such as human psyche 

and  human  language  or  conceives  them  mainly  under  the  perspective  of  its  digitization,  giving 

rise to reductionism that oversimplifies the complex relations between the human body, language 

and imagination. 

23  Official Journal L 121 of 1st May 2001, p. 34 - 44 

27

.

 
 
                                                 
Furthermore,  such  a  reductive  view  permits  different  kinds  of  scientific  and  technological 

developments  and  inventions.  ICT  implants  in  the  human  body  might  thus  play  a  major  role  in 

questions  of  health  care  and  even  lead  to  the  enhancement  of  biological  and/or  psychic 

capabilities. Extrapolating into the future, this logic might even lead to the transformation of the 

human race. 

How  far  should  we  let  ICT  devices  get  “under  our  skins”?  When  do  ICT  implants  threaten  the 

dignity of the human body, its identity and its basic capabilities? ICT implants may seem to be 

mainly of benefit for human health, as with e.g. cardiac pacemakers. However, are there possible 

situations  in  which  ICT  devices  may  be  used  for  other  goals,  due,  for  instance,  to  the 

interconnection of digital data within a networked world? When might such devices be used for 

instance  for  surveillance  and  in  which  cases  would  this  be  legitimate?  Where  are  the  threats 

related to the hopes of enhanced capabilities based on ICT implants? 

The question of ICT implants in the human body is thus located between two extremes. On the 

one  hand,  the  protection  of  the  natural  human  body,  that  is  to  say,  the  medical  use  of  ICT 

implants for health care, and, on the other hand, the elimination of the human body as we know it 

today  and  its  substitution  by  an  artificial  one  –  with  all  possibilities  in  between.  Human  dignity 

concerns the human self as an embodied self. Thus the question of autonomy and respect of the 

self cannot be separated from the question of bodily care and of the possible changes due to ICT 

implants. 

EGE OPINION: 

Against this background, the European Group on Ethics of Science and New Technologies 
submits the following Opinion: 

6.1. Scope 

This Opinion focuses on the question of ICT implants in the human body. It does not deal with the 

whole field of ICT devices or with “wearable” computing in general, although there may be cases 

in which such devices could be considered as quasi-implants. 

This  Opinion  does  not  address  the  question  of  ICT  implants  in  animals  although  these 

applications provide examples of what could be done with humans. 

.

28

 
 
 
 
 
This Opinion addresses the ethical problems raised by the potential or actual online accessibility 

of  such  ICT  implants  as  well  as  of  stand-alone  devices  (i.e.  those  that  do  not  form  part  of  a 

network). 

Legal  principles  and  rules  act  in  general  as  a  check  against  technological  drift  and  serve  to 

highlight  that  not  everything  that  is  technically  possible  is  also  ethically  admissible,  socially 

acceptable, and legally approved. On the other hand, the power of a technology manifesting itself 

with an unlimited range of applications cannot be constrained by a weak law that lacks its ultimate 

reason. Hence, it is necessary to always refer to strong values, capable to breathe life into the 

constitutionalisation of the individual that is the outcome of  a complex process and was clearly 

outlined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU – starting from its Preamble, where it is 

stated exactly that the Union “places the individual at the heart of its activities”. 

“We shall not lay hand upon thee”. This was the promise made in the Magna Carta – to respect 

the body in its entirety: Habeas Corpus. This promise has survived technological developments. 

Each  intervention  on  the  body,  each  processing  operation  concerning  individual  data  is  to  be 

regarded  as  related  to  the  body  as  a  whole,  to  an  individual  that  has  to  be  respected  in  its 

physical and mental integrity. This is a new all-round concept of individual, and its translation into 

the  real  world  entails  the  right  to  full  respect  for  a  body  that  is  nowadays  both  physical  and 

electronic. In this new world, data protection fulfils the task of ensuring the “habeas data” required 

by the changed circumstances – and thereby becomes an inalienable component of civilisation, 

as has been the history for habeas corpus. 

At  the  same  time,  this  is  a  permanently  unfinished  body.  It  can  be  manipulated  to  restore 

functions that either were lost or were never known – only think of maiming, blindness, deafness; 

or,  it  can  be  stretched  beyond  its  anthropological  normality  by  enhancing  its  functions  and/or 

adding new functions – again, for the sake of the person’s welfare and/or social competitiveness, 

as in the case of enhanced sports skills or intelligence prostheses. We have to contend with both 

repairing  and  capacity  enhancing  technologies,  the  multiplication  of  body-friendly  technologies 

that can expand and modify the concept of body care and herald the coming of “cyborgs” – of the 

post-human  body.  “In  our  societies,  the  body  tends  to  become  a  raw  material  that  can  be 

modelled  according 

to  environmental  circumstances”.  The  possibilities  of  customised 

configuration undoubtedly increase, and so do the opportunities for political measures aimed at 

controlling the body by means of technology. 

The  downright  reduction  of  our  body  to  a  device  does  not  only  enhance  the  trend  –  already 

pointed  out  –  towards  turning  it  increasingly  into  a  tool  to  allow  continuous  surveillance  of 

29

.

 
 
individuals.  Indeed,  individuals  are  dispossessed  of  their  own  bodies  and  thereby  of  their  own 

autonomy. The body ends up being under others’ control. What can a person expect after being 

dispossessed of his or her own body? 

6.2. ICT implants and human dignity 

The respect for human dignity must be the fundamental basis of discussions of where the limits 

should be drawn for different uses of ICT implants. 

The Group considers that ICT implants are not per se a danger to human freedom or dignity but 

in  the  case  of  applications,  which  entail  for  instance  the  possibility  of  individual  and/or  group 

surveillance, the potential restriction of freedom must be carefully evaluated (see Section 6.4.6). 

The protection of the health and/or security of people with severe neurological disorders on the 

basis of ICT implants does not create necessarily an ethical dilemma between the inviolability of 

freedom  and  the  need  for  health  protection.  However,  even  in  these  cases,  the  use  of  such 

implants should not result in any discrimination or abuse contrary to human rights. 

6.3. ICT implants for health purposes 

It goes without saying that informed consent is required, when ICT implants are to be used for 

health purposes. This information should not only concern possible benefits and health risks, but 

also risks that such implants could be used to locate people and/or obtain access to information 

stored in these devices without the permission of the person in whom the devices are implanted. 

When risks are difficult to predict, this should be made clear in the supplied information. 

Implantation of ICT devices for health purposes should be governed by the principles that: 

a)  the objective is important, like saving lives, restoring health or improving the quality of life; 

b)  the implant is necessary to achieve this objective; and, 

c)  there is no other less invasive and more cost-effective method of achieving the objective. 

The  question  of  mixed  bio-artificial  implants  should  be  specifically  considered  taking  into 

consideration their problems and possibilities. 

6.3.1. The Individual and the Network 

To  the  extent  that  an  individual  via  an  ICT  implant  has  become  part  of  an  ICT  network,  the 

operation  of  this  whole  network  –  not  just  the  ICT  implant  –  needs  to  be  considered.  It  is 

particularly  important  that  the  power  over  this  network  (who  has  access  to  it,  who  can  retrieve 

information from it, who can change it, and so forth) is transparent. This is based on the principle 

of respect for persons, as well as the principle of avoiding harm. 

30

.

 
 
6.3.2. Freedom of Research 

Although the necessity for research can sometimes be questioned, new knowledge is essential 

for  the  development  of  individuals  and  societies.  However,  the  freedom  of  research  has  to  be 

restricted  by  respect  for  other  important  values  and  ethical  principles,  for  example  respect  for 

persons  and  the  obligation  to  avoid  physical,  mental  and  economic  harm  as  a  result  of 

participation in research. 

The  ethical  notion  of  the  inviolability  of  the  human  body  should  not  be  understood  as  a  barrier 

against the advancement of science and technology but as a barrier against its possible misuse. 

The freedom of research in this field should be subject not only to the informed consent of the 

persons  willing  to  participate  in  new  experiments  aiming  at  health  recovery  but  also  to  the 

awareness of the possibility of damaging not only bodily but also psychic functions of the people 

participating in clinical trials (see EGE Opinion N° 17 on the ethical aspects of clinical research in 

developing countries, February 2003). 

6.3.3. Participation in Research on ICT Implants 

Informed consent is required when research on e.g. the effects of ICT implants is carried out on 

healthy volunteers or on patients. This information should not only concern possible benefits and 

present health risks, but also long term risks as well as risks that such implants can be used to 

locate people and/or obtain access to information stored in these devices without the permission 

of  the  person  in  whom  the  devices  are  implanted.  The  right  to  discontinue  participation  in  a 

research project should always be respected, and it should be made clear to participants how this 

right (when ICT devices are implanted in a person’s body) will be respected, in practice. 

6.3.4. ICT Implants, Minors and Legally Incapacitated 

Informed  consent  is  an  ethical  principle  which  applies  also  in  the  field  of  ICT  implants  in  the 

human body. However, this needs specification particularly in cases in which persons due to their 

age (children, elderly people) and/or psychic constitution are supposed to submit to ICT implants 

for  reasons  of  health  surveillance.  ICT  devices  should  be  implanted  in  minors  and  legally 

incapacitated only if this is done in accordance with the principles set out in the Council of Europe 

Convention on Biomedicine and Human Rights. 

The question of cochlear implants for children requires special attention (see Section 5.2 – Value 

Conflicts). 

.

31

 
 
6.3.5. Access to ICT Implants for Health Purposes 

There should be fair access to ICT implants for health purposes. This means that such access 

should be based on health care needs rather than on economic resources or social position. 

6.3.6. Irreversible ICT Implants 

The requirements of informed consent and data protection (privacy and confidentiality of the data 

in  particular)  need  to  be  strictly  enforced  in  cases  where  the  ICT  implants  are  irreversible  and 

cannot  be  removed  from  the  body  without  risk  of  severe  damage  or  the  individual’s  life.  Such 

implants  should  not  be  used  for  research  purposes  unless  the  objective  of  the  research  is  to 

provide a clear therapeutic benefit for the individual research subject. 

6.4. ICT implants for non-medical purposes 

The  wide  range  of  potential  non-medical  applications  of  ICT  implants  also  demands  informed 

consent,  respect  for  privacy,  etc.  Some  of  these  applications  are  analysed  in  the  following 

sections. The EGE makes the general point that non-medical applications of ICT implants are a 

potential  threat  to  human  dignity  and  democratic  society.  Therefore,  such  applications  should 

respect in all circumstances the principles of informed consent and proportionality and, whenever 

aiming at surveillance purposes, they should comply with the rules set out hereunder in Section 6.4.6. 

The EGE emphasizes that where adults give their informed consent to specific applications, the 

provided information should include clear data on possible health disturbances in the short and/or 

long term as well as problems of unwilling data processing. 

6.4.1. Mental Functions and Personal Identity 

Personal  identity  is  crucial  for  the  attribution  of  moral  responsibility  according  to  many  ethical 

theories.  ICT  devices  should  therefore  not  be  used  to  manipulate  mental  functions  or  change 

personal  identity.  The  right  to  respect  of  human  dignity,  including  the  right  to  the  respect  of 

physical and mental integrity, is the basis for this. 

6.4.2. ICT Implants and Personal Data 

The  principles  of  data  protection  need  to  be  applied  to  this  area,  since  data  about  the  human 

body can be generated via such implants. The privacy and confidentiality of such data need to be 

guaranteed. The individual has a right to determine what data about oneself is to be processed, 

by whom and for what purposes. In particular the right of the individual to decide who should have 

access to such data and for what purpose is crucial. 

.

32

 
 
These  rights  are  particularly  important  in  the  case  where  ICT  implants  function  with  an  online 

system  and  particularly  in  the  case  where  the  implants  are  part  of  a  surveillance  system.  This 

means that the EGE stresses the importance that not only the individual has the right to protect 

his or her own personal data but that society should take care that such systems, where they are 

permitted, should not become systems of untenable restriction or even negation of basic rights. 

This should be particularly considered in case such systems become part of health systems in 

which data is permanently or occasionally transmitted to other parties. The use of ICT implants in 

order to have a remote control over the will of people should be strictly prohibited. 

Legislation  and  guidelines  should  be  developed  to  ensure  this.  The  responsibility  for  this  rests 

with  the  Member  States.  However,  the  EGE  suggests  that  the  European  Commission  should 

initiate such a process (see Section 6.5.4). 

6.4.3. Privacy and ICT Implants 

Provided that ICT devices are implanted in accordance with the principles outlined in this Opinion, 

there is no need to declare these implants. They could and should remain unrecognizable to an 

external observer. The right to privacy includes the right to have an ICT implant. 

6.4.4. ICT Implants and Enhancement of Physical and Mental Capabilities 

Efforts should be made to make sure that ICT implants are not used to create a two class society 

or to increase the gap between the industrialized countries and the rest of the world. Access to 

ICT implants for enhancement should be used only: 

•  To bring children or adults into the “normal”24 range for the population, if they so wish and give 

their informed consent, or, 

•  To improve health prospects (e.g. to enhance the immune system to be resistant to HIV). As for 

health purposes, access to ICT implants for these purposes should be based on need rather than 

on economic resources or social position. 

The EGE stresses that the following possibilities should be banned: 

• 

ICT implants used as a basis for cyber-racism. 

• 

• 

ICT implants used for changing the identity, memory, self perception and perception of others. 

ICT implants used to enhance capabilities in order to dominate others. 

24  The concept of “normal” is not precise. However, what is implied in 6.4.4, in using this term, is the 
condition generally prevailing and not caused by genetic malfunction, disease or deficiency and 
lacking observable abnormalities. 

33

.

 
 
                                                 
• 

ICT implants used for coercion towards others who do not use such devices. 

6.4.5. ICT Implants, Commercialisation and Consumer Interests 

Whilst  the  human  body,  as  such,  should  not  give  rise  to  financial  gain,  there  is  –  as  has  been 

documented  in  the  scientific  background  part  of  this  report  –  already  a  commercial  market  for 

various kinds of ICT devices. It is essential that these products are not put on the market without 

adequate  control.  For  instance,  products  that  can  be  regarded  as  medical  products  should  be 

controlled according to the relevant legal framework. Efforts should be made to make sure that all 

ICT devices are checked for safety and security before being put on the market. 

6.4.6. ICT Implants for Surveillance Purposes 

ICT implants for surveillance in particular threaten human dignity. They could be used by state 

authorities,  individuals  and  groups  to  increase  their  power  over  others.  The  implants  could  be 

used to locate people (and also to retrieve other kinds of information about them). This might be 

justified  for  security  reasons  (early  release  for  prisoners)  or  for  safety  reasons  (location  of 

vulnerable children). 

However,  the  EGE  insists  that  such  surveillance  applications  of  ICT  implants  may  only  be 

permitted if the legislator considers that there is an urgent and justified necessity in a democratic 

society  (Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention)  and  there  are  no  less  intrusive  methods. 

Nevertheless  the  EGE  does  not  favour  such  uses  and  considers  that  surveillance  applications, 

under  all  circumstances,  must  be  specified  in  legislation.  Surveillance  procedures  in  individual 

cases should be approved and monitored by an independent court. 

The same general principles should apply to the use of ICT implants for military purposes. 

6.5. General considerations 

6.5.1. Development of the Information Society 

The  EGE  considers  that  the  ethical  questions  related  to  ICT  implants  in  the  human  body  are 

intimately  related  to  the  development  of  the  Information  Society  as  a  whole.  The  EGE  strongly 

supports the vision of a people-centred, inclusive and development-oriented Information Society 

as  proclaimed  in  the  Declaration  of  Principles  of  the  World  Summit  on  the  Information  Society 

(Geneva 2003). 

6.5.2. Public Debate and Information 

A broad social and political debate is needed as to what kind of applications should be accepted 

and  legally  approved,  particularly  concerning  surveillance  and  enhancement.  A  precautionary 

34

.

 
 
approach is recommended by the EGE. The Member States and their national ethics councils (or 

corresponding  institutions)  have  a  responsibility  to  create  conditions  for  education  and 

constructive, well-informed debates in this area. 

6.5.3. Democracy and Power 

This Opinion differs from several of the earlier ones of the EGE in that it moves into a new and 

rapidly  expanding  area.  The  Opinion  contains  the  essential  elements  for  a  future  agenda  for 

responsible regulators in Europe. 

Public debate and education are essential to ensure transparency and the Member States have a 

responsibility to ensure that the power of development and access to ICT implants are decided 

through democratic processes. 

6.5.4. Need for Regulation 

It is clear that this field needs regulation. Currently, non-medical ICT implants in the human body 

are  not  explicitly  covered  by  existing  legislation,  particularly  in  terms  of  privacy  and  data 

protection. Any regulations need to be based on the following principles: dignity, human rights, 

equity,  autonomy  and  the  derived  principles,  precautionary,  data  minimisation,  purpose 

specification, proportionality and relevance (see Sections 4 and 5). 

In  the  EGE’s  view,  implantable  devices  for  medical  purposes  should  be  regulated  in  the  same 

way  as  drugs  when  the  medical  goal  is  the  same,  particularly  as  such  implants  are  only  partly 

covered by Council Directive 90/385/EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States 

relating to active implantable medical devices. 

The  EGE  recommends  that  the  European  Commission  should  launch  legislative  initiatives  in 

these areas of ICT implant applications. 

6.5.5. Impact Research and ICT Devices 

More  research  on  the  long  term  social,  cultural  and  health  impact  of  different  types  of  ICT 

implants needs to be carried out, with a particular focus on risk characterisation, risk assessment, 

risk management and risk communication. The EGE considers that this should be kept in mind for 

the  Seventh  EU  Research  Framework  Programme.  This  sort  of  precautionary  research  in  a 

rapidly developing field is of crucial importance. 

6.5.6. Need for Review 

The  field  of  ICT  implants  is  in  its  infancy  and  rapid  developments  are  taking  place  that  raise 

societal  fears  as  well  as  hopes.  Consequently,  the  EGE  has  addressed  the  key  ethical  issues 

35

.

 
 
regarding developments that are current or can be foreseen at the present time. However, it is 

clear  that  the  EGE  will  have  to  return  to  this  subject  to  update  our  advice  in  the  light  of  future 

applications of ICT implants. Particularly care will need to be taken concerning developments that 

appear benign at first sight (addressing for example a serious health problem) but which prove to 

be less benign when used for other applications. Consequently, we consider that a review of this 

Opinion by the EGE may be necessary in about three to five years time. 

.

36

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AVIS DU GROUPE EUROPÉEN D’ÉTHIQUE 
DES SCIENCES ET DES NOUVELLES TECHNOLOGIES 
AUPRÈS DE LA COMMISSION EUROPÉENNE 

N° 20   

Texte original en anglais 

Adopté le 16 mars 2005 

********************************************************************************* 

ASPECTS ÉTHIQUES DES IMPLANTS TIC DANS LE CORPS HUMAIN 

Avis élaboré à l’initiative directe du GEE 
Référence:  
Rapporteurs:   Professeur Stefano Rodotà et Professeur Rafael Capurro 

******************************************************************************** 

Le Groupe européen d'éthique des sciences et des nouvelles technologies (GEE), 

vu le traité sur l’Union européenne, et notamment l’article 6 de ses dispositions communes, relatif 

au respect des droits fondamentaux, 

vu le traité instituant la Communauté européenne, et notamment son article 152, relatif à la santé 

publique, 

vu la Charte des droits fondamentaux de l'Union européenne, du 28 septembre 2000, approuvée 

par le Conseil européen de Biarritz le 14 octobre 2000 et proclamée solennellement à Nice par le 

Parlement européen, le Conseil et la Commission le 7 décembre 2000, et notamment son article 

1er  «Dignité  humaine»,  son  article  3  «Droit  à  l'intégrité  de  la  personne»  et  son  article  8 

«Protection des données à caractère personnel»1, 

vu la directive 2002/58/CE du Parlement européen et du Conseil, du 12 juillet 2002, concernant le 

traitement des données à caractère personnel et la protection de la vie privée dans le secteur des 

communications électroniques2, 

1  JO C 364 du 18.12.2000, pp. 1 à 22. 
2  JO L 201 du 31.7.2002, pp. 37 à 47. 

37

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
vu la directive 95/46/CE du Parlement européen et du Conseil, du 24 octobre 1995, relative à la 

protection des personnes physiques à l'égard du traitement des données à caractère personnel 

et à la libre circulation de ces données3, 

vu  la  directive  90/385/CEE  du  Conseil,  du  20  juin  1990,  concernant  le  rapprochement  des 

législations des États membres relatives aux dispositifs médicaux implantables actifs4, 

vu  la  Convention  du  Conseil  de  l'Europe  sur  les  droits  de  l'homme  et  la  biomédecine,  signée 

le 4 avril 1997 à Oviedo, et notamment son article 1er «Objet et finalité», son article 2 «Primauté 

de l’être humain», ses articles 5 à 9 sur le consentement et son article 10 «Vie privée et droit à 

l’information»5, 

vu la Déclaration universelle sur le génome humain et les droits de l'homme adoptée par l'Unesco 

le 11 novembre 19976, 

vu la Convention du Conseil de l’Europe, du 1er janvier 1981, pour la protection des personnes à 

l'égard du traitement automatisé des données à caractère personnel7, 

vu 

la  Déclaration  de  principes  du  Sommet  mondial  sur 

la  société  de 

l’information, 

du 12 décembre 2003,  et  notamment  son  point  58  sur  l’utilisation  des  technologies  de 

l’information et de la communication (TIC) et son point 59 sur les utilisations abusives des TIC8, 

vu  les  auditions  d’experts  et  de  services  de  la  Commission  organisées  par  le  GEE 

le 15 décembre 2003, le 16 mars 2004 et le 15 juin 2004 à Bruxelles, 

vu  le  rapport  du  Dr  Fabienne  Nsanze  «ICT  implants  in  the  human  body  –  A  Review»,  février 

20059, 

vu la table ronde organisée par le GEE le 21 décembre 2004 à Amsterdam10, 

vu l’audition des rapporteurs du GEE, le Prof. Stefano Rodotà et le Prof. Rafael Capurro, 

3  JO L 281 du 23.11.1995, pp. 31 à 50. 
4  JO L 189 du 20.7.1990, pp. 17 à 36. 
5  http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/fr/treaties/html/164.htm 
6  http://portal.unesco.org/shs/fr/ev.php-URL_ID=2228&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html 
7  http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/fr/Treaties/Html/108.htm  
8  http://www.itu.int/wsis/ 
9  Joint en annexe au présent avis. 
10  Compte rendu des débats de la table ronde «The ethical aspects of ICT implants in the human body» 

du 21 décembre 2004. 

38

.

 
 
                                                 
CONSIDÉRANT CE QUI SUIT: 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Les technologies de l’information et de la communication (TIC) sont partout. Jusqu’à présent, leur 

emprise sur notre quotidien a essentiellement pris la forme d’appareils que nous utilisons à des 

fins  personnelles  ou  professionnelles,  tels  que  PC  ou  ordinateurs  portables,  téléphones 

cellulaires, etc. Avec les dernières avancées technologiques, elles tendent cependant à devenir 

partie intégrante de l’individu, soit par le vêtement (wearable computing ou cyber-vêtement), soit 

par implantation dans le corps. 

À première vue, les implants utilisant les TIC (ICT implants, ci-après «implants TIC») ne posent 

pas de problèmes éthiques – si l’on songe, par exemple, aux stimulateurs cardiaques. Toutefois, 

s’ils peuvent être utilisés pour pallier la déficience de certaines fonctions corporelles, ces implants 

TIC peuvent aussi être source d’abus, notamment lorsqu’il est possible d'y accéder par réseau 

informatique.  Bien  que,  selon  certains,  ils  offrent  essentiellement  le  moyen  de  restaurer  des 

capacités fonctionnelles endommagées, contribuant ainsi à la promotion de la dignité humaine, 

on pourrait même considérer qu’ils représentent une menace pour celle-ci et, en particulier, pour 

l’intégrité du corps humain (voir la section 5). 

L’idée  de  se  laisser  implanter  des  dispositifs  TIC  sous  la  peau  en  vue  non  seulement  de 

restaurer,  mais  aussi  d’améliorer,  certaines  capacités  fonctionnelles  éveille  des  visions  de 

science-fiction  effrayantes  et/ou  prometteuses.  Dans  certains  cas,  l’implantation  de  micropuces 

se  pratique  pourtant  déjà,  avec  le  risque  corrélatif  de  formes  de  contrôle  de  l’individu  et  de  la 

société. 

La  relation  intime  entre  fonctions  corporelles  et  psychiques  est  fondatrice  de  l’identité 

personnelle. Les neurosciences modernes s’accordent à le souligner. Le langage et l’imagination 

influencent, de façon unique, notre perception de l’espace et du temps ainsi que de nous-mêmes 

et  des  autres,  notre  relation  à  autrui  et  à  notre  environnement  naturel,  la  manière  dont  nous 

concevons  nos  sociétés  sur  le  plan  historique,  culturel,  politique,  juridique,  économique  et 

technique, acquérons des connaissances sur nous-mêmes et le monde et créons, produisons et 

échangeons des biens. 

Les  technologies  de  l’information  et  de  la  communication  sont  le  produit  de  l’esprit  humain. 

Utilisant  essentiellement  des  substances  non  biologiques  comme  le  silicone,  elles  permettent 

d’exécuter un certain nombre de fonctions basées sur des programmes mathématiques ou des 

.

39

 
 
 
algorithmes.  Certaines  fonctions  biologiques  et  psychiques  peuvent  ainsi  être  simulées11.  Il  est 

en outre possible, non seulement en théorie, mais aujourd’hui aussi dans la pratique, d’implanter 

des  dispositifs  TIC  dans  le  corps  humain,  notamment  pour  restaurer  certaines  fonctions 

corporelles ou, dans le cas des prothèses et membres artificiels, remplacer certains organes ou 

certains membres. 

Ce sont là les raisons essentielles pour lesquelles les implants TIC dans le corps humain, qu’ils 

existent  déjà  ou  ne  soient  encore  qu'envisagés,  ont  des  implications  majeures  sur  le  plan 

éthique. 

En conséquence, le présent avis vise essentiellement à susciter, dans ce domaine à évolution 

rapide, une prise de conscience et un questionnement sur les dilemmes éthiques posés par une 

série  d’implants  TIC.  Si  nous  voulons  avoir  un  impact  approprié,  et  en  temps  utile,  sur  leurs 

diverses applications technologiques, le travail de sensibilisation et d’analyse éthiques doit avoir 

lieu maintenant. Le cas échéant, le présent avis pose des limites éthiques claires, énonce des 

principes  juridiques  et  propose  une  série  de  mesures  que  devraient  arrêter  des  législateurs 

européens conscients de leurs responsabilités. Il traite exclusivement des implants TIC dans le 

corps humain (voir la section 6.1). 

2. GLOSSAIRE 

Dispositif TIC: tout dispositif relevant des technologies de l’information et de la communication et 

contenant généralement une puce en silicone.  

Dispositif  médical  actif:  tout  dispositif  médical  dépendant,  pour  son  fonctionnement,  d'une 

source d'énergie électrique interne et indépendante ou de toute autre source d'énergie que celle 

générée directement par le corps humain ou la pesanteur12. 

Dispositif  médical  implantable  actif:  tout  dispositif  médical  actif  qui  est  conçu  pour  être 

implanté  en  totalité  ou  en  partie,  par  une  intervention  chirurgicale  ou  médicale,  dans  le  corps 

humain ou, par une intervention médicale, dans un orifice naturel et qui est destiné à rester après 

l'intervention13. 

11  Il convient, à cet égard, de noter qu’il y a actuellement un vif débat sur la conception mécaniste du 

cerveau, dont il ne sera pas question dans le présent avis. 

12  Définition tirée de la directive 90/385/CEE du Conseil sur les dispositifs médicaux implantables actifs. 
13  Définition tirée de la directive 90/385/CEE du Conseil sur les dispositifs médicaux implantables actifs. 

40

.

 
 
 
 
                                                 
Implants  TIC  passifs:  dispositifs  TIC  implantables  dans  le  corps  humain  qui  dépendent,  pour 

leur fonctionnement, d’un champ électromagnétique externe (voir notamment la section 3.1.1. sur 

la puce «VeriChip»). 

Implants TIC en ligne: implants TIC qui dépendent, pour leur fonctionnement d’une connexion 

(«en ligne») à un ordinateur externe ou qui peuvent être interrogés («en ligne») par un ordinateur 

externe (voir notamment la section 3.1.2. sur les biocapteurs). 

Implants TIC autonomes: implants TIC fonctionnant indépendamment d’appareils électroniques 

externes  (éventuellement  après  une  opération  d’initialisation)  (voir  notamment  la  section  3.1.1. 

sur la stimulation cérébrale profonde). 

3. CONTEXTE SCIENTIFIQUE ET TECHNIQUE 

(Voir le rapport détaillé du Dr Fabienne Nsanze «ICT implants in the human body – A Review», 

février 2005, joint en annexe au présent avis.) 

3.1. Applications actuelles et recherche 

3.1.1. Applications: les implants TIC commercialisés 

La  présente  section  contient  des  informations  sur  les  dispositifs  implantables  dans  le  corps 

humain qui sont déjà commercialisés – au terme, pour certains, de recherches conduites sur des 

dizaines d’années. 

Dispositifs médicaux actifs 

L’histoire  des  dispositifs  implantables  en  pratique  clinique  a  commencé  dans  les  années  1960, 

avec 

la 

fabrication  des  premiers  stimulateurs  cardiaques,  qui  suppléent  au  battement 

automatique  du  cœur.  Ont  suivi,  dans  les  années  1980,  des  systèmes  de  stimulation  vésicale 

permettant  aux  personnes  atteintes  de  paraplégie  (paralysie  des  membres  inférieurs  résultant 

souvent  d’une  lésion  de  la  moelle  épinière)  de  contrôler  leur  miction.  Derniers  exemples 

d’implants actifs produisant une stimulation électrique fonctionnelle, des stimulateurs sont utilisés 

pour soulager les patients atteints de tumeurs, atténuer les tremblements causés par la maladie 

de Parkinson et restaurer la fonction de préhension chez les personnes atteintes de quadriplégie 

(paralysie des bras, des jambes et du tronc en dessous de la lésion de la moelle épinière). Dans 

la liste des implants classiques, il convient de citer: 

.

41

 
 
 
 
• 

les stimulateurs cardiaques, destinés aux patients souffrant de troubles de la conduction ou d’une 

insuffisance cardiaque; 

• 

les implants cochléaires, qui diffèrent des aides auditives en ceci qu’ils n’amplifient pas les sons, 

mais  contournent  la  partie  endommagée  de  la  cochlée  pour  transmettre  directement  les 

signaux sonores au nerf auditif; 

• 

l’implant auditif du tronc cérébral: cette prothèse auditive indépendante de la cochlée et du nerf 

auditif est destinée aux personnes ne pouvant bénéficier d’un implant cochléaire en raison du 

dysfonctionnement du nerf auditif. Elle stimule directement le noyau cochléaire, situé dans le 

tronc cérébral; 

• 

les pompes d’administration de médicaments programmables et implantables: 

(cid:57)  pompes d’administration de Baclofen pour les patients atteints de sclérose en plaques 

avec  spasticité  grave  (administration  intrathécale,  c'est-à-dire  à  l'intérieur  du  canal 

rachidien) 

(cid:57)  pompes à insuline pour les diabétiques; 

• 

les  dispositifs  de  neurostimulation  implantables:  le  terme  «neurostimulation»  s’applique  à  des 

technologies qui ne stimulent pas directement un muscle en tant que dispositifs de stimulation 

électrique 

fonctionnelle 

(comme 

les  stimulateurs  cardiaques).  Les 

technologies  de 

radiostimulation modifient plutôt l’activité électrique des nerfs: 

(cid:57)  stimulation de la moelle épinière pour la gestion de la douleur chronique; 

(cid:57)  stimulation du nerf sacré pour le traitement de l’incontinence urinaire réfractaire; 

(cid:57)  stimulation du nerf vague (SNV) pour le contrôle des crises d’épilepsie ou le contrôle de 

l’humeur dans les cas de dépression grave; 

• 

la stimulation cérébrale profonde (SCP): 

(cid:57)  pour le contrôle des tremblements chez les patients atteints de la maladie de Parkinson; 

(cid:57)  dans le cas des tremblements essentiels: les patients concernés ne présentent aucun 

autre  symptôme  que  ces  tremblements,  qui  peuvent  toucher  les  mains,  la  tête,  les 

jambes, le tronc ou la voix. Comme les personnes atteintes de la maladie de Parkinson, 

ces patients peuvent être aidés par la stimulation cérébrale profonde; 

.

42

 
 
• 

la jambe artificielle commandée par microprocesseur: la société allemande Otto Bock Healthcare 

GmbH  a  mis  au  point  une  prothèse  appelée  «C-Leg®»,  qui  est  une  jambe  artificielle 

commandée par microprocesseur. 

Dispositifs d’identification et de localisation 

Les dispositifs à puce se présentent sous trois formes: 

1)  à  lecture  seule:  il  s’agit  de  la  forme  la  plus  simple  de  dispositifs  à  puce,  similaire  à  celle 

aujourd’hui  utilisée  pour  l’identification  des  animaux.  Même  ce  procédé  élémentaire  a  de 

nombreuses  applications  potentielles,  par  exemple  le  repérage  des  personnes  atteintes  de  la 

maladie  d’Alzheimer,  mineures  ou  inconscientes.  Plus  largement,  il  pourrait  être  utilisé  comme 

une sorte de carte nationale d’identité, fonctionnant avec un numéro d’identification intégré à la 

puce; 

2)  à  lecture/écriture:  le  type  de  puce  utilisé  contient  une  série  d'informations,  qui  peut  être 

complétée si nécessaire. La puce permet l’enregistrement de données et elle est programmable 

à distance. À supposer, par exemple, qu’elle contienne le dossier médical d’une personne et que 

ce dossier médical évolue, les informations correspondantes pourraient être ajoutées sans qu'il 

soit pour cela nécessaire de retirer l'implant. Les puces à lecture/écriture pourraient également 

faciliter  et  permettre 

l’enregistrement  des 

transactions 

financières.  Le 

troisième 

type 

d’informations importantes qu’elles pourraient contenir serait le casier judiciaire; 

3)  avec fonction de localisation: outre les fonctions de lecture/écriture décrites ci-dessus, certains 

dispositifs  peuvent  également  émettre  un  signal  radio  localisable.  Là  encore,  les  applications 

potentielles  sont  nombreuses,  comme  en  témoignent  les  technologies  moins  sophistiquées  qui 

existent déjà. Les dispositifs avec fonction de localisation dépendent d’une source d’énergie qui 

devrait être miniaturisée pour rendre l’implantation possible. Avec un tel implant, un suivi constant 

deviendrait  possible:  si  chaque  puce  implantée  émettait  un  signal  sur  une  fréquence 

d’identification unique, les porteurs pourraient être localisés par simple appel du bon signal. Le 

récepteur étant mobile, cette localisation serait partout possible. 

Dans la liste des dispositifs classiques, il convient de citer: 

• 

les dispositifs d’identification de fréquence par radio (radio frequency identification (RFID) tags): 

des millions de RFID se sont vendues depuis le début des années 1980. Cette technologie est 

utilisée pour l'identification du bétail, des animaux de compagnie, des animaux de laboratoire 

et  des  espèces  menacées.  Elle  ne  contient  ni  produit  chimique,  ni  batterie.  La  puce  ne  se 

décharge jamais et a une espérance de vie de 20 ans; 

43

.

 
 
• 

la  puce  VeriChip™  ou  «code  barre  humain»:  la  puce  VeriChip™  (www.4verichip.com)  est  une 

RFID sous-cutanée, de la taille d’un grain de riz environ, qui s’implante dans le tissu adipeux 

en dessous du triceps. Ses applications actuelles sont notamment les suivantes: 

(cid:57)  dossier  médical  et  informations  sur  l’état  de  santé  du  porteur  (groupe  sanguin,  terrains 

allergiques, antécédents médicaux); 

(cid:57)  données  personnelles/identification:  au  Baja  Beach  Club  (en  Espagne et aux Pays-Bas, 

http://www.baja.nl),  la  puce  VeriChip™  est  utilisée  comme  une  carte  intelligente 

permettant d'accélérer les commandes de boissons et leur paiement; 

(cid:57) 

informations financières (vérification secondaire). 

Les  applications  pourraient  en  outre  s’étendre  à  la  sécurité  des  transports  publics,  à  l’accès 

aux  bâtiments  ou  installations  sensibles  et  au  suivi  des  personnes  en  liberté  conditionnelle 

(anciens  condamnés,  criminels,  etc.).  Actuellement,  le  porteur  doit  se  tenir  à  une  courte 

distance d’un scanner pour que la puce soit «réveillée». Par conséquent, celle-ci ne permet de 

suivre ses déplacements qu’à proximité du scanner. Pour le moment, la puce VeriChip™ n’est 

donc pas un système implantable de positionnement par satellites. 

• 

la société bavaroise Ident Technology (http://www.ident-technology.com) propose des dispositifs 

utilisant le corps humain (en particulier la peau) comme transmetteur de données numériques; 

• 

implant  télécommandé  de  déclenchement  de  l'orgasme  féminin:  le  brevet  d’un  dispositif 

déclenchant  un  orgasme  par  simple  pression  sur  un  bouton  a  été  déposé  aux  États-unis  en 

janvier 2004. 

3.1.2. Recherche sur les implants TIC 

Dispositifs médicaux 

•  Les biocapteurs: les biocapteurs ou microsystèmes électromécaniques (MEMS, selon l’acronyme 

anglais) sont des capteurs implantés dans le corps humain pour un suivi précis de certaines 

parties inaccessibles. Organisés en réseau, ils contrôlent de manière collective l’état de santé 

de leur hôte. Cela va de la collecte de données sur des paramètres physiologiques comme la 

pression sanguine ou le taux de glucose à la prise de décisions fondées sur ces données (par 

exemple, le corps médical sera averti d’un éventuel risque pour la santé). 

Les données à transmettre sont des informations médicales fondamentales qui, en vertu de la 

loi, doivent être protégées au regard de leur confidentialité. En conséquence, les technologies 

de l’information représentent une composante essentielle des implants biologiques concernés: 

44

.

 
 
en termes de recherche, de mémoire et de capacités de calcul, les enjeux pour la recherche 

sont importants. 

Diverses  applications  biomédicales  sont  possibles.  À 

titre  d’exemple,  on  peut  citer 

l’implantation de capteurs dans le cerveau de patients atteints de la maladie de Parkinson ou 

épileptiques,  l’implantation  d’un  ensemble  de  capteurs  acoustiques  ou  optiques  à  des  fins 

d’analyse sanguine ou encore l’implantation de capteurs dans le corps de malades cancéreux 

en phase de guérison en vue de détecter les éventuelles cellules cancéreuses.  

•  L’hippocampe  artificiel:  l’implantation  dans  le  cerveau  d’une  puce  capable  de  restaurer  ou 

d’améliorer la mémoire est un autre exemple de future prothèse cérébrale. L’hippocampe joue 

un rôle essentiel dans l’enregistrement des souvenirs. Contrairement à des dispositifs comme 

les  implants  cochléaires,  qui  stimulent  simplement  l’activité  cérébrale,  la  puce  en  question 

exécutera  les  mêmes  processus  que  la  partie  endommagée  du  cerveau  qu’elle  remplacera. 

C’est  une  voie  prometteuse  pour  les  personnes  dont  le  cerveau  a  été  endommagé  par  une 

attaque, une épilepsie ou la maladie d’Alzheimer. 

•  L’implant cortical destiné aux aveugles: on sait, depuis des années, qu’une stimulation électrique 

de l’œil produit des phosphènes permettant la perception visuelle. Avec l’implant cortical, les 

informations  enregistrées  par  une  petite  caméra  numérique  seraient  transmises  à  des 

électrodes  implantées  dans  le  cortex  visuel,  sans  passer  par  la  rétine  ou  le  nerf  optique 

défectueux. 

•  L’implant  oculaire  ou  rétine  artificielle:  d’autres  chercheurs  se  concentrent  sur  de  nouvelles 

technologies  qui  se  substitueraient  à  la  rétine,  soit  la  couche  de  cellules  photosensibles  de 

l’œil, lorsque celle-ci est endommagée. 

Une prothèse rétinienne implique de stimuler électriquement les neurones rétiniens situés en 

arrière  de  la  couche  réceptrice  via  des  signaux  (lumineux)  émis  par  une  microcaméra 

numérique. Une telle stimulation est possible à condition que la rétine interne et le nerf optique 

soient toujours intacts. En fait, deux voies sont actuellement explorées par la recherche sur les 

prothèses rétiniennes: l’implant sous-rétinien et l’implant épirétinien.  

•  Les interfaces cerveau-ordinateur (BCI, selon l’acronyme anglais) ou contrôle cérébral direct: les 

technologies ci-dessus sont des technologies de la communication. Elles collectent certaines 

informations  produites  par  le  cerveau  et  les  externalisent.  Il  existe  aussi  des  technologies 

d’internalisation  (comme  les  implants  cochléaires  ou  du  nerf  optique),  dont  l’objectif  est  de 

recueillir  des  informations  externes  et  de  les  rendre  intelligibles  pour  l’individu.  À  terme,  ces 

.

45

 
 
deux types de technologies seront combinés pour donner naissance à des systèmes interactifs 

permettant l’échange d’informations dans les deux sens. Avec de tels systèmes, il deviendrait 

possible d’utiliser directement les signaux émis par le cerveau à des fins de communication et 

de maîtrise du mouvement. 

Même si les études réalisées sur le corps humain démontrent la faisabilité d’une telle utilisation 

des  signaux  cérébraux  à  des  fins  de  commande  et  de  contrôle  d’appareils  externes,  les 

chercheurs  soulignent  que  de  nombreuses  années  de  développement  et  de  tests  cliniques 

seront encore nécessaires avant que des dispositifs ad hoc – y compris les neuro-prothèses 

pour les personnes paralysées – ne soient disponibles. 

Appareils de surveillance ou de localisation 

•  Les  appareils  électroniques  portables  de  localisation  des  humains:  ces  appareils  peuvent 

permettre à quiconque possède un récepteur d'établir la position des porteurs partout dans le 

monde.  

•  Le  système  de  positionnement  par  satellites  sous-cutané:  en  mai  2003,  la  société  américaine 

Applied  Digital  Solutions  (ADS)  (http://www.adsx.com)  a  déclaré  qu’un  implant  prototype  de 

localisation par satellites avait été testé avec succès. Des experts techniques se demandent 

cependant  s’il  peut  réellement  fonctionner.  Le  «dispositif  de  localisation  personnelle»  se 

présente,  en  effet,  sous  la  forme  d’un  disque  de  6,35  centimètres  de  diamètre  et  de  1,27 

centimètre d’épaisseur – soit environ la taille d’un stimulateur cardiaque. Ce système de suivi 

par satellites pourrait être utilisé à diverses fins, par exemple en cas d'urgence médicale (crise 

cardiaque, épilepsie ou diabète) ou à des fins d'identification et de localisation (des personnes 

occupant un emploi à haut risque, des enfants, des psychotiques ou des terroristes présumés). 

Dispositifs d’amélioration des capacités fonctionnelles ou «de confort» 

Les informaticiens ont annoncé que, dans les vingt prochaines années, des interfaces neuronales 

seraient  conçues  qui  non  seulement  augmenteraient  la  gamme  dynamique  des  sens,  mais 

amélioreraient  aussi 

la  mémoire  et  permettraient 

la  «cyber-pensée»  –  c'est-à-dire 

la 

communication invisible avec les autres. 

Sont notamment envisagés: 

• 

l’implant prothétique cortical («amplificateur» sensoriel ou d’intelligence): initialement conçu pour 

les aveugles, l’implant cortical permettra aux porteurs «sains» d’avoir en permanence accès à 

.

46

 
 
des  informations  transmises  par  ordinateur,  sur  la  base  soit  des  images  captées  par  une 

caméra numérique, soit d’une interface constituée d'une «fenêtre» artificielle; 

• 

la  vision  artificielle:  selon  de  récents  travaux  de  recherche  qui  portaient  sur  le  développement 

d’une  rétine  artificielle,  il  sera  un  jour  possible  de  voir  dans  l'infrarouge.  La  vidéo-caméra 

normale pourra alors être remplacée par une caméra infrarouge; 

• 

l’implant  téléphonique  dentaire  ou  téléphone  dentaire:  conçu  en  2002,  l’implant  téléphonique 

dentaire  n’existe  encore  qu’à  l’état  de  prototype.  Un  microvibrateur  et  un  récepteur  d'ondes 

basse fréquence sont implantés dans une dent au cours d'une banale opération de chirurgie 

dentaire. La dent opérée peut alors communiquer avec toute une série d’appareils numériques 

(téléphones  portables,  radios  et  ordinateurs).  Le  son  est  transféré  à  l'oreille  interne  par 

résonance osseuse. La réception étant absolument indétectable, des informations peuvent être 

reçues n’importe où, n’importe quand; 

• 

l’hippocampe artificiel: ainsi qu’on l’a déjà mentionné, cette puce artificielle pourrait améliorer la 

mémoire. 

3.2. Autres applications potentielles 

Parmi les autres applications potentielles des implants TIC, il convient de citer: 

• 

le brevet Microsoft n° 6 754 472 (du 22 juin 2004), qui fait du corps humain un transmetteur de 

données  (et  d'énergie)  à  «d'autres  appareils»,  tels  qu’assistants  numériques  personnalisés, 

téléphones cellulaires, appareils médicaux (à des fins de surveillance, par exemple dans des 

maisons de retraite) et RFID, qui permettent la localisation de personnes. Dans le cadre d’un 

site web familial, les enfants pourraient ainsi se connecter au système de surveillance pour voir 

ce  que  font  leurs  parents  ou  grands-parents.  Le  brevet  ne  contient  pas  de  description 

d’applications spécifiques; 

• 

les  «armes  intelligentes»:  la  société  Applied  Digital  Solutions  (ADS),  qui  a  créé  la  puce 

VeriChip™,  a  annoncé  en  avril  2004  la  conclusion  d'un  partenariat  avec  la  fabrique 

d'armement  FN  Manufacturing,  en  vue  de  la  production  d’armes  à  feu  dites  «intelligentes». 

Ces  armes  ne  peuvent  tirer  que  si  elles  sont  actionnées  par  leur  propriétaire,  auquel  est 

implantée une RFID dans la main. 

3.3. Le sixième programme-cadre de recherche et développement (PC6) 

«La  priorité  TSI  [Ndt:  en  matière  de  technologies  de  la  société  de  l’information]  du  6e 

programme-cadre  (PC)  poursuit  …  l'objectif  d'assurer  la  prééminence  de  l'Europe  dans  les 

technologies  génériques  et  appliquées  qui  sont  au  cœur  de  l'économie  de  la  connaissance.    Il 

47

.

 
 
vise à accroître l'innovation et la compétitivité des entreprises et des industries européennes et à 

contribuer à une augmentation du bien-être de tous les citoyens européens. 

La priorité TSI dans le 6e PC se concentre sur les technologies de la prochaine génération, qui 

intégreront  ordinateurs  et  réseaux  dans  l'environnement  quotidien  et  rendront  accessibles,  par 

l'intermédiaire  d'interfaces  utilisateurs  conviviales,  une  multitude  de  services  et  d'applications. 

Cette vision de "l'intelligence ambiante" place l'utilisateur, l'individu, au centre des progrès futurs 

d'une société de la connaissance dont personne ne devra être exclu.14» 

Exemples de projets financés par le PC6 

Développement  de  matériels  et  capteurs  nanoscopiques  et  de  microsystèmes  pour  implants 

médicaux destinés à améliorer l’état de santé et la qualité de vie 

Ce  projet  prévoit  le  développement  de  microsystèmes  fondés  sur  les  technologies  de  la 

communication en vue, d’une part, d’introduire directement certaines informations dans le corps 

humain sous la forme d’implants médicaux et systèmes ambulatoires de mesure et, d’autre part, 

de  transmettre  d’autres  informations  à  l’environnement  extérieur.  L’objectif  global  est  de 

développer  les  technologies  nécessaires  à  la  fabrication  d’un  microsystème,  puis  de  fabriquer 

des  dispositifs  médicaux  spécifiques  exploitant  ces  technologies.  Au  final,  les  dispositifs 

médicaux visés incluent implants cochléaires et rétiniens, systèmes de stimulation nerveuse, de 

contrôle vésical et de contrôle de la pression sanguine. Sur la base des statistiques disponibles, 

on estime qu’environ 50 % de la population occidentale, soit près de 500 millions de personnes, 

souffrira de l'un au moins des problèmes de santé ciblés par le projet. 

Le projet OPTIVIP (Optimization of the Visual Implantable Prosthesis) 

Le  projet  OPTIVIP  poursuit  deux  objectifs:  l’optimisation  d’une  prothèse  visuelle  implantable 

fondée  sur  la  stimulation  du  nerf  optique  et  la  démonstration  de  son  fonctionnement  dans  le 

cadre d’une étude préclinique. 

Les questions éthiques sont ici examinées dans le cadre de tâches-projet spécifiques, dont le but 

est de recueillir les réactions de la communauté des aveugles, et notamment des patients et de 

leurs  représentants.  Divers  aspects  de  la  prothèse  (fonctionnement,  apparence,  éthique)  sont 

couverts, ce qui est essentiel pour orienter les efforts de recherche en fonction des besoins réels. 

14  Priorité TSI du 6e programme-cadre pour 2003 et 2004: 
http://www.cordis.lu/ist/workprogramme/fr/2_2.htm 

48

.

 
 
 
                                                 
4. CADRE JURIDIQUE 

4.1. Principes généraux 

Le  caractère  nouveau  des  questions  abordées  dans  le  présent  avis  rend  difficile  l’édiction  de 

règles  spécifiquement  applicables  aux  dispositifs  TIC  implantables  dans  le  corps  humain.  Le 

cadre  juridique  devrait,  par  conséquent,  découler  des  principes  généraux  sous-tendant  les 

législations  nationales  et  les  instruments  de  droit  international  en  vigueur.  Ces  principes 

généraux  peuvent,  en  effet,  nous  fournir  les  orientations  dont  nous  avons  besoin  pour  définir 

dans  leurs  grandes  lignes  les  normes  juridiques  nécessaires  à  la  réglementation  d’une 

technologie qui, du fait qu’elle modifie le corps humain et sa relation à son environnement, a un 

profond impact sur l’identité personnelle et sur la vie. Ils sont énoncés dans des textes portant sur 

différents  thèmes:  de  la  bioéthique  au  traitement  électronique  des  informations,  des  limites  au 

consentement à la définition des dispositifs médicaux. 

Pour  ce  qui  concerne  le  cadre  juridique  européen,  il  convient  d’attacher  une  importance 

particulière à la Charte des droits fondamentaux de l’Union européenne, aujourd’hui intégrée à la 

partie II du traité établissant une Constitution pour l’Europe. Cette charte consacre les principes 

généraux  de  dignité,  de  liberté,  d’égalité,  de  solidarité,  de  citoyenneté  et  de  justice,  ainsi  que 

d’intégrité et d’inviolabilité de la personne, en mettant notamment l’accent sur le consentement 

éclairé (article 3) et la protection des données à caractère personnel (article 8). Les questions de 

protection  des  données  à  caractère  personnel  sont  développées  dans  les  directives 95/46/CE 

et 2002/58/CE. Par ailleurs, l’article 174 du traité CE et, de façon plus détaillée, la communication 

de  la  Commission  du  2  février  2000  (COM(2000)1  final)15  font  expressément  référence  au 

principe  de  précaution.  Enfin,  les  dispositifs  médicaux  actifs  sont  définis  et  réglementés  par  la 

directive 90/385/CEE. 

Parmi  les  instruments  de  droit  international,  la  Convention  sur  les  droits  de  l’homme  et  la 

biomédecine  adoptée  par  le  Conseil  de  l’Europe  en  1997  et  la  Déclaration  universelle  sur  le 

génome  humain  et  les  droits  de  l'homme  adoptée  par  l’Unesco  la  même  année  sont 

particulièrement importantes, au regard notamment du respect de la dignité et de l’intégrité de la 

personne et du principe du consentement éclairé. Des orientations importantes sont également 

fournies par les points 58 et 59 de la Déclaration de principes du Sommet mondial sur la société 

de l’information, qui soulignent la nécessité de veiller à ce que l’utilisation des TIC soit toujours 

respectueuse des droits de l'homme et de la vie privée. 

15  http://europa.eu.int/comm/dgs/health_consumer/library/pub/pub07_fr.pdf 

49

.

 
 
                                                 
Les  chartes  constitutionnelles  et  législations  nationales  contiennent  également  des  dispositions 

relatives au respect de la dignité humaine, à la protection de l’intégrité physique et de la santé et 

au consentement éclairé, ainsi qu’en matière de transplantation. 

Enfin,  un  certain  nombre  de  décisions  administratives  et  judiciaires  traitent  directement  ou 

indirectement  des  questions  examinées  dans  le  présent  avis,  tels  l'arrêt  rendu  par  la  Cour  de 

justice  des  Communautés  européennes 

le  12  octobre  2004  dans 

l’affaire  C-36/02, 

Omega/Oberbürgermeister16  et  l’ordonnance  rendue  par  la  Food  and  Drug  Administration 

américaine concernant les tests de la puce VeriChip à des fins d’applications médicales. 

Au total, il est possible de tirer de ces instruments un certain nombre de principes sur lesquels 

asseoir le cadre juridique et à l’aune desquels la légalité des implants TIC dans le corps humain 

pourrait être appréciée. 

4.2. Dignité humaine 

La  Charte  des  droits  fondamentaux  de  l’Union  européenne  énonce,  en  tout  premier  lieu,  le 

principe de la dignité humaine. Son article 1er dispose que «la dignité humaine est inviolable». 

Inspirée  de  la  Loi  fondamentale  allemande,  cette  disposition  est  également  conforme  à  la 

déclaration contenue dans le préambule de la charte, selon laquelle l’Union «place la personne 

au cœur de son action». Ce principe a été consacré comme limite absolue dans l’arrêt Omega, 

par  lequel  a  été  jugée  légale  la  décision  des  autorités  allemandes  interdisant  un  jeu  appelé 

«Jouer à tuer», considéré comme «mena(çant) l'ordre public … du fait que, selon la conception 

prévalant dans l'opinion publique, l'exploitation commerciale de jeux de divertissement impliquant 

la  simulation  d'actes  homicides  porte  atteinte  à  une  valeur  fondamentale  consacrée  par  la 

constitution nationale, à savoir la dignité humaine».  

L’importance de cet «affront à la dignité humaine»  est telle qu’elle légitime non seulement une 

interdiction  restreignant  la  liberté  d'entreprise,  mais  fixe  encore  une  limite  à  la  liberté  de  choix 

individuelle,  en  excluant  que  le  consentement  éclairé  du  joueur  puisse  être  considéré  comme 

suffisant pour faire du jeu en cause un objet socialement et légalement acceptable. Il conviendrait 

ainsi  de  considérer  le  principe  de  la  dignité  humaine  comme  un  instrument  permettant  de 

déterminer les cas dans lesquels le corps humain est absolument «inviolable». 

Dans  la  jurisprudence  allemande  bien  connue  relative  à  la  loi  sur  le  recensement,  il  est  dit 

précisément que «la valeur et la dignité de la personne, en tant que membre autodéterminé d’une 

société  libre,  sont  au  cœur  de  l’ordre  institutionnel»  (arrêt  du  Bundesverfassungsgericht 

16  http://curia.eu.int/jurisp/cgi-bin/form.pl?lang=fr&Submit=Rechercher&alldocs=alldocs&docj=docj 

&docop=docop&docor=docor&docjo=docjo&numaff=C-36%2F02&resmax=100 

50

.

 
 
                                                 
du 15 décembre 1983). Cette affirmation est conforme aux orientations clairement énoncées en 

préambule de la Déclaration universelle des droits de l’homme de 1948 ainsi qu’à son article 1er, 

qui fait expressément référence à la dignité comme composante essentielle de l’être humain et 

comme  condition  de  sa  liberté  et  de  l’égalité  des  droits.  S’agissant  des  expériences 

constitutionnelles  plus  récentes,  il  suffira  de  mentionner  l’article  16  du  Code  civil  français  ou 

l’article  2  du  Code  italien  relatif  à  la  protection  des  données,  qui  font  aussi  expressément 

référence à la dignité. Il en va de même d’instruments de droit international comme la Déclaration 

d’Helsinki  (1964),  la  Convention  du  Conseil  de  l’Europe  sur  les  droits  de  l'homme  et  la 

biomédecine  (1997),  qui  réaffirme  en  tout  premier  lieu  le  principe  de  la  dignité  humaine,  et  la 

Déclaration universelle de l’Unesco sur le génome humain (1997). Enfin, l’article 1er de la Charte 

des  droits  fondamentaux  de  l’Union  européenne  (2000)  dispose  que  «la  dignité  humaine  est 

inviolable» et qu’«elle doit être respectée et protégée». 

On peut en conclure que la dignité est une valeur universelle, fondamentale et incontournable, 

même  s’il  faut  toujours  la  replacer  dans  son  contexte  culturel  spécifique.  Aujourd’hui,  cette 

conclusion est étayée par le fait que le terme revient avec une fréquence toujours accrue dans 

les  instruments  adoptés  par  les  organisations  internationales  représentatives  de  toutes  les 

cultures  mondiales,  comme  l’Unesco  (de  fait,  il  apparaît  quinze  fois  dans  la  Déclaration 

universelle  sur  le  génome  humain).  De  ce  point  de  vue,  la  dignité  est  appelée  à  devenir  un 

concept  interculturel.  Il  ne  faut  cependant  pas  oublier  que  les  références  au  terme  sont  aussi 

teintées  d’ambiguïté:  celui-ci  est  employé  aussi  bien  pour  exprimer  la  nécessité  d’un  respect 

absolu de l’autonomie et des droits de la personne que pour justifier une volonté de contrôle des 

individus et de leur comportement au nom de valeurs qu’on entend imposer à d’autres. En outre, 

l’article 1er de la Charte des droits fondamentaux dispose que la dignité doit non seulement être 

«respectée»,  mais  aussi  «protégée»  –  selon  le  modèle  de  la  Loi  fondamentale  allemande. 

Autrement dit, les autorités publiques sont tenues non seulement de s’abstenir d’intervenir dans 

la vie privée des individus, mais aussi de prendre activement toute mesure nécessaire pour créer 

les conditions qui leur permettront de vivre dans la dignité. 

4.3. Inviolabilité de la personne 

Le principe d’inviolabilité du corps humain et d’intégrité physique et psychologique, tel qu’énoncé 

à  l’article  3  de  la  Charte  des  droits  fondamentaux,  exclut  toute  activité  susceptible  de 

compromettre tout ou partie de cette intégrité – même avec le consentement du sujet. Selon la 

définition  qu’en  donne  l’OMS,  «la  santé  est  un  état  de  complet  bien-être  physique,  mental  et 

social et ne consiste pas seulement en une absence de maladie ou d'infirmité». La réalité dont il 

.

51

 
 
est  ici  question  est  cependant  différente,  puisque  l'intégrité  n'est  pas  considérée  comme 

absolument  inviolable  –  la  notion  d’inviolabilité  renvoyant  aux  interventions  causant  une 

«diminution  permanente»  des  fonctions  corporelles  (conformément  à  l’article  5  du  Code  civil 

italien) ou contraires à l’ordre public et/ou à la morale. 

Ceci s’applique notamment au cadre régissant l’appréciation de la légalité des dons d’organe, qui 

est limitée aux cas de perte d’une fonction corporelle essentielle. On pourrait être amené à en 

conclure  qu'il  convient  de  ne  pas  se  référer  au  principe  d'intégrité  lorsque  des  fonctions 

corporelles sont effectivement restaurées et/ou améliorées. Par ailleurs, la liberté d’user de son 

corps  est  spécifiquement  limitée  par  les  nombreuses  dispositions  en  vertu  desquelles  il  est 

interdit de faire du corps humain et de ses parties et/ou produits une source de profit (article 3 de 

la  Charte  des  droits  fondamentaux;  article  21  de  la  Convention  sur  les  droits  de  l’homme  et  la 

biomédecine; article 4 de la Déclaration universelle de l'Unesco). Une interprétation large de ces 

principes de non-commercialisation et de non-instrumentalisation pourrait pousser à conclure que 

l’implantation  de  dispositifs  TIC  à  des  fins  qu’on  pourrait  généralement  qualifier  de  mercantiles 

(par  exemple,  l’accès  à  une  discothèque  à  des  conditions  préférentielles)  ne  devrait  pas  être 

autorisée (voir la section 6.4). 

4.4 Protection de la vie privée et des données à caractère personnel 

L’idée selon laquelle les individus ne sont pas libres de faire n’importe quel usage de leur propre 

corps est confirmée, quoique indirectement, par l’article 8, paragraphe 2, de la directive 95/46/CE 

relative  à  la  protection  des  données  à  caractère  personnel.  Selon  cette  disposition,  l’État  peut 

prévoir  que  le  consentement  exprès  d’une  personne  ne  suffit  pas  pour  permettre  à  un  tiers 

d’utiliser les «données sensibles» la concernant – sur sa vie sexuelle, ses opinions, sa santé, son 

origine ethnique –, mais doit être assorti d’une autorisation ad hoc délivrée, par exemple, par une 

autorité  de  surveillance  (voir  l’article  26  du  Code  italien  relatif  à  la  protection  des  données  à 

caractère personnel). L’objectif est de protéger la partie la plus sensible du «corps électronique» 

en  empêchant  la  personne  concernée  d’y  donner  elle-même  un  accès  susceptible  de 

compromettre son intégrité. 

D’un point de vue plus général, la Charte des droits fondamentaux de l’Union européenne a établi 

une distinction entre le respect de la vie privée et familiale (article 7) et la protection des données 

à caractère personnel (article 8), devenu en conséquence un droit individuel distinct. On a ainsi 

affaire à un type de protection qui, d’une part, s'oppose à toute intrusion dans la sphère privée et, 

d'autre part, confère à chaque individu le droit à l'autodétermination informationnelle – y compris 

le  droit  de  rester  maître  des  informations  le  concernant.  C’est  là  un  véritable  cas  de 

52

.

 
 
«constitutionnalisation  de 

l’individu»,  qui 

impose 

le 

respect  du  corps 

tant  physique 

qu’électronique.  Plus  spécifiquement,  la  protection  des  données  à  caractère  personnel  est 

fondée, dans l’Union européenne, sur la directive 95/46/CE17 et la directive 2002/58/CE18. Cette 

dernière directive contient également des dispositions concernant spécifiquement la localisation 

des  individus.  L’ensemble  de  principes  et  de  règles  applicables  à  la  protection  des  données  à 

caractère personnel est actuellement partagé par tous les États membres de l’Union européenne 

ainsi que par plusieurs autres États qui – du Canada à l’Australie, du Japon à nombre de pays 

d’Amérique latine – ont avalisé une norme élevée en la matière prévoyant, avant toute chose, la 

fourniture  d’informations  détaillées  à  la  personne  concernée,  assortie  de  son  consentement 

explicite.  Par  conséquent,  tout  type  d’implant  TIC  devrait  préalablement  faire  l’objet  d’une 

évaluation stricte visant à apprécier son impact sur la vie privée. 

4.5. Le principe de précaution 

Le  principe  de  précaution  n’impose  pas  la  définition  de  limites  ou  d’interdits  absolus.  C’est  un 

instrument  général  de  gestion  des 

risques, 

initialement 

restreint  aux  questions 

environnementales.  Dans  sa  communication  de  février  2000,  la  Commission  souligne:  «Le 

principe de précaution n'est pas défini dans le Traité, qui ne le prescrit qu'une seule fois – pour 

protéger  l'environnement.  Mais,  dans  la  pratique,  son  champ  d'application  est  beaucoup  plus 

vaste,  plus  particulièrement  lorsqu'une  évaluation  scientifique  objective  et  préliminaire  indique 

qu'il est raisonnable de craindre que les effets potentiellement dangereux pour l'environnement 

ou  la  santé  humaine,  animale  ou  végétale  soient  incompatibles  avec  le  niveau  élevé  de 

protection  choisi  pour  la  Communauté»  (résumé,  paragraphe  3).  La  Commission  estime  en 

conséquence que «le principe de précaution est un principe d'application générale» (section 3), 

dont  la  portée  dépasse  l’Union  européenne  –  comme  en  témoignent  plusieurs  instruments  de 

droit  international,  à  commencer  par  la  Déclaration  sur  l'environnement  et  le  développement, 

adoptée à Rio de Janeiro en 1992. 

Les  conditions  préalables  fondamentales  pour  l’application  du  principe  de  précaution  sont 

l’existence d’un risque, la possibilité d’un dommage et une incertitude scientifique concernant la 

survenance  de  ce  dommage.  Une  fois  le  principe  de  précaution  invoqué,  il  incombe  au 

gestionnaire du risque de décider de mesures préventives qui soient proportionnées à l’objectif 

17  Directive 95/46/CE du Parlement européen et du Conseil, du 24 octobre 1995, relative à la protection 

des personnes physiques à l'égard du traitement des données à caractère personnel et à la libre 
circulation de ces données, JO L 281 du 23.11.1995, pp. 31 à 50. 

18  Directive 2002/58/CE du Parlement européen et du Conseil, du 12 juillet 2002, concernant le 

traitement des données à caractère personnel et la protection de la vie privée dans le secteur des 
communications électroniques (directive vie privée et communications électroniques), JO L 201 du 
31.7.2002, pp. 37 à 47. 

53

.

 
 
                                                 
d’atténuation  du  dommage  potentiel,  sans  viser  à  créer  une  situation  de  «risque  zéro».  Les 

mesures de gestion du risque doivent servir à déterminer le «niveau de risque acceptable» au 

regard des valeurs en jeu – le respect du corps humain étant incontestablement l'une des valeurs 

appelant le plus haut degré de protection juridique. Cependant, même s’il procède d’exigences 

fondamentales, le principe de précaution relève plus d’une question «de forme» que «de fond». 

En  d’autres  termes,  il  n’est  pas  appliqué  pour  évaluer  une  innovation  en  soi,  mais  pour  en 

apprécier  les  effets.  En  l’absence  d’effets  négatifs  constatés,  ou  si  les  dispositifs  de  mise  en 

œuvre  sont  modifiés,  une  innovation  scientifique  ou  technologique  donnée  peut  être  jugée 

acceptable.  Le  principe  de  précaution  est  donc  un  outil  dynamique,  qui  permet  de  suivre 

l’évolution d’un secteur et de vérifier en permanence que les conditions d’acceptabilité de telle ou 

telle  innovation  restent  remplies  –  renforçant  ainsi  la  gouvernance  de  ce  qu'il  est  convenu 

d’appeler «la société du risque». 

Les  risques  inhérents  aux  implants  TIC  ont  été  soulignés  par  la  Food  and  Drug  Administration 

américaine dans l’ordonnance qu’elle a rendue sur la puce sous-cutanée «VeriChip»: «réaction 

tissulaire; migration du transpondeur implanté; sécurité des informations compromise; défaillance 

du  transpondeur  implanté;  défaillance  de  l’applicateur;  défaillance  du  scanner  électronique; 

perturbations  électromagnétiques;  risques  électriques; 

incompatibilité  avec 

l’imagerie  par 

résonance  magnétique;  et  blessure  par  l’aiguille».  Au  vu  d’une  liste  aussi  détaillée  de  risques 

potentiels, on peut s'étonner que les tests en vue d'un usage médical aient été autorisés! Une 

telle autorisation aurait peut-être été refusée si le principe de précaution avait été appliqué à ces 

risques à haut degré d’incertitude. 

4.6. Minimisation des données, spécification de la finalité, principe de proportionnalité et 

de pertinence 

Il  convient  également  d’attacher  une  importance  particulière  aux  principes  de  minimisation  des 

données,  de  spécification  de  la  finalité,  de  proportionnalité  et  de  pertinence.  Ces  principes 

n’intéressent  pas  la  légalité  de  l’utilisation  des  différentes  TIC,  mais  plutôt  les  conditions 

spécifiques de cette utilisation – c’est-à-dire le contexte dans lequel les TIC sont utilisées. 

Il  est  expressément  fait  référence  au  principe  de  minimisation  des  données  à  l’article 16, 

paragraphe 2, du Code civil français par exemple, qui dispose qu’«il ne peut être porté atteinte à 

l’intégrité du corps humain qu’en cas de nécessité pour la personne». Objectivement, cela signifie 

qu’il ne faudrait recourir à un instrument donné que si l’objectif poursuivi ne peut être atteint par 

un moyen moins «invasif». On retrouve essentiellement là le principe de «minimisation» énoncé 

dans les dispositions d’un certain nombre de lois sur la vie privée, telles que l'article 3, point a), 

54

.

 
 
de la Bundesdatenschutzgesetz allemande ou l’article 3 du Code italien relatif à la protection des 

données. Subjectivement, le principe de minimisation des données postule l’existence d’un état 

de santé auquel il ne peut être remédié sauf recours à un instrument spécifique, qui se révèle 

indispensable. 

Le  principe  de  spécification  de  la  finalité  suppose  de  sélectionner  les  objectifs  à  atteindre.  Par 

exemple,  la  Convention  sur  les  droits  de  l’homme  et  la  biomédecine  dispose  qu’il  ne  peut  être 

procédé à des tests prédictifs de maladies génétiques «qu'à des fins médicales ou de recherche 

médicale»  (article  12).  Fondamentalement,  une  relation  est  ainsi  établie  entre  circonstances 

spécifiques, instruments disponibles et valeurs de référence: seuls les instruments qui, dans un 

contexte donné, répondent au critère de compatibilité avec ces valeurs peuvent être légalement 

utilisés. 

Le principe de proportionnalité est également fondé sur la relation entre l’instrument à utiliser et 

l’objectif poursuivi. Ici, l’accent n’est toutefois pas mis sur la nature de l'objectif en question, mais 

sur le caractère proportionné de l'instrument mis en œuvre. Autrement dit, même si l'objectif est 

en soi légitime, il ne peut être poursuivi par le recours à un instrument disproportionné. En fait, la 

communication susmentionnée de la Commission lie expressément les principes de précaution et 

de proportionnalité lorsqu’elle indique: «une interdiction totale peut ne pas être dans tous les cas 

une réponse proportionnée à un risque potentiel. Cependant, dans certains cas, elle peut être la 

seule réponse possible à un risque donné.»  

Quant au principe de pertinence, expressément énoncé à l’article 6  de la directive 95/46/CE, il 

peut aussi être appliqué aux implants TIC. Selon ce principe, une technologie donnée peut être 

légalement utilisée dès lors qu’elle entretient un rapport étroit et sans ambiguïté avec la situation 

considérée. L’idée est de prévenir les abus et/ou les applications inappropriées des technologies 

existantes. 

En définitive, tous ces principes se complètent: une fois établie l’existence d’un objectif légitime 

justifiant  l'utilisation  d'un  implant  TIC,  il  convient  de  déterminer  si  cet  implant  est  effectivement 

nécessaire et si les instruments utilisés (ou à utiliser) sont pertinents et proportionnés. 

4.7. Autonomie et limites à imposer aux implants TIC 

Les  limites  qu’il  convient  d’imposer  aux  implants  TIC  dans  le  corps  humain,  telles  qu’elles 

découlent de l’analyse des principes contenus dans différents instruments juridiques, doivent en 

outre  être  évaluées  à  l’aune  des  règles  et  principes  généraux  concernant  l’autonomie  de 

l’individu, dans le sens – ici – de la liberté de disposer de son corps (pour citer un slogan bien 

.

55

 
 
connu: «je suis maître de mon corps»), de la liberté de choix concernant sa propre santé et de la 

liberté par rapport à tout contrôle ou à toute influence externe. 

Concernant  la  liberté  de  disposer  de  son  corps,  les  considérations  relatives  aux  principes 

d’intégrité  et  d’inviolabilité  restent  valables  –  eu  égard,  notamment,  à 

l’exigence  de 

consentement.  En  réalité,  le  consentement  est  une  condition  nécessaire,  mais  non  suffisante, 

pour légitimer l’utilisation d’un implant – qui, dans tous les cas, ne devrait jamais avoir lieu contre 

le gré et/ou à l’insu de la personne concernée. 

Pour  ce  qui  est  de  la  liberté  de  choix  en  matière  de  santé,  le  patient  a  toujours  le  droit  de 

s’opposer à un implant ou de se le faire retirer si l'opération est techniquement possible – sans 

préjudice de l'exigence de consentement éclairé, ni du droit de refuser un traitement médical. 

Quant  à  la  liberté  par  rapport  à  tout  contrôle  ou  à  toute  influence  externe,  la  question  de 

l'autonomie  de  l’individu  revêt  une  importance  particulière  au  regard  du  droit  d’exclure  tout 

conditionnement ou tout exercice d’une influence sur le comportement d’une personne par des 

entités  gérant  des  liens  électroniques  –  dès  lors  que  ceux-ci  aboutissent  à  une  connexion 

permanente avec des entités externes. Même en l’absence de connexion permanente de ce type, 

il convient de tenir compte du fait que les implants TIC peuvent permettre: 

a)  la localisation occasionnelle ou continue des porteurs; 

b)  la modification à distance, à leur insu, des informations qui y sont contenues. 

Ces  risques  vont  très  certainement  se  renforcer  avec  l’adoption  de  normes  techniques 

harmonisées, qui pourraient permettre à d’autres entités que les porteurs et les organes gérant 

légalement le dispositif ou la connexion concerné(e) de lire et de modifier les données. Ces deux 

cas  de  figure  sont  clairement  contraires  aux  règles  de  protection  des  données  relatives  à  la 

collecte  et  au  traitement  des  informations.  En  particulier,  toute  «réécriture»  des  données  a  un 

impact sur le droit au respect de l’identité personnelle, expressément reconnu par l’article 1er de 

la directive 95/46/CE. 

4.8. Remarques conclusives 

Pour ce qui concerne le cadre juridique, il convient de noter que: 

a)  l’existence  d’un  risque  sérieux  reconnu,  bien  qu’incertain,  inhérent  même  aux  formes  les  plus 

simples  de  dispositifs  TIC  implantables  dans  le  corps  humain,  rend  nécessaire  l’application  du 

principe  de  précaution.  À  cet  égard,  il  convient  en  particulier  de  distinguer  implants  actifs  et 

passifs, réversibles et irréversibles, hors ligne et en ligne; 

.

56

 
 
b)  le  principe  de  spécification  de  la  finalité  commande  d'opérer  au  moins  une  distinction  entre 

applications médicales et non médicales. Mais les applications médicales devraient, elles aussi, 

faire l’objet d’une évaluation stricte et sélective, visant notamment à empêcher l’invocation de la 

finalité médicale comme un moyen de légitimer d’autres types d’applications; 

c)  en vertu du principe de minimisation des données, il convient de ne pas légaliser les implants TIC 

visant exclusivement à permettre l’identification des porteurs, dès lors qu’existent des substituts 

moins invasifs et tout aussi sûrs; 

d)  en  vertu  du  principe  de  proportionnalité,  il  convient  de  ne  pas  légaliser  les  implants  TIC  visant 

exclusivement, par exemple, à faciliter l’accès à des locaux publics; 

e)  en vertu du principe d’intégrité et d’inviolabilité du corps humain, le consentement de la personne 

concernée n’est pas suffisant pour permettre le recours à tout type d’implant;  

f) 

le principe de dignité proscrit toute transformation du corps humain en un objet susceptible d’être 

manipulé et contrôlé à distance – soit en une simple source d’informations. 

Eu  égard  à  ces  considérations,  on  pourrait  conclure  que,  dans  les  circonstances  actuelles, 

nombre  de  dispositifs  TIC  implantables  dans  le  corps  humain,  qu’ils  existent  déjà  ou  ne  soient 

encore  qu'envisagés,  ne  sont  pas  admissibles  sur  le  plan  légal,  sous  réserve  des  cas 

exceptionnels exposés ci-dessous (voir la section 6.4.6).  

5. CONTEXTE ÉTHIQUE 

Notre  société  contemporaine  est  confrontée  à  des  changements  qui  touchent  à  l’essence 

anthropologique  des  individus.  Un  changement  progressif  est  à  l’œuvre:  après  leur  mise  en 

observation  par  vidéosurveillance  et  biométrie,  les  individus  sont  modifiés  par  divers  dispositifs 

électroniques, comme les puces sous-cutanées et les RFID, qui tendent de plus en plus à leur 

mise  en  réseau.  À  terme,  ils  pourraient  donc  se  trouver  connectés  en  permanence  et 

reconfigurés,  de  façon  à  transmettre  ou  à  recevoir  des  signaux  permettant  un  traçage  et  une 

détermination de leurs mouvements, de leurs habitudes et de leurs contacts. Il est certain qu’une 

telle  évolution  modifierait  l’autonomie  des  individus,  sur  le  plan  tant  théorique  que  réel,  et 

porterait atteinte à leur dignité. 

Parallèlement à cette érosion toujours plus grande des prérogatives individuelles (qui va jusqu’à 

la transformation du corps humain), une attention croissante est toutefois portée à la question de 

la  dignité,  sans  oublier  le  fait,  déjà  mentionné,  que  la  personne  est  au  cœur  de  l’ordre 

constitutionnel (voir le préambule et les articles 1er, 3 et 8 de la Charte des droits fondamentaux 

.

57

 
 
de  l’Union  européenne  et  la  partie  du  présent  avis  consacrée  au  cadre  juridique,  sections  4.2 

et 4.4).  

5.1. Principes éthiques fondamentaux 

Comme  le  soulignent  les  précédents  avis  du  GEE,  un  certain  nombre  de  conventions,  de 

déclarations et de chartes reconnues en Europe ainsi que la section du présent avis consacrée 

au  cadre  juridique  (section  4),  les  principes  fondamentaux  sont  la  dignité  et  l'intégrité  de  l'être 

humain.  De  ces  principes  fondamentaux  découle  un  ensemble  de  principes  dérivés  (énoncés 

ci-dessous), pertinents dans le cadre du présent avis et étroitement corrélés les uns aux autres. 

Dignité humaine (voir également la section 4.2) 

Le  traité  établissant  une  Constitution  pour  l’Europe19,  qui  dispose  que  «la  dignité  humaine  est 

inviolable»  et  qu’«elle  doit  être  respectée  et  protégée»  (article  II-61),  explique  plus  avant  à  cet 

égard que «la dignité de la personne humaine n'est pas seulement un droit fondamental en soi, 

mais constitue la base même des droits fondamentaux» (déclaration concernant les explications 

relatives  à  la  Charte  des  droits  fondamentaux).  L’explication  ci-dessus  ne  définissant  toutefois 

pas la dignité humaine au sens strict, plusieurs auteurs ont tenté de combler cette lacune. Selon 

l’un  d’entre  eux20,  la  dignité  humaine  pourrait  être  définie  comme  «le  haut  statut  moral  que 

chaque  être  humain  possède  de  façon  unique.  La  dignité  humaine  est  une  réalité  donnée, 

inhérente  à  l’essence  humaine  et  qui  ne  dépend  pas  de  capacités  fonctionnelles  variables  en 

degré.  (…)  La  possession  de  la  dignité  humaine  entraîne  certaines  obligations  morales 

immuables. Ces obligations incluent, pour ce qui est du traitement à réserver à tous les autres 

êtres humains, le devoir de préserver la vie, la liberté et la sécurité d'autrui et, envers le monde 

animal et la nature, une responsabilité de bonne administration». 

Est ainsi planté le cadre essentiel dans lequel s’inscrivent les principes éthiques dérivés énoncés 

ci-après, qui sont directement pertinents pour le présent avis sur les implants TIC: 

•  non-instrumentalisation:  commandement  éthique  selon  lequel  l’individu  ne  doit  pas  être 

considéré simplement comme un moyen, mais toujours comme une fin en soi (voir notamment 

la section 6.4.2); 

• 

respect de la vie privée: principe éthique de non-ingérence dans la vie privée (Charte des droits 

fondamentaux de l’Union européenne21, articles 7 et 8) (voir notamment les sections 6.4.2 et 

6.4.3); 

19  JO C 310 du 16.12.2004, pp. 1 à 482. 
20  William Cheshire, Ethics & Medicine, Volume 18:2, 2002. 
21  Charte des droits fondamentaux de l'Union européenne, JO C 364 du 18.12.2000, pp. 1 à 22.  

58

.

 
 
                                                 
•  non-discrimination:  l'égalité  de  traitement  est  un  droit,  sauf  raison  justifiant  une  différence. 

Largement accepté, ce principe renvoie ici essentiellement à la distribution des ressources de 

santé (voir notamment la section 6.3.5); 

•  consentement  éclairé:  principe  éthique  selon  lequel  un  patient  ne  peut  être  soumis  à  un 

traitement  ou  à  des  travaux  de  recherche  sans  son  consentement  libre  et  éclairé  (voir 

notamment la section 6.3.3); 

•  équité: principe éthique selon lequel tout le monde doit avoir accès aux avantages considérés; 

•  principe de précaution: le GEE a souligné que les technologies modernes de l’information et de 

la communication rendent l’être humain à la fois plus puissant et plus vulnérable. L’éthique doit 

avoir  pour  objet  de  garantir  le  respect  des  libertés  et  droits  individuels,  et  notamment  ici  la 

confidentialité  des  données.  Aussi  le  GEE  a-t-il  recommandé  de  faire  de  la  prudence  un 

principe éthique général dans le cas des technologies de l’information et de la communication. 

Ce  principe  impose  l’obligation  morale  de  procéder  à  une  évaluation  continue  des  risques 

inhérents à toute technologie nouvelle dont l'impact n'est pas totalement prévisible, comme les 

implants TIC dans le corps humain22. Une telle évaluation suppose, en particulier, d’analyser 

les  situations  présentes  et  à  venir  dans  lesquelles  l’utilisation  de  ces  implants  pourrait  être 

considérée comme un risque potentiel, voire comme une menace pour la dignité humaine ou 

d’autres principes éthiques. Il convient de souligner qu’aucune étude scientifique sérieuse n’a 

été conduite concernant l’impact à long terme des implants TIC sur la santé (voir la section 4.5 

– cadre juridique – et la section 6.5.1 notamment). 

5.2. Conflits de valeurs 

Il  pourrait  y  avoir  un  conflit  entre  la  liberté  de  chacun  d’utiliser  ses  propres  ressources 

économiques pour se faire implanter un dispositif de nature à améliorer ses capacités physiques 

et mentales et ce que la société dans son ensemble juge souhaitable ou acceptable sur le plan 

éthique.  Un  autre  conflit  de  valeurs  pourrait  opposer  le  fait  de  limiter  la  liberté  des  individus 

dangereux en les soumettant à une surveillance et le renforcement de la sécurité des autres. La 

liberté  des  chercheurs  pourrait  entrer  en  conflit  avec  l’obligation  de  préserver  la  santé  des 

personnes  sujets  de  leurs  recherches.  Il  pourrait  en  aller  de  même  du  souci  de  compétitivité 

économique et de la défense d'autres valeurs économiques (comme la croissance) par rapport 

au respect de la dignité humaine. Enfin, la liberté illimitée de certaines personnes pourrait mettre 

22  Principe de précaution: article 174 de la version consolidée du traité instituant la Communauté 
européenne et communication de la Commission sur le recours au principe de précaution 
(COM(2000)1 final du 2 février 2000). 

59

.

 
 
                                                 
en péril la santé et la sécurité d’autres personnes. Il convient donc de trouver un juste équilibre 

entre des valeurs toutes légitimes dans notre culture. 

Comme dans d’autres domaines, le principe de liberté lui-même – en l’occurrence, la liberté de 

se faire implanter un dispositif TIC dans le corps – pourrait se heurter au risque de conséquences 

sociales  négatives.  Dans  ce  cas,  l’intervention  de  conseillers  éthiques  et  un  débat  social  et 

politique pourraient se révéler nécessaires. 

La frontière entre réparer et améliorer n'est pas nette (même s’il existe des exemples clairs des 

deux  types  d’applications).  Il  est  néanmoins  nécessaire  de  légiférer  si  l’on  veut  éviter  une 

situation dans laquelle la société deviendrait de plus en plus dépendante d’une technologie aussi 

intrusive que les implants TIC pour assurer sa sécurité, alors même que, de par leur perfection 

technique,  ceux-ci  pourraient  avoir  toutes  sortes  d’applications  médicales  utiles,  ainsi  que  des 

applications sociales légitimes. En conséquence, le GEE souligne la nécessité d’un débat global 

et continu sur les types d’améliorations des capacités fonctionnelles qui devraient être autorisés – 

à quelles conditions et dans quels cas (voir la section 6.4.4). 

Un exemple particulier, qui remet en cause l’opinion selon laquelle il existe une norme générale 

d’évaluation  des  capacités  fonctionnelles  de  l’être  humain,  est  celui  des  implants  cochléaires 

chez  les  enfants  sourds.  Les  efforts  déployés  pour  promouvoir  cette  technologie  posent  des 

questions  éthiques  quant  à  son  impact  sur  le  porteur  de  l’implant  et  sur  la  communauté  des 

sourds (notamment ceux qui communiquent par langue des signes). Ils ignorent le problème de 

l'intégration  sociale  du  porteur  de  l’implant  dans  cette  communauté  et  ne  prêtent  pas  une 

attention  suffisante  aux  incidences  psychologiques,  linguistiques  et  sociologiques.  Avant  toute 

chose,  ils  promeuvent  une  vision  particulière  de  la  «normalité».  Du  point  de  vue  du  GEE,  la 

question  des  implants  cochléaires  elle-même,  l’analyse  risques/avantages  et  le  problème  de 

l’accès  équitable  aux  soins  doivent  être  encore  approfondis  (sans  oublier  la  distinction  entre 

implants cochléaires unilatéraux et bilatéraux). 

5.3. Quelques lacunes importantes dans la connaissance des implants TIC dans le corps 

humain 

Il  ressort  clairement  des  sections  précédentes  que  la  connaissance  des  implants  TIC  présente 

encore des lacunes majeures, qui intéressent autant les futurs programmes de recherche qu’elles 

soulèvent des questions éthiques fondamentales. Ces lacunes sont notamment les suivantes: 

.

60

 
 
Dignité, intégrité et autonomie de l’être humain 

•  Dans  quelle  mesure  les  implants  TIC  peuvent-ils  représenter  une  menace  pour  l’autonomie  de 

l’être humain, notamment lorsqu’ils sont placés dans le cerveau? 

•  Dans  quelle  mesure  peuvent-ils  avoir  un  impact  irréversible  sur  le  corps  humain  et/ou  sur  le 

psychisme, et comment la réversibilité peut-elle être préservée? 

•  De quelle manière peuvent-ils influer sur la mémoire? 

•  Un être humain cesse-t-il d’être « humain » lorsque certaines parties de son corps – notamment 

au  niveau  du  cerveau  –  sont  remplacées  et/ou  complétées  par  des  implants  TIC?  En 

particulier, dès lors que les implants TIC peuvent servir à une «mise en réseau des individus», 

qui  seraient  ainsi  connectés  en  permanence  et  pourraient  être  reconfigurés  de  façon  à 

transmettre  ou  à  recevoir  des  signaux  permettant  le  traçage  et  la  détermination  de  leurs 

mouvements,  de  leurs  habitudes  et  de  leurs  relations,  la  dignité  humaine  pourrait  se  trouver 

affectée. 

Vie privée et surveillance 

•  Dans quelle mesure les implants TIC peuvent-ils représenter une menace pour la vie privée? 

•  Dans  quelle  mesure  pourraient-ils  doter  un  individu  ou  un  groupe  de  pouvoirs  spécifiques 

susceptibles de représenter une menace pour la société? 

•  Quelles  sont  les  ingérences  dans  la  vie  privée  que  pourraient  causer  les  implants  TIC  utilisés 

comme sources et/ou récepteurs d'informations dans un environnement en réseau? 

•  Dans quelle mesure devrions-nous être soumis au contrôle exercé par de tels dispositifs ou par 

leurs utilisateurs? 

Amélioration des capacités fonctionnelles et conscience 

•  Que recouvre l’idée d’être humain «amélioré»? 

•  Comment faut-il entendre la notion de perfectibilité de l’être humain? 

La création d'une «race» technologiquement améliorée donnerait-elle nécessairement naissance 

à  une  nouvelle  forme  de  racisme?  La  possibilité  d’une  utilisation  industrielle  des  implants  TIC 

comme  moyen  de  créer  des  corps  et  des  cerveaux  plus  performants  à  des  fins  économiques 

pose  la  question  des  limites  à  imposer  à  une  telle  utilisation.  La  question  de  l’utilisation  des 

implants TIC représente un bond culturel dans l'évolution humaine, comparable à l'invention de la 

.

61

 
 
machine ou d'appareils (d’écriture, d’édition, numériques) complétant et optimisant des capacités 

fonctionnelles comme la mémoire humaine. 

•  Dans  quelle  mesure  l’utilisation  des  implants  TIC  à  des  fins  d’amélioration  des  capacités 

fonctionnelles de l’être humain devrait-elle être autorisée? 

•  Dans  quelle  mesure  peut-on  considérer  que  les  implants  TIC  relèvent  de  ce  qu’on  pourrait 

appeler la vision que chacun a de son propre corps, y compris la façon dont chacun conçoit 

librement ses propres capacités corporelles et psychiques (améliorées)? 

Aspects sociaux 

•  Quelles peuvent être nos relations avec des personnes porteuses d’implants TIC en ligne? 

•  Dans quelle mesure les implants TIC devraient-ils rester invisibles à un œil extérieur? 

•  Dans quelle mesure les utilisations possibles dépendent-elles de valeurs comme le contrôle ou 

l’efficacité, qui pourraient renforcer la dépendance de l’individu à l’égard des forces du marché, 

notamment en cas d’utilisation (légale) sur le lieu de travail? 

•  De quelle manière les implants TIC transforment-ils notre environnement social et culturel? 

•  Dans quelle mesure peuvent-ils être utilisés pour le traçage des êtres humains, et dans quels cas 

une telle utilisation devrait-elle être légale? 

•  Dans  quelle  mesure  cette  technologie  permet-elle  la  manipulation  publicitaire  et  à  des  fins 

publicitaires? 

•  Dans quelle mesure l’armée pourrait-elle en faire une utilisation abusive? 

Prévisibilité des risques 

•  Dans quelle mesure pouvons-nous nous prononcer aujourd’hui sur les avantages et les risques 

présentés par les implants TIC? 

Implants TIC pour lesquels une prudence particulière s’impose 

• 

les implants qui ne peuvent être aisément retirés; 

• 

• 

les implants qui influencent, déterminent ou modifient certaines fonctions psychiques; 

les implants qui, du fait qu’ils peuvent être mis en réseau, pourraient être abusivement employés 

à divers titres, à des fins de surveillance et de manipulation sociales, notamment dans le cas 

des enfants ou des personnes handicapées; 

.

62

 
 
• 

les  implants  qui  influencent  le  système  nerveux,  en  particulier  le  cerveau,  et  donc  l’identité  de 

l’être humain en tant qu’espèce, ainsi que la subjectivité et l’autonomie individuelles; 

• 

les applications militaires; 

• 

les  implants  pour  lesquels  la  distinction  entre  applications  thérapeutiques  et  amélioration  des 

capacités fonctionnelles n’est pas toujours claire (voir la section 6.4.4); 

• 

• 

les technologies «invasives» qui ne passent pas par l’expérience sensorielle normale; 

les implants qui auront une incidence biologique et/ou culturelle sur les générations futures. 

5.4. Précédents avis pertinents du GEE 

Avis n° 14 sur les aspects éthiques du dopage dans le sport 

Dans son avis n° 14, le GEE déclarait: «Il est urgent, dans le cadre des politiques sportives, de 

mieux tenir compte des profonds changements qui ont eu lieu au cours de ce siècle en raison de 

l’impact  économique  et  médiatique  croissant  du  sport  à  l’échelle  mondiale.  Ces  facteurs  ont 

favorisé  la  médicalisation  et  le  recours  aux  technologies  de  pointe  dans  le  sport  ainsi  que  le 

développement des industries qui lui sont connexes. Ceci explique que des pressions de plus en 

plus fortes pèsent sur les athlètes. C’est pourquoi il importe de resituer la lutte antidopage dans le 

contexte  actuel  en  prenant  acte  qu'aujourd'hui,  la  performance  et  la  victoire  sont  ressenties 

comme  biens  plus  importantes  que  le  seul  fait  de  participer  à  une  compétition.  Face  à  cette 

situation, le Groupe entend mettre l’accent sur la tension qui existe entre la lutte antidopage et la 

recherche de performances toujours à dépasser.» 

On  peut  aisément  établir  un  parallèle  entre  le  dopage  dans  le  sport  et  les  implants  TIC, 

notamment ceux qui visent à améliorer les capacités fonctionnelles. 

Avis  n° 17  sur  les  aspects  éthiques  de  la  recherche  clinique  dans  les  pays  en 

développement 

La  plupart  des  recommandations  formulées  par  le  GEE  dans  son  avis  n° 17  sur  les  aspects 

éthiques de la recherche clinique dans les pays en développement sont pertinents dans le cadre 

du  présent  avis,  pour  ce  qui  concerne  les  essais  cliniques  sur  les  implants  TIC.  Ces 

recommandations  sont  d’autant  plus  importantes  que  les  dispositifs  médicaux  ne  sont  pas 

couverts  par  la  directive  2001/20/CE  du  Parlement  européen  et  du  Conseil,  du 4 avril 2001, 

concernant le rapprochement des dispositions législatives, réglementaires et administratives des 

.

63

 
 
États membres relatives à l'application de bonnes pratiques cliniques dans la conduite d'essais 

cliniques de médicaments à usage humain23. 

5.5. Questions éthiques générales relatives aux implants TIC dans le corps humain 

Dans de précédents rapports et avis, notamment «Droits des citoyens et nouvelles technologies: 

un  défi  lancé  à  l'Europe»  (23  mai  2000)  et  «Aspects  éthiques  de  l'utilisation  des  données 

personnelles de santé dans la société de l'information» (avis n° 13 du 30 juillet 1999), le GEE a 

mis  en  évidence  certaines  valeurs  éthiques  fondamentales  dans  le  cas  des  technologies  de 

l’information et de la communication, en particulier: 

• 

la nécessité d’améliorer la protection de la vie privée (protection des données), en respectant le 

droit  des  personnes  de  fixer  des  limites  et  de  préserver  leur  intimité,  leur  autonomie  et  la 

confidentialité des données les concernant; et 

• 

la nécessité d’armer les individus contre l’introduction de systèmes susceptibles de réduire leur 

liberté et leur autonomie (vidéosurveillance, contrôle du comportement et profilage sur la base 

des  transactions  via  Internet)  ou  d’accroître  leur  dépendance  à  l’égard  de  mécanismes  de 

sélection et de décision opaques ou incompréhensibles. 

L’homme n’est un être ni purement naturel, ni purement culturel. En fait, notre essence même est 

liée à notre capacité de nous transformer. Sous cet angle anthropomorphique, les technologies 

de l’information ont été, jusqu’à présent, considérées comme un prolongement de l’être humain. 

Cependant, la transformation de notre corps a aussi des conséquences sur notre environnement 

culturel. Selon ces prémisses, l’être humain est considéré comme une composante d’un système 

complexe de messages naturels et artificiels fonctionnant sur une base numérique. En ce sens, 

le  corps  humain  peut  être  vu  comme  un  ensemble  de  données.  Ce  point  de  vue  a  des  effets 

culturels  importants,  notamment  parce  qu’il  exclut  des  phénomènes  de  haut  niveau,  comme  le 

psychisme et le langage humains, ou qu’il les conçoit essentiellement dans la perspective de leur 

numérisation,  donnant  ainsi  lieu  à  un  réductionnisme  simplifiant  à  l'extrême  les  relations 

complexes entre le corps, le langage et l'imagination. 

Cette vision réductrice ouvre néanmoins aussi la voie à différents types de développements et 

inventions  scientifiques  et  techniques.  Les  implants  TIC  dans  le  corps  humain  pourraient  ainsi 

être amenés à jouer un rôle majeur dans les questions de santé, voire conduire à l'amélioration 

des  capacités  biologiques  et/ou  psychiques.  Par  extrapolation,  cette  logique  pourrait  même 

aboutir à la transformation de l’espèce humaine. 

23  JO L 121 du 1.5.2001, pp. 34 à 44. 

64

.

 
 
                                                 
Dès lors, dans quelle mesure devrions-nous nous laisser implanter des dispositifs TIC «sous la 

peau»? À partir de quand les implants TIC menacent-ils la dignité de l’être humain, son identité et 

ses  capacités  fondamentales?  On  peut  avoir  le  sentiment  qu’à  l’instar  des  stimulateurs 

cardiaques,  les  implants  TIC  présentent  essentiellement  des  avantages  pour  la  santé. 

Cependant,  ne  pourrait-il  y  avoir  des  cas  où  ils  seraient  utilisés  à  d'autres  fins,  du  fait, 

notamment,  de  l'interconnexion  des  données  numérisées  dans  un  environnement  en  réseau? 

Quand pourraient-ils être utilisés, par exemple, à des fins de surveillance, et dans quels cas un 

tel  usage  serait-il  légitime?  Quels  sont  les  risques  contrebalançant  les  espoirs  de  capacités 

fonctionnelles améliorées? 

La  problématique  des  implants  TIC  dans  le  corps  humain  se  situe  donc  entre  deux  extrêmes: 

d’un côté, la protection du corps humain «naturel», c’est-à-dire l’utilisation des implants TIC à des 

fins médicales; de l’autre, l’élimination du corps humain tel que nous le connaissons aujourd’hui 

et  son  remplacement  par  un  corps  artificiel  –  avec  toutes  les  possibilités  qui  existent  entre  les 

deux. La dignité humaine est propre à l’être humain en tant qu’être incarné. Par conséquent, la 

question  de  l’autonomie  et  du  respect  de  l’individu  ne  peut  être  séparée  de  celle  des  soins  au 

corps et de la modification possible du corps par implant TIC. 

AVIS DU GEE 

Eu égard aux considérations qui précèdent, le Groupe européen d'éthique des sciences et 

des nouvelles technologies rend l’avis suivant: 

6.1. Champ d'application 

Le présent avis se concentre sur la question des implants TIC dans le corps humain. Il ne traite 

pas du vaste champ des dispositifs TIC ou relevant de l’électronique «vestimentaire» en général, 

même si, dans certains cas, ces dispositifs sont assimilables à des quasi-implants. 

Il n’aborde pas la question des implants TIC chez l’animal, même si ces applications fournissent 

des exemples de ce qui pourrait être fait chez l’homme. 

.

65

 
 
 
 
 
Il  examine  les  problèmes  éthiques  posés  par  l’accessibilité  en  ligne  actuelle  ou  potentielle  des 

implants TIC, ainsi que par les dispositifs autonomes (c’est-à-dire ceux qui ne sont pas reliés à 

un réseau). 

D’un  côté,  les  principes  et  règles  juridiques  servent  généralement  de  garde-fou  aux  dérives 

technologiques  et  à  rappeler  que 

tout  ce  qui  est 

techniquement  possible  n’est  pas 

nécessairement admissible sur le plan éthique, socialement acceptable, ni légalement approuvé. 

D’un  autre  côté,  la  puissance  d’une  technologie  donnant  lieu  à  une  infinité  d’applications  ne 

saurait être contrainte par une législation faible, manquant sa finalité ultime. Par conséquent, il 

est nécessaire de se référer systématiquement à des valeurs fortes, capables d’insuffler de la vie 

dans  la  constitutionnalisation  de  l’individu  qui,  fruit  d’un  processus  complexe,  est  clairement 

soulignée dans la Charte des droits fondamentaux de l’Union européenne – à commencer par le 

préambule, où il est dit expressément que l’Union «place la personne au cœur de son action». 

«We  shall  not  lay  hand  upon  thee»  («Nous  ne  lèverons  pas  la  main  sur  toi»).  Telle  était  la 

promesse  faite  dans  la  Magna  Carta:  celle  de  respecter  le  corps  dans  son  intégralité  (Habeas 

Corpus). Cette promesse a survécu au progrès technologique. Chaque intervention sur le corps, 

chaque opération de traitement de données à caractère personnel doit être considérée comme 

touchant le corps dans son ensemble, comme touchant un individu qui doit être respecté dans 

son intégrité à la fois physique et mentale. C’est là un nouveau concept global de l’individu, et sa 

traduction dans la réalité donne le droit de revendiquer le respect total d’un corps qui, aujourd’hui, 

est  à  la  fois  physique  et  électronique.  Dans  notre  monde  actuel,  la  protection  des  données  à 

caractère  personnel  remplit  la  mission  de  garantir  le  «Habeas  Data»  que  rend  nécessaire  un 

environnement modifié, devenant ainsi une composante inaliénable de notre civilisation, comme 

l’a été l’Habeas Corpus. 

Parallèlement, on peut considérer que le corps n’est jamais achevé. Il peut être manipulé en vue 

de  la  restauration  de  capacités  fonctionnelles  qui  ont  été  perdues  ou  étaient  d’emblée 

manquantes (que l’on songe aux mutilations, à la cécité ou à la surdité); ou il peut être tiré au-

delà  de  sa  normalité  anthropologique  par  une  amélioration  de  ses  fonctions  et/ou  l’ajout  de 

nouvelles  fonctions  (encore  une  fois,  dans  un  souci  de  bien-être  de  la  personne  et/ou  de 

compétitivité  sociale,  comme  dans  le  cas  de  l’optimisation  des  capacités  sportives  ou  des 

prothèses d’intelligence artificielle). Nous sommes ainsi confrontés à des technologies capables à 

la  fois  de  réparer  et  d’améliorer  le  corps,  à  la  multiplication  de  technologies  implantables  qui 

pourraient  modifier  et  étendre  le  concept  des  soins  au  corps  et  annoncer  l’avènement  du 

«cyborg» – soit du corps post-humain. «Dans nos sociétés, le corps tend à devenir un matériau 

.

66

 
 
brut,  qui  peut  être  modelé  en  fonction  des  circonstances.»  Il  ne  fait  aucun  doute  que  les 

possibilités  de  configuration  sur  mesure  se  développent,  de  même  que  le  risque  de  mesures 

politiques visant à placer l’individu sous contrôle technologique. 

Le fait de réduire le corps humain à une simple machine n’a pas pour unique effet de renforcer la 

tendance  –  déjà  évoquée  –  qui  consiste  à  le  transformer  de  plus  en  plus  en  un  instrument  de 

surveillance permanente de l’individu. De fait, l’individu est alors dépossédé de son propre corps 

et, par conséquent, de sa propre autonomie. Le corps se trouve placé sous un contrôle exercé 

par d’autres. Or que peut-on espérer lorsqu’on est dépossédé de son corps? 

6.2. Implants TIC et dignité humaine 

Le  respect  de  la  dignité  humaine  doit  constituer  le  fondement  de  toute  discussion  relative  aux 

limites à imposer aux différentes utilisations des implants TIC. 

Le GEE estime que les implants TIC ne représentent pas, en soi, un danger pour la liberté ou la 

dignité de l’être humain. Dans le cas d’applications offrant, par exemple, la possibilité d’exercer 

une  surveillance  individuelle  et/ou  collective,  il  convient  toutefois  d’évaluer  soigneusement  les 

restrictions  de  liberté  potentielles  (voir  la  section  6.4.6).  La  protection  de  la  santé  et/ou  de  la 

sécurité  des  personnes  atteintes  de  troubles  neurologiques  graves  par  recours  à  des  implants 

TIC ne crée pas nécessairement un dilemme éthique entre le caractère inaliénable de la liberté et 

la nécessité d’une protection médicale. Cependant, même dans ce cas, l’utilisation d’implants TIC 

ne devrait pas entraîner de discrimination ou d’abus contraire à la santé. 

6.3. Implants TIC à visée médicale 

Il va sans dire que, lorsqu’un implant TIC doit être utilisé à des fins médicales, le consentement 

éclairé  du  patient  est  nécessaire.  Les  informations  fournies  à  ce  dernier  ne  devraient  pas 

uniquement porter sur les avantages et les risques possibles pour la santé, mais évoquer aussi le 

risque  d'une  utilisation  de  l'implant  à  des  fins  de  localisation  personnelle  et/ou  d'accès  aux 

données  qui  y  sont  enregistrées,  sans  le  consentement  du  porteur.  Lorsque  les  risques  sont 

difficiles à prévoir, les informations fournies devraient le stipuler clairement. 

L’implantation de dispositifs TIC à des fins médicales devrait être régie par les principes suivants: 

a)  l’objectif est important, comme sauver la vie du patient, le guérir ou améliorer sa qualité de vie; 

b)  l’implant est nécessaire à la réalisation de cet objectif; et 

c)  il n’existe pas d’autre moyen d’y parvenir qui soit moins invasif et plus efficace en termes de coût. 

.

67

 
 
Il  conviendrait  d’accorder  une  attention  particulière  à  la  question  des  implants  bioartificiels,  en 

tenant compte des problèmes qu’ils soulèvent et des possibilités qu’ils offrent. 

6.3.1. Individu et réseau 

Dans  la  mesure  où  un  implant  TIC  peut  transformer  son  porteur  en  maillon  d’un  réseau 

informatique,  il  convient  de  prendre  en  considération  le  fonctionnement  de  l’ensemble  de  ce 

réseau – et pas uniquement de l’implant. Il est particulièrement important de veiller à ce que le 

pouvoir exercé sur le réseau (qui y a accès, qui peut en retirer des données, qui peut modifier sa 

configuration, etc.) soit transparent. Il en va du principe de respect de la personne, ainsi que du 

principe de minimisation du préjudice. 

6.3.2. Liberté de la recherche 

Même si la nécessité de la recherche peut parfois être mise en doute, l’acquisition de nouvelles 

connaissances est essentielle au développement des individus et des sociétés. La liberté de la 

recherche  doit  cependant  être  limitée  par  d'autres  valeurs  et  principes  éthiques  importants, 

comme  le  respect  de  la  personne  et  l'obligation  d'éviter  aux  participants  à  des  travaux  de 

recherche tout préjudice physique, mental ou économique. 

La notion éthique d’inviolabilité du corps humain ne devrait pas être comprise comme un obstacle 

au progrès scientifique et technologique, mais comme un garde-fou contre ses dérives possibles. 

En  l’espèce,  la  liberté  de  la  recherche  devrait  être  contrainte  non  seulement  par  l'obligation 

d’obtenir  le  consentement  éclairé  des  personnes  se  portant  volontaires  pour  participer  à  de 

nouvelles  expériences  à  visée  curative,  mais  aussi  par  la  conscience  du  risque  d’infliger  des 

dommages  corporels  et  psychiques  aux  participants  aux  essais  cliniques  (voir  l’avis  n° 17  du 

GEE  sur  les  aspects  éthiques  de  la  recherche  clinique  dans  les  pays  en  développement, 

février 2003). 

6.3.3. Participation à des projets de recherche sur les implants TIC 

Lorsque  des  recherches  visant,  par  exemple,  à  explorer  les  effets  des  implants  TIC  sont 

conduites sur des volontaires sains ou des patients, le consentement éclairé de ces personnes 

est nécessaire. Les informations fournies auxdites personnes ne devraient pas uniquement porter 

sur les avantages et les risques possibles pour la santé, mais évoquer aussi les risques à long 

terme, ainsi que le risque d'une utilisation de l'implant à des fins de localisation personnelle et/ou 

d'accès  aux  données  qui  y  sont  enregistrées  sans  le  consentement  du  porteur.  Le  droit 

d’interrompre  toute  participation  à  un  projet  de  recherche  devrait  toujours  être  respecté,  et  les 

.

68

 
 
participants  devraient  être  clairement  informés  de  la  manière  dont  ils  pourront  concrètement 

exercer ce droit (dès lors qu’un dispositif électronique leur est implanté dans le corps). 

6.3.4. Implants TIC, mineurs et personnes en incapacité légale 

Le  consentement  éclairé  est  un  principe  éthique  qui  s’applique  au  domaine  des  implants  TIC 

dans le corps humain. Cependant, ce principe demande à être précisé, notamment dans le cas 

de personnes qui, en raison de leur âge (enfants, personnes âgées) et/ou de leur état psychique, 

sont censées être assujetties à des implants TIC à des fins de surveillance médicale: les implants 

TIC chez les mineurs et les personnes en incapacité légale ne devraient être possibles que sous 

réserve  du  respect  des  principes  énoncés  dans  la  Convention  du  Conseil  de  l'Europe  sur  les 

droits de l'homme et la biomédecine. 

Enfin, il conviendrait d’accorder une attention particulière à la question des implants cochléaires 

chez l’enfant (voir la section 5.2 – conflits de valeurs). 

6.3.5. Accès aux implants TIC à visée médicale 

Il conviendrait de garantir un accès équitable aux implants TIC à visée médicale. Autrement dit, 

cet  accès  devrait  être  conditionné  par  les  besoins  en  termes  de  santé,  plutôt  que  par  les 

ressources économiques ou la position sociale. 

6.3.6. Implants TIC irréversibles 

Les  exigences  de  consentement  éclairé  et  de  protection  des  données  (en  particulier,  de  leur 

caractère privé et de leur confidentialité) doivent être strictement respectées lorsque l’implant TIC 

est  irréversible,  c’est-à-dire  ne  peut-être  retiré  du  corps  du  patient  sans  risque  grave  pour  sa 

santé  ou  même  sa  vie.  Les  implants  irréversibles  ne  devraient  pas  être  utilisés  à  des  fins  de 

recherche,  à  moins  que  la  recherche  en  question  n’ait  pour  objet  d’apporter  un  bénéfice 

thérapeutique net au porteur. 

6.4. Implants TIC à visée non médicale 

Les  principes  de  consentement  éclairé,  de  respect  de  la  vie  privée,  etc.  doivent  aussi  être 

invoqués  au  regard  du  vaste  éventail  d’applications  non  médicales  que  pourraient  avoir  les 

implants TIC. Certaines de ces applications sont analysées dans les sections suivantes. D’une 

manière générale, le GEE soutient que les applications non médicales des implants TIC sont une 

menace potentielle pour la dignité humaine et la société démocratique. Il faudrait donc veiller à ce 

qu’elles  respectent,  en  toutes  circonstances,  les  principes  de  consentement  éclairé  et  de 

proportionnalité et, chaque fois qu’elles ont la surveillance pour finalité, les règles énoncées à la 

section 6.4.6. 

69

.

 
 
Le GEE souligne que les informations fournies aux adultes donnant leur consentement éclairé à 

certaines applications devraient inclure des renseignements clairs sur les éventuels risques pour 

leur  santé  à  court  et/ou  long  terme,  ainsi  que  sur  le  risque  d'une  manipulation  des  données 

contre leur gré. 

6.4.1. Psychisme et identité personnelle 

D’après nombre de théories éthiques, l'identité personnelle joue un rôle crucial dans l’attribution 

de la responsabilité morale. C’est pourquoi les implants TIC ne devraient pas être utilisés à des 

fins de manipulation mentale ou de modification de l’identité personnelle. Le droit au respect de la 

dignité humaine, y compris le droit au respect de l’intégrité physique et mentale, est à la base de 

ce postulat. 

6.4.2. Implants TIC et données à caractère personnel 

Les  implants  TIC  pouvant  générer  des  données  sur  le  corps  humain,  les  principes  relatifs  à  la 

protection  des  données  doivent  leur  être  appliqués.  Le  caractère  privé  et  la  confidentialité  des 

données  doivent  être  respectés.  Chaque  individu  a  le  droit  de  déterminer  quelles  données  le 

concernant  doivent  être  traitées,  par  qui  et  dans  quel  but.  Le  droit  de  choisir  qui  a  accès  aux 

données et à quelle fin est particulièrement crucial. 

Les droits ci-dessus sont d’autant plus importants lorsque les implants TIC fonctionnent en ligne, 

notamment  dans  le  cadre  de  dispositifs  de  surveillance.  En  d’autres  termes,  le  GEE  souligne 

l’importance de veiller non seulement à ce que l’individu ait droit à la protection des données le 

concernant, mais aussi à ce que la société exerce un contrôle tel sur ces dispositifs lorsqu'ils sont 

autorisés  et  qu'ils  ne  puissent  devenir  source  de  restrictions  inadmissibles  des  droits 

fondamentaux, voire entraîner leur négation. Il conviendrait d’y veiller tout particulièrement dans 

le cas où ils deviendraient partie intégrante de systèmes de santé au sein desquels des données 

sont  occasionnellement  ou  continuellement  communiquées  à  des  tiers.  L’utilisation  d’implants 

TIC à des fins de contrôle à distance de la volonté d’autrui devrait être strictement interdite. 

Une législation et des orientations ad hoc devraient être élaborées à cet effet. La responsabilité 

en  incombe  aux  États  membres.  Le  GEE  suggère  néanmoins  que  la  Commission  prenne  ici 

l’initiative (voir la section 6.5.4). 

6.4.3. Implants TIC et vie privée 

Sous réserve que les implants TIC respectent les principes énoncés dans le présent avis, il n’y a 

pas  lieu  de  les  déclarer.  Ils  pourraient  et  devraient  rester  invisibles  aux  yeux  d’un  observateur 

extérieur. Le droit au respect de la vie privée inclut le droit de porter un implant TIC. 

70

.

 
 
6.4.4. Implants TICs et amélioration des capacités physiques et mentales 

Il conviendrait de veiller à ce que les implants TIC ne puissent être utilisés pour créer une société 

à deux vitesses ou pour creuser le fossé entre les pays industrialisés et le reste du monde. Leur 

utilisation  à  des  fins  d'amélioration  des  capacités  fonctionnelles  devrait  être  réservée  aux  cas 

suivants: 

•  pour  faire  entrer  des  enfants  ou  des  adultes  dans  la  frange  «normale»24  de  la  population,  à 

condition qu’ils le souhaitent et sous réserve de leur consentement éclairé; ou 

•  pour  améliorer  les  perspectives  en  matière  de  santé  (par  exemple,  en  renforçant  le  système 

immunitaire  de  façon  à  le  rendre  résistant  au  VIH).  Comme  dans  le  cas  des  applications 

médicales,  l’accès  aux  implants  TIC  devrait  être  ici  conditionné  par  les  besoins  réels,  plutôt 

que par les ressources économiques ou la position sociale. 

Selon le GEE, les utilisations suivantes des implants TIC devraient être interdites: 

•  comme fondement d’un cyber-racisme; 

•  pour modifier l’identité, la mémoire, la perception de soi et la perception d’autrui; 

•  pour améliorer les capacités fonctionnelles à des fins de domination; 

•  pour exercer une coercition sur les personnes qui n’en sont pas dotées. 

6.4.5. Implants TIC, commercialisation et intérêts des consommateurs 

Alors même que le corps humain, en  tant que tel, ne devrait pas être source de profits, divers 

types d'implants TIC sont déjà commercialisés – comme on l’a vu dans la partie du présent avis 

consacrée au contexte scientifique. Or il est essentiel de veiller à ce que ces produits ne puissent 

être lancés sur le marché sans contrôle adéquat. Par exemple, les implants TIC assimilables à 

des produits médicaux devraient être contrôlés en vertu de la législation pertinente en vigueur. Il 

conviendrait  ainsi  de  déployer  les  efforts  nécessaires  pour  que  tous  les  implants  TIC  soient 

soumis à un contrôle de sûreté et de sécurité avant commercialisation. 

6.4.6. Implants TIC utilisés à des fins de surveillance 

Les implants TIC utilisés à des fins de surveillance menacent tout particulièrement la dignité de 

l’être  humain.  Une  telle  utilisation  pourrait  être  le  fait  d’autorités  publiques,  d’individus  et  de 

groupes  cherchant  à  renforcer  leur  pouvoir  sur  les  autres.  Les  implants  pourraient  servir  à 

24  Le concept de «normalité» n’est pas précis. L’emploi de ce terme à la section 6.4.4 renvoie toutefois à 
l'état corporel généralement prédominant, non affecté par une malformation, une maladie ou une 
déficience génétique et exempt d'anomalies observables. 

71

.

 
 
                                                 
localiser des personnes (mais aussi à obtenir d’autres types d’informations les concernant). Ce 

pourrait être justifié par des raisons de sécurité (libération anticipée de prisonniers) ou de sûreté 

(localisation d’enfants en état de vulnérabilité). 

Le GEE insiste cependant sur le fait que l’utilisation des implants TIC à des fins de surveillance 

ne saurait être autorisée que si le législateur estime que la société démocratique en a un besoin 

urgent et justifié (article 8 de la Convention européenne des droits de l’homme) et qu’il n’existe 

pas  de  méthode  moins  intrusive.  Le  GEE  n’y  est  toutefois  pas  favorable.  Il  considère  que  les 

applications  à  visée  de  surveillance  devraient,  en  toutes  circonstances,  être  inscrites  dans  la 

législation. Dans chaque cas individuel, les procédures de surveillance devraient être approuvées 

et contrôlées par une juridiction indépendante. 

Les mêmes principes généraux devraient régir l’utilisation des implants TIC à des fins militaires. 

6.5. Considérations générales 

6.5.1. Développement de la société de l'information 

Le GEE estime que les questions éthiques soulevées par les implants TIC dans le corps humain 

sont  intimement  liées  au  développement  de  la  société  de  l’information  dans  son  ensemble.  Il 

soutient  fortement  l’objectif  d’une  société  de  l’information  à  dimension  humaine,  inclusive  et 

privilégiant  le  développement,  tel  que  proclamé  dans  la  Déclaration  de  principes  du  Sommet 

mondial sur la société de l'information (Genève, 2003). 

6.5.2. Débat public et information 

Un vaste débat social et politique s'impose sur le type d’applications qui devrait être accepté et 

légalement  approuvé,  notamment  pour  ce  qui  concerne  la  surveillance  et  l'amélioration  des 

capacités  fonctionnelles.  Le  GEE  recommande  une  approche  prudente.  Il  incombe  aux  États 

membres  et  à  leurs  comités  nationaux  d’éthique  (ou  institutions  équivalentes)  de  créer  les 

conditions nécessaires à l’éducation ainsi qu’à des débats constructifs et étayés en la matière. 

6.5.3. Démocratie et pouvoir 

Le  présent  avis  diffère  d’un  certain  nombre  d’avis  précédents  du  GEE  en  ceci  qu’il  traite  d’un 

domaine  nouveau,  à  croissance  rapide.  Pour  des  législateurs  européens  conscients  de  leurs 

responsabilités, il pose les jalons essentiels d’un futur programme de travail. 

Le débat public et l’éducation sont indispensables pour garantir la transparence. Il incombe aux 

États membres de veiller à ce que le pouvoir de développer des implants TIC et la capacité d’y 

accéder soient régis par des processus démocratiques. 

.

72

 
 
6.5.4. Nécessité d’une réglementation 

Il est clair que le domaine des implants TIC dans le corps humain doit être réglementé. À l’heure 

actuelle, les implants à visée non médicale ne sont pas explicitement couverts par la législation 

en  vigueur,  notamment  en  ce  qui  concerne  le  respect  de  la  vie  privée  et  la  protection  des 

données.  Toute  réglementation  en  la  matière  doit  être  fondée  sur  les  principes  de  dignité 

humaine, de respect des droits de l’homme, d’équité et d’autonomie, ainsi que sur les principes 

dérivés  de  précaution,  de  minimisation  des  données,  de  spécification  de  la  finalité,  de 

proportionnalité et de pertinence (voir les sections 4 et 5). 

Du  point  de  vue  du  GEE,  les  implants  TIC  à  visée  médicale  devraient,  quant  à  eux,  être 

réglementés à l’instar de  médicaments  lorsque  l'objectif médical est le même, dans la mesure, 

notamment, où ces implants ne sont que partiellement couverts par la directive 90/385/CEE du 

Conseil concernant le rapprochement des législations des États membres relatives aux dispositifs 

médicaux implantables actifs. 

Le GEE recommande que la Commission européenne lance des initiatives législatives dans ces 

domaines d’application des implants TIC. 

6.5.5. Recherche d’impact et implants TIC 

Il convient de poursuivre les recherches sur l’impact à long terme – sur le plan social, culturel et 

de  la  santé  –  des  différents  types  d’implants  TIC,  en  accordant  une  attention  particulière  à  la 

caractérisation, à l’évaluation, à la gestion et à la communication des risques. Le GEE estime que 

cet objectif devrait orienter le 7e programme-cadre de recherche de l’Union européenne. Dans un 

domaine  à  croissance  rapide,  cette  sorte  de  «recherche  de  précaution»  revêt,  en  effet,  une 

importance cruciale. 

6.5.6. Nécessité d’une révision 

Les  implants  TIC  en  sont  à  leurs  balbutiements,  mais  une  évolution  rapide  est  en  cours,  qui 

soulève  autant  d’espoirs  que  de  craintes  sur  le  plan  sociétal.  Le  GEE  s’est  penché  sur  les 

grandes  questions  éthiques  que  posent  les  applications  actuelles  ou  d’ores  et  déjà  prévisibles 

des  implants  TIC.  Il  est  clair,  cependant,  qu’il  devra  actualiser  son  avis  à  la  lumière  de  leurs 

applications nouvelles. Les implants à première vue sans danger (permettant, par exemple, de 

traiter un grave problème de santé), mais pouvant se révéler moins bénins en cas d’application à 

d’autres fins, appellent une vigilance particulière. Le GEE estime en conséquence qu’une révision 

du présent avis pourrait s’imposer d’ici trois à cinq ans. 

.

73

 
 
Le Groupe européen d'éthique des sciences et des nouvelles technologies 

Le Président: Göran Hermerén 

Les membres: 

Nicos C. Alivizatos 

Inez de Beaufort 

Rafael Capurro 

Yvon Englert 

Catherine Labrusse-Riou 

Anne McLaren 

Linda Nielsen 

Pere Puigdomenech-Rosell 

Stefano Rodota 

Günter Virt 

Peter Whittaker 

.

74

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STELLUNGNAHME DER EUROPÄISCHEN GRUPPE FÜR ETHIK IN 
NATURWISSENSCHAFTEN UND NEUEN TECHNOLOGIEN 
BEI DER EUROPÄISCHEN KOMMISSION 

Nr. 20   

Original: Englisch 

16. März 2005 

******************************************************************************** 

ETHISCHE ASPEKTE DER VERWENDUNG VON INFORMATIONS- UND 
KOMMUNIKATIONSTECHNOLOGISCHEN (IKT)-IMPLANTATEN  IM 
MENSCHLICHEN KÖRPER 

Bezug: Stellungnahme der EGE in eigener Initiative 
Berichterstatter: Professor Stefano Rodotà und Professor Rafael Capurro 

******************************************************************************** 

Die Europäische Gruppe für Ethik in Naturwissenschaften und neuen Technologien (EGE), 

gestützt  auf  den  Vertrag  über  die  Europäische  Union,  insbesondere  auf  Artikel  6  der 

Gemeinsamen Bestimmungen über die Achtung der Grundrechte, 

gestützt auf den EG-Vertrag, insbesondere auf Artikel 152 über das Gesundheitswesen, 

gestützt auf die vom Europäischen Rat in Biarritz am 14. Oktober 2000 angenommene und vom 

Europäischen  Parlament,  vom  Rat  und  von  der  Kommission  am  7.  Dezember  2000  in  Nizza 

feierlich verkündete Charta der Grundrechte der Europäischen Union vom 28. September 2000, 

insbesondere auf Artikel 1 über "Menschenwürde", Artikel 3 über das "Recht auf Unversehrtheit" 

und Artikel 8 über den "Schutz personenbezogener Daten", 1  

gestützt auf die Richtlinie 2002/58/EG des Europäischen Parlaments und des Rates vom 12. Juli 

2002 über die Verarbeitung personenbezogener Daten und den Schutz der Privatsphäre in der 

elektronischen Kommunikation, 2 

1   ABl. C 364 vom 18. November 2000, S. 1-22. 
2   ABl. L 201 vom 31. Juli 2002, S. 37-47. 

75

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
gestützt  auf  die  Richtlinie  95/46/EG  des  Europäischen  Parlaments  und  des  Rates  vom  24. 

Oktober  1995  zum  Schutz  der  Individuen  bei  der  Verarbeitung  personenbezogener  Daten  und 

zum freien Datenverkehr; 3 

gestützt  auf  die  Richtlinie  90/385/EWG  des  Rates  vom  20. Juni  1990  zur  Angleichung  der 

Rechtsvorschriften der Mitgliedstaaten über aktive implantierbare medizinische Geräte, 4 

gestützt  auf  das  am  4. April  1997  in  Oviedo  unterzeichnete  Übereinkommen  des  Europarates 

über  Menschenrechte  und  Biomedizin,  insbesondere  auf  Artikel  1  über  "Gegenstand  und  Ziel", 

Artikel 2 über den "Vorrang des menschlichen Lebewesens" sowie auf die Artikel 5 bis 9 über die 

Einwilligung und auf Artikel 10 über "Privatsphäre und Recht auf Auskunft", 5 

gestützt auf die am 11. November 1997 von der UNESCO verabschiedete Allgemeine Erklärung 

über das menschliche Genom und die Menschenrechte, 6 

gestützt  auf  das  Übereinkommen  des  Europarates  vom  1. Januar  1981  zum  Schutz  des 

Menschen bei der automatischen Verarbeitung personenbezogener Daten, 7 

gestützt  auf  die  Grundsatzerklärung  des  Weltgipfels  über  die  Informationsgesellschaft  vom 

12. Dezember  2003,  insbesondere  auf  Artikel 58  über  den  Einsatz  der  IKT  und  Artikel 59  über 

den Missbrauch der IKT, 8 

gestützt auf die Anhörungen von Sachverständigen und Kommissionsdienststellen durch die EGE 

am 15. Dezember 2003, 16. März 2004 und 15. Juni 2004 in Brüssel, 

gestützt auf den Bericht von Dr. Fabienne Nsanze mit dem Titel "ICT implants in the human body 

– A Review", Februar 2005, 9 

unter Berücksichtigung der Ergebnisse des von der EGE am 21. Dezember 2004 in Amsterdam 

veranstalteten Runden Tisches, 10 

nach Anhörung der Berichterstatter Professor Stefano Rodotà und Professor Rafael Capurro, 

3   ABl. L 281 vom 23. November 1995, S. 31-50. 
4   ABl. L 189 vom 20. Juli 1990, S. 17-36. 
5   http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/en/treaties/html/164.htm 
6   http://portal.unesco.org/shs/en/ev.php-URL_ID=2228&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html 
7   http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/en/treaties/html/108.htm 
8   http://www.itu.int/wsis/ 
9   Siehe Anlage. 
10  Dok. "Proceedings of the Round Table Debate – The ethical aspects of ICT implants in the human 

body" vom 21. Dezember 2004 

76

.

 
 
 
                                                 
IN ERWÄGUNG NACHSTEHENDER GRÜNDE: 

1. EINLEITUNG 

Informations-  und  Kommunikationstechnologien  (IKT)  dringen  in  alle  Bereiche  des  Lebens  ein. 

Bisher betraf dies hauptsächlich Geräte, die für private Zwecke oder am Arbeitsplatz verwendet 

werden, wie etwa PCs, Mobiltelefone, Laptops und Ähnliches. Aufgrund neuerer Entwicklungen 

werden  diese  Geräte  zusehends  zu  einem  Teil  des  menschlichen  Körpers,  weil  sie  entweder 

mitgeführt werden (in Kleidungsstücke integrierte Computer) oder im Körper implantiert sind. 

Auf  den  ersten  Blick  bereiten  IKT-Implantate  keine  spezifischen  ethischen  Probleme  –  Beispiel 

Herzschrittmacher.  Auch  wenn  IKT-Implantate  verwendet  werden  können,  um  beeinträchtigte 

Körperfunktionen  wiederherzustellen,  so  lassen  sie  sich  doch  auch  missbrauchen,  und  zwar 

besonders,  wenn  über  Computernetze  auf  diese  Geräte  zugegriffen  werden  kann. 

Möglicherweise  empfinden  einige  diese  Implantate  als  Bedrohung  der  Menschenwürde  und 

besonders der Unversehrtheit des menschlichen Körpers (siehe Abschnitt 5), während andere sie 

eventuell  in  erster  Linie  als  ein  Mittel  zur  Wiederherstellung  beeinträchtigter  menschlicher 

Fähigkeiten und somit als Beitrag zur Förderung der Menschenwürde ansehen. 

Der  Gedanke,  sich  IKT-Geräte  unter  die  Haut  einsetzen  zu  lassen,  und  zwar  nicht  nur  zur 

Wiederherstellung, sondern auch zur Steigerung menschlicher Fähigkeiten, lässt  Sciencefiction-

Szenarien aufkommen, die als Bedrohung und/oder Verheißung empfunden werden können. In 

einigen  Fällen  wurden  bereits  Mikrochips  implantiert,  wobei  das  Potenzial  für  individuelle  oder 

soziale Kontrolle gegeben ist. 

Die  enge  Beziehung  zwischen  körperlichen  und  seelischen  Funktionen  ist  eine  grundlegende 

Voraussetzung 

für  die 

Identität  eines  Menschen.  Die  modernen  Neurowissenschaften 

unterstreichen  diese  Sichtweise.  Sprache  und  Einbildungskraft    beeinflussen  auf  einzigartige 

Weise die Wahrnehmung von Zeit und Raum, das Bild von einem selbst und von anderen, die 

Art, wie der Einzelne zu anderen nicht-menschlichen Lebewesen und zur Umwelt in Beziehung 

tritt,  wie  Gesellschaften  in  historischer,  kultureller,  politischer,  rechtlicher,  wirtschaftlicher  und 

technischer Hinsicht gestaltet werden, wie der Mensch Wissen über sich selbst und über die Welt 

erwirbt und wie er Dinge herstellt, konzipiert und austauscht. 

IKT-Geräte  sind  Erzeugnisse  menschlichen  Erfindergeistes.  Ihre  Funktionen  beruhen  auf 

programmierbaren  oder  algorithmischen  Berechnungen, 

für  die  zumeist  nichtbiologische 

Werkstoffe  wie  Silizium  verwendet  werden.  Diese  ermöglichen  die  Simulation  bestimmter 

.

77

 
 
 
biologischer  und  psychischer  Funktionen 11

.  Darüber  hinaus  ist  es  theoretisch  und  heutzutage 

auch schon praktisch möglich, IKT-Geräte in den menschlichen Körper zu implantieren, um etwa 

Körperfunktionen  wiederherzustellen  oder,  wie  im  Falle  von  Prothesen  und  künstlichen  Glied-

maßen, bestimmte Körperteile zu ersetzen. 

Dies  sind  die  wesentlichen  Gründe  dafür,  warum  die  potenzielle  oder  bereits  erfolgte 

Verwendung  von  IKT-Implantaten  im  menschlichen  Körper  umfangreiche  und  nachhaltige 

ethische Relevanz besitzt . 

Daher ist es das Ziel dieser Stellungnahme, in erster Linie zu sensibilisieren und Fragen zu den 

ethischen Dilemmata anzusprechen, die durch eine Reihe von IKT-Implantaten auf diesem sich 

rasch entwickelnden Gebiet  aufgeworfen werden. Ethische Sensibilisierung und Analyse müssen 

jetzt  stattfinden,  damit  rechtzeitig  und  angemessen  auf  die  verschiedenen 

technischen 

Anwendungen reagiert  werden kann. In dieser Stellungnahme werden jedoch erforderlichenfalls 

auch  klare  ethische  Grenzen  und  rechtliche  Grundsätze  sowie  mehrere  Maßnahmen 

vorgeschlagen,  die  die  verantwortlichen  Regelungsinstanzen  in  Europa  ergreifen  sollten.  Der 

Schwerpunkt  des  Gutachtens  liegt  auf  der  Verwendung  von  IKT-Implantaten  im  menschlichen 

Körper (siehe Abschnitt 6.1). 

2. GLOSSAR 

IKT-Geräte: Geräte der Informations- und Kommunikationstechnologie, die in der Regel auf der 

Siliziumchip-Technologie beruhen. 

Aktives  medizinisches  Gerät:  jedes  medizinische  Gerät,  dessen  Betrieb  auf  eine  elektrische 

Energiequelle oder eine andere Energiequelle als die unmittelbar durch den menschlichen Körper 

oder die Schwerkraft erzeugte Energie angewiesen ist. 12 

Aktives  implantierbares  medizinisches  Gerät:  jedes  aktive  medizinische  Gerät,  das  dafür 

ausgelegt  ist,  ganz  oder  teilweise  durch  einen  chirurgischen  oder  medizinischen  Eingriff  in  den 

11  Es sei an dieser Stelle darauf hingewiesen, dass derzeit eine lebhafte Debatte über die mechanistische 
Betrachtung des Gehirns geführt wird; hierauf soll in dieser Stellungnahme nicht eingegangen werden. 

12  Diese Definition wurde aus der Richtlinie 90/385/EWG des Rates über aktive implantierbare 

medizinische Geräte übernommen. 

78

.

 
 
 
 
                                                 
menschlichen  Körper  oder  durch  einen  medizinischen  Eingriff  in  eine  natürliche  Körperöffnung 

eingeführt zu werden und dazu bestimmt ist, nach dem Eingriff dort zu verbleiben. 13 

Passive  IKT-Implantate:  in  den  menschlichen  Körper  eingesetzte  IKT-Implantate,  die  für  ihren 

Betrieb  auf  ein  externes  elektromagnetisches  Feld  angewiesen  sind  (siehe  beispielsweise  die 

Ausführungen über den "VeriChip" in Abschnitt 3.1.1). 

Online-IKT-Implantate:  IKT-Implantate,  die  für  ihren  Betrieb  auf  eine  ("Online"-)Verbindung  zu 

einem externen Rechner angewiesen sind oder ("online") über einen externen Rechner abgefragt 

werden können (siehe beispielsweise die Ausführungen über Biosensoren in Abschnitt 3.1.2). 

Offline-IKT-Implantate: 

IKT-Implantate,  die 

(gegebenenfalls  nach  einer  Ersteinrichtung) 

unabhängig von externen IKT-Geräten betrieben werden (siehe beispielsweise die Ausführungen 

über Tiefenhirnstimulation in Abschnitt 3.1.1). 

3. WISSENSCHAFTLICH-TECHNISCHER HINTERGRUND 

(Siehe den ausführlichen Bericht von Dr. Fabienne Nsanze "ICT implants in the human body – 

a review" vom Februar 2005 in der Anlage) 

3.1. Aktuelle Anwendungen und Forschungsarbeiten 

3.1.1. Anwendungen: Auf dem Markt erhältliche IKT-Implantate 

Dieser  Abschnitt  enthält  Informationen  über  die  auf  dem  Markt  bereits    erhältlichen  IKT-

Implantate, an denen – in Einzelfällen jahrzehntelang – geforscht wurde. 

Aktive medizinische Geräte 

Die Geschichte der implantierbaren Geräte in der klinischen Praxis begann in den 1960er Jahren 

mit  den  ersten  Herzschrittmachern,  die  den  Eigenrhythmus  des  Herzens  ersetzen  sollten.  Es 

folgten in den 1980er Jahren Blasenstimulationsgeräte, die Querschnittsgelähmten (Lähmung der 

unteren  Gliedmaßen  oft  aufgrund  einer  Verletzung  der  Wirbelsäule)  eine  kontrollierte 

Blasenentleerung  ermöglichen.  Die  jüngsten  Beispiele  für  aktive  Implantate  für  funktionale 

elektrische  Stimulation  sind  Stimulatoren  zur  Schmerzbehandlung  bei  Tumorpatienten  und  zur 

Tremorbehandlung  bei  Parkinsonpatienten  sowie  Stimulatoren  zur  Wiederherstellung  der 

Greiffunktion  bei  Volllähmung  (Lähmung  der  Arme,  der  Beine  und  des  Rumpfs  unterhalb  einer 

13  Diese Definition wurde aus der Richtlinie 90/385/EWG des Rates über aktive implantierbare 

medizinische Geräte übernommen. 

79

.

 
 
 
                                                 
entsprechenden  Wirbelsäulenverletzung).  Zu  den  typischen  Geräten  gehören  unter  anderem 

Folgende: 

•  Herz-Kreislauf-Schrittmacher für Patienten mit Leitungsstörungen oder Herzinsuffizienz 

•  Cochlearimplantate: Cochlearimplantate unterscheiden sich insoweit von Hörgeräten, als sie 

nicht  den  Schall  verstärken,  sondern  beschädigte  Teile  des  Gehörapparates  umgehen  und 

Schallsignale unmittelbar an den Gehörnerv weiterleiten. 

•  Bei  dem  Akustik-Hirnstammimplantat  ABI  (Auditory  Brainstem  Implant)  handelt  es  sich  um 

eine  Hörprothese,  die  die  Ohrschnecke  und  den  Gehörnerv  umgeht;  damit  soll  Patienten 

geholfen  werden,  bei  denen  kein  Cochlearimplantat  verwendet  werden  kann,  da  der 

Gehörnerv  nicht  funktioniert.  Das  Hirnstammimplantat  stimuliert  direkt  den  im  Hirnstamm 

befindlichen Nucleus cochlearis ventralis.  

• 

Implantierbare programmierbare Pumpen zur Abgabe von Pharmaka: 

(cid:57)  Baclofen-Abgabe bei Multiple-Sklerose-Patienten mit schwerer Spastizität (intrathekale 

Verabreichung, d.h. Abgabe in den Wirbelkanal); 

(cid:57)  Insulinpumpe für Diabetiker. 

• 

Implantierbare  Neurostimulationsgeräte:  Der  Begriff  "Neurostimulation"  bezieht  sich  auf 

Technologien,  die  anders  als  funktionale  Elektrostimulationsgeräte  (z.B.  Herzschrittmacher) 

den  Muskel  nicht  unmittelbar  stimulieren.  Bei  Neurostimulationstechnologien  wird  vielmehr 

die elektrische Nerventätigkeit modifiziert. 

(cid:57)  Wirbelsäulenstimulation zur Behandlung chronischer Schmerzen; 

(cid:57)  Sakralnervstimulation zur Behandlung hartnäckiger Harninkontinenz; 

(cid:57)  Vagusnervstimulation 

(VNS)  zur  Behandlung  von  Epilepsieanfällen  oder  zur 

Stimmungsverbesserung in Fällen schwerer Depression. 

•  Tiefenhirnstimulation (Deep brain stimulation/DBS): 

(cid:57)  zur Tremorbehandlung bei Parkinsonpatienten 

(cid:57)  zur Behandlung des essenziellen Tremors: Patienten mit essenziellem Tremor weisen 

außer  dem  Tremor –  an  Händen,  Kopf,  Beinen,  Rumpf  oder  Stimme –  keine  weiteren 

Symptome  auf.  Wie  bei  Parkinsonpatienten  kann  den  Betroffenen  mit  einer  Tiefenhirn-

stimulationstherapie geholfen werden. 

•  Künstliches chipgesteuertes Bein: Das deutsche Unternehmen Otto Bock Healthcare GmbH 

80

.

 
 
hat eine "C-Leg®" genannte Prothese entwickelt, bei der es sich um ein chipgesteuertes Bein 

handelt. 

Identifizierungs- und Standortbestimmungsgeräte 

Die betreffenden Mikrochips existieren in drei Formen: 

1)  Nur-Lesespeicher-Chip ("Read only"): Dies ist der einfachste Gerätetyp mit unveränderlich 

eingespeicherten  Daten,  ähnlich  wie  die  derzeit  zur  Identifizierung  von  Tieren  eingesetzten 

Chips.  Sogar  für  diese  rudimentärste  Erscheinungsform  gäbe  es  zahlreiche  Verwendungs-

möglichkeiten, etwa zur Identifizierung von Alzheimerpatienten, Kindern oder Bewusstlosen. 

Eine  allgemeinere  Anwendung  könnte  in  der  Nutzung  als  eine  Art  Personalausweis 

bestehen, und zwar auf der Grundlage der auf dem Mikrochip gespeicherten Kennnummer. 

2)  Schreib-/Lesespeicher-Chip ("Read-write"): Diese Art von Mikrochip wäre in der Lage, eine 

Reihe  von  Informationen  zu  speichern,  die  erforderlichenfalls  ergänzt  werden  könnten.  Der 

Chip erlaubt die Speicherung von Daten und ist fernprogrammierbar. Ist auf dem Mikrochip 

beispielsweise  die  Krankengeschichte  einer  Person  gespeichert  und  wird  diese  Kranken-

geschichte ergänzt, so können die betreffenden Informationen dem implantierten Chip hinzu-

gefügt  werden,  ohne  dass  er  entfernt  werden  muss.  Ferner  könnten  Finanzoperationen 

erleichtert  und  aufgezeichnet  werden.  Die  dritte  bedeutende  Art  von  Informationen,  die  auf 

einem Schreib-/Lesespeicher-Chip aufgezeichnet werden könnten, wären Informationen über 

Vorstrafen. 

3)  Geräte  mit  Standortbestimmungsfunktionen:  Über  den  genannten  Schreib-/Lesezugriff 

hinaus kann ein derartiges Gerät auch ein verortbares  Funksignal aussenden. Auch hierfür 

gäbe  es  zahlreiche  Anwendungen,  was  durch  die  bereits  existierenden  einfacheren  Geräte 

belegt wird. Ein entsprechendes Gerät benötigt eine Energiequelle, die in eine miniaturisierte 

Form  gebracht  werden  muss,  bevor  sie  implantiert  werden  kann.  Mit  einem  implantierten 

Mikrochip wäre eine Dauerüberwachung möglich. Wenn ein Chip ein Signal mit eindeutiger 

Kennungsfrequenz  aussenden  würde,  könnte  der  Standort  des  Implantatträgers  durch 

einfache Anwahl des richtigen Signals bestimmt werden. Mit mobilem Empfänger könnte die 

markierte Person an jedem beliebigen Ort aufgespürt werden. 

Zu den typischen Geräten dieser Art gehören unter anderem Folgende: 

•  RFID-Chips:  Seit  Anfang  der  1980er  Jahre  sind  Millionen  von  RFID-Funkchips  (Radio 

frequency  identification  –  RFID)  verkauft  worden.  Sie  werden  für  die  Identifizierung  des 

.

81

 
 
 
Viehbestands, von Haustieren, Labortieren und vom Aussterben bedrohten Arten verwendet. 

Die betreffenden Geräte enthalten keine Chemikalien oder Batterien. Der Chip ist nie ausge-

schaltet und hat eine Lebensdauer von 20 Jahren. 

•  VeriChip™  oder  "menschlicher  Strichcode"    Bei  dem  VeriChip™  (www.4verichip.com) 

handelt es sich um ein unter der Haut implantiertes RFID-Gerät, dessen Größe ungefähr der 

eines Reiskorns entspricht und das in das Fettgewebe unterhalb des Trizeps implantiert wird. 

Derzeit wird der VeriChip™ unter anderem für Folgendes verwendet: 

(cid:57)  medizinische  und  gesundheitsrelevante  Daten  (Blutgruppe,  potenzielle  Allergien  und 

Krankengeschichte); 

(cid:57)  personenbezogene Angaben/Angaben zur Identität: Im Baja Beach Club (in Spanien und 

den Niederlanden, http://www.baja.nl) verwenden die Kunden den VeriChip™ wie eine so 

genannte "Smartcard" zur vereinfachten Bestellung und Bezahlung von Getränken; 

(cid:57)  finanzielle Angaben (Zweitüberprüfung). 

Über diese Anwendungsgebiete hinaus gibt es weitere Anwendungen auf dem Gebiet der 

Sicherheit  des  öffentlichen  Verkehrs,  des  Zugangs  zu  geschützten  Gebäuden  oder 

Anlagen  und  zur  Standortbestimmung  von  Personen  mit  bedingter  Strafaussetzung, 

ehemaligen Haftinsassen, Straftätern usw. Derzeit muss sich eine Person mit einem RFID-

Chip in unmittelbarer Nähe eines Lesegeräts (Scanner) befinden, damit der Chip aktiviert 

wird. Somit lassen sich die Bewegungen einer Person nur verfolgen, wenn sich Scanner in 

der Nähe befinden. Daher stellt der VeriChip™ derzeit kein implantierbares GPS-Gerät dar 

(GPS = Global Positioning System). 

•  Das  bayerische  Unternehmen  Ident  Technology  (http://www.ident-technology.com)  bietet 

Standortbestimmungsgeräte  an,  die  den  menschlichen  Körper  (besonders  die  Haut)  zur 

Übermittlung digitaler Daten nutzen. 

• 

Implantat für weiblichen Orgasmus per Fernbedienung: Im Januar (2004) wurde in den USA 

ein Gerät patentiert, das auf Knopfdruck einen Orgasmus bewirkt. 

3.1.2. Forschung an IKT-Implantaten 

Medizinische Geräte 

•  Biosensoren: Biosensoren oder Mikrosensoren (Micro Electro-Mechanical System – MEMS) 

sind Geräte, die zur genauen Überwachung unzugänglicher Körperteile in den menschlichen 

Körper implantiert werden. Die Biosensoren bilden ein Netz und überwachen gemeinsam den 

82

.

 
 
Gesundheitszustand 

ihres  Trägers.  Hierzu  gehört  die  Erhebung  von  Daten  über 

physiologische  Parameter  wie  Blutdruck  oder  Blutzuckerniveau  und  darauf  beruhende 

Entscheidungsprozesse,  etwa  die  Warnung  des  Arztes  vor  einer  gesundheitskritischen 

Situation. 

Bei  den  zu  übermittelnden  Informationen  handelt  es  sich  um  entscheidende  medizinische 

Daten,  die 

von  Gesetzes  wegen  gesichert 

sein  müssen.  Daher 

ist  die 

Informationstechnologie  ein  kritischer  Bestandteil  dieser  biologischen 

Implantate,  die 

zusammen  mit  der  Frage  der  Energieversorgung,  der  Speichergröße  und  der 

Rechenkapazität die Forschung vor große Herausforderungen stellen. 

Es gibt mehrere biomedizinische Anwendungen, bei denen sich diese Technologie als sinn-

voll  erweisen  wird.  Als  Beispiel  lassen  sich  Sensoren  anführen,  die  in  das  Hirn  von 

Parkinsonpatienten  oder  Epileptikern  implantiert  werden,  Cluster  aus  akustischen  und 

optischen  Biosensoren  zur  Blutanalyse  sowie  Sensoren,  die  bei  Rekonvaleszenten  zur 

Aufspürung von Krebszellen implantiert werden. 

•  Künstlicher  Hippocampus:  Ein  Beispiel  für  eine  künftige  Hirnprothese  ist  der  implantierbare 

Hirnchip,  der  das  Gedächtnis  wiederherstellen  oder  die  Gedächtnisleistung  steigern  kann. 

Dem Hippocampus kommt bei der Anlage des Gedächtnisses eine Schlüsselrolle zu. Anders 

als  bei  Geräten  wie  Cochlear-Implantaten,  die  die  Hirntätigkeit  lediglich  stimulieren,  wird 

dieser implantierte Chip die gleichen Prozesse wie der von ihm ersetzte beschädigte Hirnteil 

durchführen. Dies dürfte für Patienten hilfreich sein, die aufgrund von Schlaganfall, Epilepsie 

oder Alzheimer-Krankheit einen Hirnschaden erlitten haben. 

•  Kortikalimplantate für Blinde: Es ist seit Jahren bekannt, dass bei der elektrischen Stimulation 

der  Augen  Phosphene  generiert  werden,  die  eine  optische  Wahrnehmung  bewirken.  Mit 

einem  Kortikalimplantat  könnten  Informationen  von  einer  winzigen  Digitalkamera  an  in  die 

Sehrinde  implantierte  Elektroden  weitergeleitet  werden,  wobei  das  nicht  funktionierende 

Organ (Netzhaut oder Sehnerv) umgangen wird.  

•  Okularimplantate  oder  künstliche  Netzhaut:  Andere  Forscher  konzentrieren  sich  auf  neue 

Technologien, mit denen die beschädigte Netzhaut, d. h. die lichtempfindliche Zellschicht im 

Auge, ersetzt werden soll. 

Mit einer Netzhautprothese werden die Netzhautneuronen jenseits der Empfangsschicht mit 

(Licht-)Signalen  einer  mikroskopischen  Digitalkamera  elektrisch  stimuliert;  dies  ist  möglich, 

wenn die innere Netzhaut und der Sehnerv intakt sind. Derzeit wird an zwei Konzepten für 

Netzhautprothesen geforscht, nämlich an subretinalen und epiretinalen Implantaten. 

83

.

 
 
•  Hirn-Computer-Schnittstellen  (Brain-computer  interfaces  –  BCI)  oder  direkte  Hirnkontrolle: 

Dabei  kommen  Kommunikationstechnologien  zum  Einsatz,  bei  denen  die  betreffenden 

Geräte  Informationen  aus  dem  Hirn  übernehmen  und  sie  nach  außen  weiterleiten.  Es  gibt 

Geräte, die Informationen nach innen weitergeben (Cochlear- oder Sehnervimplantate) und 

mit  denen  externe  Informationen  individuell  zugänglich  gemacht  werden.  Eine  Kombination 

beider  Konzepte  würde  Eingabe-Ausgabe-Interaktionen  ermöglichen.  Die  betreffenden 

Systeme  könnten  es  den  Betroffenen  erlauben,  Signale  direkt  aus  dem  Hirn  zur 

Kommunikation und Bewegungssteuerung zu nutzen. 

Auch wenn Untersuchungen an Menschen ergeben haben, dass es grundsätzlich möglich ist, 

Hirnsignale  zur  Steuerung  und  Kontrolle  externer  Geräte  zu  verwenden,  betonen  die 

Forscher,  dass  noch  viele  Jahre  lang  Forschungsarbeiten  und  klinische  Tests  durchgeführt 

werden  müssen,  bevor  die  betreffenden  Geräte  –  einschließlich  "neuroprothetischer" 

Gliedmaßen für Gelähmte – verfügbar sind. 

Überwachungs- oder Standortbestimmungsgeräte  

•  Am  Körper  getragene  IKT-Geräte  zur  Bestimmung  des  Standorts  eines  Menschen:  Diese 

Geräte gestatten es, mit Hilfe eines Empfängers weltweit jeden beliebigen Aufenthaltsort des 

Geräteträgers genau zu bestimmen. 

•  Subkutan  implantierte  GPS-Geräte  zur  Bestimmung  des  Standorts  von  Personen:  Im  Mai 

2003  behauptete  das  Unternehmen  Applied  Digital  Solutions  (ADS)  (http://www.adsx.com), 

dass  "Digital  Angel",  der  Prototyp  eines 

implantierbaren  GPS-Geräts  zur  Standort-

bestimmung,  mit  Erfolg  getestet  worden  sei.  Fachexperten  haben  aber  Zweifel,  ob  das 

System  tatsächlich  funktionieren  könnte.  Das  scheibenförmige  "Personal  location  device" 

misst 6,35 cm im Durchmesser bei einer Tiefe von 1,27 cm – ungefähr die gleiche Größe wie 

ein  Herzschrittmacher.  Diese  Überwachung  via  GPS  könnte  für  verschiedene  Zwecke 

genutzt werden, wie etwa bei medizinischen Notfällen (Herzanfälle, epileptische Anfälle oder 

Diabetes)  oder  für  Zwecke  der  Identifizierung  und  Standortbestimmung  (Arbeiten  in 

Gefahrenzonen, Kinder, Stalker  oder mutmaßliche Terroristen). 

Leistungssteigerungsgeräte   

Informatiker haben vorausgesagt, dass innerhalb der nächsten zwanzig Jahre neuronale Schnitt-

stellen konzipiert werden, die nicht nur die dynamische Bandbreite der Sinne erweitern, sondern 

auch die Gedächtnisleistung steigern und "Cyber-think", d.h. die unsichtbare Kommunikation mit 

anderen, ermöglichen werden. 

84

.

 
 
Zu den möglichen Geräten der betreffenden Art gehören unter anderem Folgende: 

•  Kortikal-Implantate  als  Prothese  ("Wahrnehmungsverstärker"  oder  "Sinnesverstärker"):  Die 

ursprünglich 

für  Blinde  entwickelten  Kortikalimplantate  sollen  auch  "Gesunden"  den 

permanenten Zugriff auf die auf einem Computer gespeicherten Informationen ermöglichen, 

die  entweder  auf  den  Aufnahmen  einer  Digitalkamera  oder  auf  einer  künstlichen  "Fenster-

schnittstelle" beruhen. 

•  Künstlicher  Gesichtssinn:  Entsprechend  jüngsten  Forschungsarbeiten  an  einer  künstlichen 

Netzhaut soll es eines Tages möglich sein, Licht im Infrarotbereich zu sehen. Hierfür könnte 

statt einer gewöhnlichen Videokamera eine Infrarotkamera verwendet werden. 

•  Akustik-Zahnimplantate  oder  "Zahntelefone":  Das  2002  konzipierte  Akustik-Zahnimplantat 

gibt es nach wie vor nur auf dem Papier. Ein Mikrovibrator und ein drahtlos funktionierender 

Niederfrequenzempfänger werden bei einem zahnchirurgischen Routineeingriff in den Zahn 

implantiert.  Der  Zahn  steht  in  Verbindung  mit  einer  Reihe  von  elektronischen  Geräten  wie 

etwa  Mobiltelefon,  Radio  und  Computer.  Die  akustischen  Informationen  werden  vom  Zahn 

über  Knochenresonanz  ins  Innenohr  übertragen.  Der  Tonempfang  kann  von  außen  nicht 

bemerkt werden, so dass Informationen jederzeit an jedem beliebigen Ort empfangen werden 

können. 

•  Künstlicher  Hippocampus:  Wie  bereits  erwähnt,  könnte  dieser  implantierbare  Hirnchip  die 

Gedächtnisleistung steigern. 

3.2. Andere Verwendungsmöglichkeiten 

Unter anderem gibt es noch folgende Verwendungsmöglichkeiten für IKT-Implantate: 

•  Das Microsoft-Patent mit der Nummer 6.754.472 (vom 22. Juni 2004) erstreckt sich auf den 

menschlichen  Körper  als  Medium  zur  Übertragung  von  Daten  (und  Energie)  auf  "andere 

Geräte" wie etwa PDAs (Personal Digital Assistant), Mobiltelefone, medizinische Geräte (zu 

Überwachungszwecken  etwa  in  Altenheimen),  wobei  die  RFID-Technik  das  Auffinden 

anderer Personen ermöglicht. Auf der familieneigenen Website könnten sich die Kinder bei 

dem  Überwachungssystem  anmelden  und  sehen,  was  ihre  Eltern  oder  Großeltern  gerade 

tun. Das Patent beschreibt kein spezifisches Gerät. 

• 

Intelligente  Schusswaffen  ("Smart  guns"):  Das  Unternehmen  Applied  Digital  Solutions 

(ADS), das auch den VeriChip™ konzipiert hat, kündigte im April 2004 die Aufnahme einer 

Partnerschaft  mit  dem  Schusswaffenhersteller  FN  Manufacturing  an,  deren  Zweck  der  Bau 

so genannter "Smart guns" ist. Diese Waffen können nur dann abgefeuert werden, wenn sie 

85

.

 
 
von  ihrem  Eigentümer,  dem  ein  RFID-Chip  in  die  Hand  implantiert  worden  ist,  betätigt 

werden. 

3.3. Das sechste Forschungs- und Entwicklungsrahmenprogramm (RP6) 

"Im  Rahmen  des  RP6  (Research  and  Development  Framework  Programme)  wird  mit  den 

Technologien 

für  die 

Informationsgesellschaft 

(TIG) 

  das  Ziel  verfolgt,  Europa  eine 

Führungsposition in der Nutzung der Basistechnologien und der angewandten Technologien zu 

sichern,  die  im  Mittelpunkt  der  wissensgestützten  Wirtschaft  stehen.  Ziel  ist  es,  die  Innovation 

voranzutreiben,  die  Wettbewerbsfähigkeit  der  europäischen  Unternehmen  und  der  Industrie  zu 

erhöhen und den Nutzen für alle europäischen Bürger zu erhöhen 

Das RP6 zielt auf die kommende Generation von Technologien. In Zukunft werden Computer und 

Netze in den Alltag integriert sein und den Bürgern dank anwenderfreundlicher Schnittstellen eine 

Vielzahl  von  Diensten  und  Anwendungen  zugänglich  machen.  In  der  Vision  der  'Intelligenten 

Umgebung'  rückt  der  individuelle  Nutzer  in  den  Mittelpunkt  der  zukünftigen  Entwicklungen  für 

eine breite Wissensgesellschaft für alle." 14 

Beispiele für über das RP6 finanzierte Projekte 

Nanowerkstoffe  und 

-sensoren  sowie  Mikrosysteme 

für  medizinische 

Implantate  zur 

Verbesserung von Gesundheit und Lebensqualität 

Im  Rahmen  dieses  Projekts  werden  entscheidende  Mikrosystemtechnologien  und 

Kommunikationsverfahren entwickelt, die die über medizinische Implantate und ambulante Mess-

Systeme  empfangenen 

Informationen  direkt  zum  Menschen  übertragen  und  es 

ferner 

ermöglichen,  Informationen  von  den  Geräten  in  die  weitere  Umgebung  zu  senden.  Das 

weiterführende  Ziel  ist  die  Entwicklung  von  Technologien  zur  Bildung  eines  Mikrosystems  und 

anschließend  die  Herstellung  medizinischer  Geräte  zur  Nutzung  dieser  Technologien.  Zu  den 

hierbei  entwickelten  einsatzbereiten  medizinischen  Erzeugnissen  gehören  Cochlear-Implantate 

und  Netzhautimplantate  sowie  Systeme  zur  Nervenstimulation,  Blasenkontrolle  und  Blutdruck-

überwachung. Aufgrund der vorliegenden Statistiken wird davon ausgegangen, dass etwa 50 % 

der  Bevölkerung  der  westlichen  Welt,  d.h.  ca.  500  Millionen  Menschen,  von  mindestens  einem 

der in dem Projekt behandelten Gesundheitsprobleme betroffen sein werden. 

14  RP6, Arbeitsprogramm 2003-2004 für den Themenbereich Technologien der Informationsgesellschaft 

(TIG), http://www.cordis.lu/ist/workprogramme/en/2_2.htm 

86

.

 
 
 
 
                                                 
Das OPTIVIP-Projekt 

Ziel  des  OPTIVIP-Projekts  ist  die  Optimierung  einer  auf  der  Stimulation  des  Sehnervs 

beruhenden  implantierbaren  Sehprothese  und  die  Erprobung  der  Prothese  im  Rahmen  einer 

vorklinischen Untersuchung.  

Bei diesem Projekt werden ethische Aspekte im Rahmen spezieller Projektaufgaben behandelt, 

mit denen Rückmeldungen seitens der Gemeinschaft der Blinden, besonders von Patienten und 

ihren  Vertretern,  angestrebt  werden.  Es  werden  verschiedene  Aspekte  der  Prothese  erfasst, 

insbesondere  Funktionalität,  Aussehen  und  ethische  Fragen.  Dies 

ist  von  wesentlicher 

Bedeutung, damit die Forschungsanstrengungen auf die tatsächlichen Bedürfnisse ausgerichtet 

werden können. 

4. RECHTLICHER RAHMEN 

4.1. Allgemeine Grundsätze 

Aufgrund der innovativen Aspekte der in dieser Stellungnahme behandelten Fragen lassen sich 

nur  schwer    Vorschriften  finden,  die  speziell  für  die  Implantierung  von  IKT-Geräten  in  den 

menschlichen Körper gelten. Der rechtliche Rahmen ist deshalb von den allgemeinen Prinzipien 

abzuleiten, auf die sich die Rechtsvorschriften der verschiedenen Länder und die internationalen 

Übereinkünfte gründen. Diese allgemeinen Grundsätze können die erforderlichen Anhaltspunkte 

bieten,  wenn  es  zu  umreißen  gilt,  welcher  Rechtsnormen  es  für  eine  Technik  bedarf,  die  den 

Körper und dessen Verhältnis zur Umwelt verändert und somit tief greifende Auswirkungen auf 

die Identität und das Leben der betroffenen Person hat. Diese Rechtsgrundsätze sind in Texten 

zu  verschiedenen  Themenbereichen  zu  finden,  die  von  der  Bioethik  bis  zur  elektronischen 

Datenverarbeitung,  von  Einwilligungsbeschränkungen  bis  zur  Definition  medizinischer  Geräte 

reichen. 

Was den europäischen Rechtsrahmen anlangt, so ist der EU-Grundrechtecharta, die gegenwärtig 

den  Teil  II  des  Vertrags  über  eine  Verfassung  für  Europa  bildet,  besondere  Bedeutung 

beizumessen.  Menschenwürde,  Freiheit,  Gleichheit,  Solidarität,  die  Bürgerrechte  und  die 

Gerechtigkeit    ebenso  wie  die  Unversehrtheit  und  Unantastbarkeit  des  Körpers,  insbesondere 

das  Gebot  der  freiwilligen  Einwilligung  nach  vorheriger  Aufklärung  (Artikel  3),  und  der  Schutz 

personenbezogener  Daten  (Artikel  8)  sind  darin  als  allgemeine  Grundsätze  verankert. 

Datenschutzfragen werden in den Richtlinien 95/46 und 2002/58 näher behandelt. In Artikel 174 

des  EG-Vertrags  sowie  ausführlicher 

in  der  Mitteilung  der  Kommission  (2000/1)  vom 

.

87

 
 
 
2. Februar 2000 15  wird  ausdrücklich  auf  das  Vorsichtsprinzip  Bezug  genommen.  Die  Richtlinie 

90/385 enthält Begriffsbestimmungen und Vorschriften für aktive medizinische Geräte. 

Unter den internationalen Übereinkünften sind das Übereinkommen des Europarates über Men-

schenrechte  und  Biomedizin  (1997)  und  die  Allgemeine  Erklärung  der  UNESCO  über  das 

menschliche  Genom  und  die  Menschenrechte  (1997)  besonders  wichtig,  vor  allem  was  die 

Würde  und  die  Unversehrtheit  des  Menschen  und  den  Grundsatz  der  Einwilligung  nach 

vorheriger  Aufklärung  betrifft.  Wichtige  Leitlinien  sind  auch  in  den  Nummern  58  und  59  der 

Grundsatzerklärung des Weltgipfels über die Informationsgesellschaft (2003) enthalten, in denen 

hervorgehoben  wird,  dass  beim  Einsatz  der  IKT  stets  die  Grundrechte  und  das  Privatleben 

geachtet werden müssen. 

Die  Verfassungen  und  Rechtsvorschriften  der  einzelnen  Länder  enthalten  verschiedene 

Vorschriften zur Achtung der Menschenwürde, zum Schutz der körperlichen Unversehrtheit und 

der Gesundheit, zur Einwilligung nach vorheriger Aufklärung und zu Transplantationsfragen. 

Eine  Reihe  von  Gerichts-  und  Verwaltungsentscheidungen  betreffen  unmittelbar  oder  mittelbar 

die in dieser Stellungnahme behandelten Fragen, etwa das Urteil des Europäischen Gerichtshofs 

vom 14. Oktober 2004 in der Rechtssache Omega gegen Oberbürgermeisterin der Stadt   Bonn 

(Rechtssache  C-36/02  16)  und  die  Verfügung  der  US-Bundesbehörde  für  Lebens-  und 

Arzneimittelüberwachung  vom  12. Oktober  2004  über  die  Erprobung  des  "VeriChip"  für 

medizinische Zwecke. 

Insgesamt  betrachtet  lassen  sich  von  diesen  Rechtsakten  und  Beschlüssen  eine  Reihe  von 

Grundsätzen ableiten, anhand deren ein Rechtsrahmen entwickelt und die Frage beurteilt werden 

kann, inwieweit die Implantierung von IKT-Geräten in den menschlichen Körper rechtmäßig ist. 

4.2. Menschenwürde 

Die  Würde  des  Menschen  wird  in  der  Grundrechtecharta  der  Europäischen  Union  als  erster 

Grundsatz genannt. In Artikel 1 der Charta heißt es: "Die Würde des Menschen ist unantastbar." 

Dies  entspricht  dem  Muster  des  deutschen  Grundgesetzes  und  steht  in  Einklang  mit  der 

Erklärung in der Präambel zu der Charta, wonach die Union "den Menschen in den Mittelpunkt 

ihres Handelns stellt". Im Omega-Urteil wurde festgehalten, dass dieser Grundsatz eine absolute 

Grenze darstellt; dem Urteil zufolge haben die deutschen Behörden rechtmäßig gehandelt, als sie 

ein Spiel beim dem es um  "spielerisches Töten" ging, untersagt haben, da es "eine Gefahr für 

15  http://europa.eu.int/comm/dgs/health_consumer/library/pub/pub07_en.pdf 
16  http://curia.eu.int/jurisp/cgi-bin/form.pl?lang=en&Submit=Submit&alldocs=alldocs&docj=docj 

&docop=docop&docor=docor&docjo=docjo&numaff=36%2F02&resmax=100  

88

.

 
 
                                                 
die  öffentliche  Ordnung  darstelle,  weil  die  gewerbliche  Veranstaltung  von  Unterhaltungsspielen 

mit  simulierten  Tötungshandlungen  an  Menschen  nach  der  in  der  öffentlichen  Meinung 

vorherrschenden Auffassung gegen eine in der nationalen Verfassung verankerte grundlegende 

Wertvorstellung verstoße, nämlich gegen die Menschenwürde". 

Ein solcher "Verstoß gegen die Menschenwürde" rechtfertigt nicht nur ein Verbot, durch das die 

unternehmerische  Freiheit  eingeschränkt  wird,  sondern  bildet  auch  eine  Grenze  für  die  freie 

Entscheidung des Einzelnen; angesichts eines solchen Verstoßes kann nämlich die Einwilligung 

der Spielteilnehmer nach vorheriger Aufklärung nicht als ein Faktor betrachtet werden, durch den 

das  fragliche  Spiel  gesellschaftlich  und  rechtlich  annehmbar  würde.  Deshalb  ist  der  Grundsatz 

der  Menschenwürde  als  ein  Kriterium  anzusehen,  mit  dem  sich  die  Fälle  ermitteln  lassen,  in 

denen der Körper als in jeder Hinsicht "unantastbar" zu gelten hat. 

In  dem  allseits  bekannten  deutschen  Rechtsstreit  über  das  Volkszählungsgesetz  wurde  eben 

hervorgehoben, dass "im Mittelpunkt der grundgesetzlichen Ordnung der Wert und die Würde der 

Bürgerinnen und Bürger steht, die in freier Selbstbestimmung als Glied einer freien Gesellschaft 

wirken" (Urteil des Bundesverfassungsgerichts vom 15. Dezember 1983). Dies steht in Einklang 

mit  der  klaren  Vorgabe  in  der  Präambel  sowie  in  Artikel  1  der  Allgemeinen  Erklärung  der 

Menschenrechte  von  1948,  wo  die  Würde  ausdrücklich  als  ein  wesentliches  Merkmal  des 

Menschen  und  als  eine  Bedingung  für  Freiheit  und  Gleichheit  genannt  wird.  Was  neuere 

grundlegende  Gesetzestexte  angeht,  so  sei  etwa  auf  Artikel  16  des  Bürgerlichen  Gesetzbuchs 

Frankreichs  oder  auf  Artikel  2  des  italienischen  Datenschutzgesetzes  verwiesen,  in  denen  die 

Würde  ausdrücklich  erwähnt  wird.  Ein  Gleiches  gilt  für  internationale  Übereinkünfte  wie  die 

Erklärung von Helsinki (1964), das Übereinkommen des Europarates über Menschenrechte und 

Biomedizin (1997), in dem gleich zu Beginn der Grundsatz der Menschenwürde bekräftigt wird, 

und  die  Allgemeine  Erklärung  der  UNESCO  über  das  menschliche  Genom  und  die 

Menschenrechte (1997). Und schließlich heißt es in Artikel 1der Charta der Grundrechte der EU 

(2000): "Die Würde des Menschen ist unantastbar. Sie ist zu achten und zu schützen." 

Es darf somit der Schluss gezogen werden, dass die Würde ein universeller, grundlegender und 

unumgehbarer Referenzbegriff ist, auch wenn er stets vor dem jeweiligen besonderen kulturellen 

Hintergrund zu sehen ist. Diese Einschätzung ließe sich auch dadurch bekräftigen, dass in den 

Übereinkünften  internationaler  Organisationen,  in  denen  alle  Kulturen  der  Welt  vertreten  sind, 

nun  immer  häufiger  auf  die  Menschenwürde  Bezug  genommen  wird  (in  der  Allgemeinen 

Erklärung der UNESCO über das menschliche Genom und die Menschenrechte beispielsweise 

wird das Wort "Würde" fünfzehn Mal verwendet). Unter diesem Blickwinkel lässt sich sagen, dass 

.

89

 
 
die Würde zu einem kulturübergreifenden Begriff werden wird. Allerdings ist der Gebrauch dieses 

Wortes  nicht  ganz  frei  von  einer  gewissen  Doppeldeutigkeit.  Es  wird  nämlich  zum  einen 

verwendet,  um  hervorzuheben,  dass  die  Autonomie  und  die  Rechte  des  Einzelnen  in  jeder 

Hinsicht geachtet werden müssen, und zum anderen, um die Forderung nach einer Überwachung 

des  Einzelnen  und  seines  Verhaltens  im  Namen  von  Werten  zu  untermauern,  die  jemand  den 

anderen  auferlegen  will.  Außerdem  ist  die  Würde  nach  Artikel 1  der  Grundrechtecharta – 

entsprechend dem Muster des deutschen Grundgesetzes – nicht nur "zu achten", sondern auch 

"zu schützen". Das bedeutet, dass den Behörden nicht nur die Einmischung oder der Eingriff in 

die Privatsphäre des Einzelnen untersagt ist, sondern dass sie auch aktiv auf die Schaffung von 

Bedingungen hinwirken müssen, die den Menschen ein Leben in Würde ermöglichen.  

4.3. Unantastbarkeit des Menschen 

Der  in  Artikel 3  der  Grundrechtecharta  verankerte  Grundsatz  der  Unantastbarkeit  des  Körpers 

und  der  körperlichen  und  geistigen  Unversehrtheit  schließt  jedes  Handeln  aus,  das  diese 

Unversehrtheit ganz oder teilweise in Frage stellen könnte, und dies selbst bei Einwilligung der 

betroffenen  Person.  Die  Weltgesundheitsorganisation  (WHO)  definiert  den  Begriff  Gesundheit 

"als  einen  Zustand  des  vollständigen  körperlichen,  geistigen  und  sozialen  Wohlbefindens  und 

nicht  nur  des  Freiseins  von  Krankheit  oder  Gebrechen".  Hier      handelt  es  sich  um  eine 

unterschiedliche  Situation,  da  die  Unversehrtheit  nicht  in  jeder  Hinsicht  als  unantastbar 

angesehen  wird  und  vielmehr  (wie  in  Artikel 5  des  Bürgerlichen  Gesetzbuchs  Italiens)  auf 

Eingriffe  Bezug  genommen  wird,  die  zu  einer  "dauerhaften  Minderung"  der  körperlichen 

Unversehrtheit  einer  Person  führen  oder  anderweitig  der  öffentlichen  Ordnung  und/oder  den 

guten Sitten zuwiderlaufen. 

Auf dieser Grundlage ist beispielsweise die Rechtmäßigkeit einer Organspende zu beurteilen; sie 

findet  ihre  Grenze  dort,  wo  sie  den  Verlust  wesentlicher  Funktionen  nach  sich  zöge.  Daraus 

könnte  man  den  Schluss  ziehen,  dass  der  Grundsatz  der  Unversehrtheit  nicht  ins  Feld  geführt 

werden  sollte,  wenn  es  sich  um  eine  Wiederherstellung  und/oder    Verbesserung  von 

Körperfunktionen handelt. Außerdem wird die freie Verfügung über den eigenen Körper durch die 

zahlreichen  Vorschriften  spezifisch  eingeschränkt,  die  es  verbieten,  den  Körper,  Körperteile 

und/oder  Körpererzeugnisse  zur  Erzielung  von  Gewinnen  zu  nutzen 

(Artikel 3  der 

Grundrechtecharta,  Artikel 21  des  Übereinkommens  über  Menschenrechte  und  Biomedizin, 

Artikel 4 der Allgemeinen Erklärung der UNESCO). Eine extensive Auslegung des Grundsatzes, 

dass  der  Körper  weder  als  Ware  noch  als  bloßes  Mittel  behandelt  werden  darf,  könnte  den 

Schluss  nahe  legen,  dass  die  Implantierung  von  IKT-Geräten  für  Zwecke,  die  allgemein 

.

90

 
 
gesprochen mit der Erzielung eines Gewinns zu tun haben (z.B. Zugang zu einer Diskothek unter 

Vorzugsbedingungen), nicht zugelassen werden sollte (siehe Abschnitt 6.4 der Stellungnahme). 

4.4. Schutz des Privatlebens und Datenschutz 

Die  Auffassung,  dass  es  dem  Einzelnen  nicht  freisteht,  nach  Belieben  über  seinen  Körper  zu 

verfügen,  wird,  wenn  auch  nur  indirekt,  durch  Artikel 8  Absatz 2  der  Richtlinie  95/46  über  den 

Schutz  personenbezogener  Daten  bestätigt.  Dieser  Bestimmung  zufolge  können  die 

Mitgliedstaaten  vorsehen,  dass  die  ausdrückliche  Einwilligung  der  betroffenen  Person  nicht 

ausreicht,  um  jemandem  anderen  die  Verwendung  von  dieser  Person  betreffenden  "  sensibler 

Daten" –  d.h.  Daten  über  Sexualleben,  Überzeugungen,  ihrem  Gesundheitszustand  und  ihrer 

ethnischen Herkunft – zu gestatten, wenn nicht zuvor jeweils eine entsprechende Genehmigung 

eingeholt  worden  ist,  für  deren  Erteilung  beispielsweise  eine  Aufsichtsbehörde  zuständig  sein 

könnte  (siehe  Artikel  26  des  italienischen  Gesetzes  zum  Schutz  personenbezogener  Daten). 

Indem  die  betroffenen  Personen  selbst  daran  gehindert  werden,  Teile  ihres  "elektronischen 

Körpers" in einer Weise zugänglich zu machen, die dessen Unversehrtheit gefährdet, soll eben 

der  sensibelste Teil dieses "elektronischen Körpers" geschützt werden. 

Unter  einem  allgemeineren  Blickwinkel  wird  in  der  Grundrechtecharta  der  EU  zwischen  dem 

Schutz  des  Privat-  und  Familienlebens  (Artikel 7)  und  dem  Schutz  personenbezogener  Daten 

(Artikel 8)  unterschieden,  der  folglich  ein  selbstständiges  individuelles  Recht  geworden  ist.  Es 

handelt sich hier somit um einen Schutz, der jedes nennenswerte Eindringen in die Privatsphäre 

des Einzelnen verhindern soll und mit dem auf der anderen Seite jedem Einzelnen das Recht auf 

informationelle Selbstbestimmung eingeräumt wird, einschließlich des Rechts, Herr über die ihn 

selbst  betreffenden  Daten  zu  bleiben.  Hier  liegt  eine  wahre  "Konstitutionalisierung  des 

Individuums"  vor,  die  die  Achtung  sowohl  des  natürlichen  als  auch  des  elektronischen  Körpers 

auferlegt.  Der  Schutz  personenbezogener  Daten  in  der  EU  gründet  sich  im  Einzelnen  auf  die 

Richtlinie  95/46/EG  17  und  die  Richtlinie  2002/58/EG  18.  Letztere  enthält  auch  besondere 

Bestimmungen  hinsichtlich  der  Standortdaten  der  betroffenen  Person.  Die  Grundsätze  und 

Vorschriften für den Schutz personenbezogener Daten gelten gegenwärtig in allen EU-Mitglied-

staaten sowie in verschiedenen anderen Staaten, von Kanada bis Australien und von Japan bis 

hin  zu  vielen 

lateinamerikanischen  Ländern;  diese  Staaten 

treten 

für  eine  strenge 

17  Richtlinie 95/46/EG des Europäischen Parlaments und des Rates vom 24. Oktober 1995 zum Schutz 
natürlicher Personen bei der Verarbeitung personenbezogener Daten und zum freien Datenverkehr, 
ABl. L 281 vom 23.11.1995, S. 31-50. 

18  Richtlinie 2002/58/EG des Europäischen Parlaments und des Rates vom 12. Juli 2002 über die 
Verarbeitung personenbezogener Daten und den Schutz der Privatsphäre in der elektronischen 
Kommunikation (Datenschutzrichtlinie für elektronische Kommunikation), ABl. L 201 vom 31.7.2002, 
S. 37-47. 

91

.

 
 
                                                 
Datenschutznorm  ein,  die  vor  allem  auf  ausführlicher  Unterrichtung  in  Kombination  mit 

ausdrücklicher  Einwilligung  der  betroffenen  Person  beruht.  Daher  muss  für  jede  Art  von  IKT-

Implantaten  zunächst  eine  genaue  Vorprüfung  ihrer  Auswirkungen  auf  die  Privatsphäre 

vorgenommen werden.  

4.5. Das Vorsichtsprinzip 

Das Vorsichtsprinzip   nötigt nicht zu unüberschreitbaren Grenzen oder strikten Verboten. Es ist 

ein  allgemeines  Instrument  im  Dienste  des  Risikomanagements  und  war  ursprünglich  auf 

Umweltfragen  beschränkt.  In  der  Mitteilung  der  Kommission  vom  Februar  2000  heißt  es:  "Das 

Vorsichtsprinzip wird im Vertrag nicht definiert, der seine Anwendung lediglich an einer Stelle – 

nämlich zum Schutz der Umwelt – vorschreibt. In der Praxis ist sein Anwendungsbereich jedoch 

wesentlich  weiter,  und  zwar  insbesondere  in  den  Fällen,  in  denen  aufgrund  einer  objektiven 

wissenschaftlichen Bewertung berechtigter Grund für die Besorgnis besteht, dass die möglichen 

Gefahren  für  die  Umwelt  und  die  Gesundheit  von  Menschen,  Tieren  oder  Pflanzen  nicht 

hinnehmbar  oder  mit  dem  hohen  Schutzniveau  der  Gemeinschaft  unvereinbar  sein  könnten" 

(Nummer  3  der  Zusammenfassung).  "Das  Vorsichtsprinzip  ist  daher  nach  Auffassung  der 

Kommission  ein  allgemein  gültiger  Grundsatz"  (Abschnitt  3  der  Mitteilung),  dessen  Tragweite 

über die EU hinausgeht, wie verschiedene internationale Übereinkünfte zeigen, angefangen mit 

der 1992 in Rio de Janeiro verabschiedeten Erklärung über Umwelt und Entwicklung. 

Dies sind die grundlegenden Ausgangspunkte und die Vorbedingungen für die Anwendung des 

Vorsichtsprinzips, nämlich dass ein Risiko gegeben ist, dass dieses Risiko zu einer Schädigung 

führen  kann  und  dass  wissenschaftliche  Unsicherheit  darüber  besteht,  ob  diese  Schädigung 

wirklich  eintreten  wird.  Ausgehend  vom  Vorsichtsprinzip  muss 

im  Rahmen  des 

Risikomanagements  entschieden  werden,  welche  Vorsorgemaßnahmen  angemessen  sind,  um 

den  möglichen  Schaden  zu  mindern,  ohne  jedoch  zu  versuchen,    jegliches  Risiko  absolut 

auszuschließen.  Die  Risikomanagement-Maßnahmen  sollten  zum  Ziel  haben,  die  Schwelle  zu 

ermitteln, bis zu der das Risiko in Anbetracht der auf dem Spiel stehenden Werte als "akzeptabel" 

angesehen  werden  kann,  wobei  die  Achtung  des  menschlichen  Körpers  ganz  ohne  Zweifel  ein 

Wert ist, der höchsten rechtlichen Schutz verdient. Doch betrifft das Vorsichtsprinzip, obgleich es 

in grundlegenden Anforderungen wurzelt, eher die "Verfahrensebene" als die "Sache selbst"; d.h. 

es wird nicht angewandt, um eine Neuerung als solche zu beurteilen, sondern um vielmehr deren 

Folgen 

zu  bewerten.  Sind 

keine  negativen  Folgen 

festzustellen  oder  werden 

Anwendungsmodalitäten  geändert,  so  mag  eine  bestimmte  wissenschaftliche  oder  technische 

Neuerung als akzeptabel angesehen werden. Bei dem Vorsichtsprinzip handelt es sich somit um 

.

92

 
 
ein  dynamisches  Instrument,  das  erlaubt,  mit  der  Entwicklung  eines  Gebietes  Schritt  zu  halten 

und  beständig  zu  überprüfen,  ob  die  Bedingungen  erfüllt  sind,  unter  denen  eine  bestimmte 

Neuerung  annehmbar  ist,  und  das  so  zu  einer  besseren  Steuerung  und  Ausgestaltung  der  so 

genannten Risikogesellschaft beiträgt. 

In  der  Verfügung  der  US-Bundesbehörde  für  Lebens-  und  Arzneimittel-Überwachung  zu  dem 

subkutanen Chip namens "VeriChip" (siehe Abschnitt 3) wurden die mit IKT-Implantaten verbun-

denen  Risiken  hervorgehoben:  "negative  Gewebereaktion,  Wanderung  des 

implantierten 

Transponders 

im  Körper,  mangelnde 

Informationssicherheit,  Versagen  des 

implantierten 

Transponders,  Versagen  des    Eingabegeräts  ,  Versagen  des  elektronischen  Scanners, 

elektromagnetische  Störungen,  Gefährdung  durch  elektrischen  Strom,  Inkompatibilität  mit  der 

Kernspintomografie und Nadelstichverletzung". Angesichts dieser langen Liste möglicher Risiken 

nimmt es wunder, dass VeriChip-Tests für medizinische Zwecke überhaupt zugelassen wurden. 

Bei  Berücksichtigung  des  Vorsichtsprinzips  hätte  die  Genehmigung  in  Anbetracht  dieser  mit 

hohem Unsicherheitsgrad behafteten Risiken verweigert werden können. 

4.6. Datenminimierung, Zweckangabe, Verhältnismäßigkeit und Relevanz 

Besondere  Bedeutung 

ist  auch  den  Grundsätzen  Datenminimierung,  Zweckangabe, 

Verhältnismäßigkeit  und  Relevanz  beizumessen.  Alle  diese  Grundsätze  haben  nichts  mit  der 

Frage zu tun, ob die Verwendung der einzelnen IKT rechtmäßig ist, sondern betreffen eher die 

spezifischen  Bedingungen  für  deren  Verwendung,  d.h.  den  Zusammenhang,  in  dem  sie 

verwendet werden. 

Auf  den  Grundsatz  der  Datenminimierung  wird  beispielsweise  in  Artikel  16  Absatz 3  des 

Bürgerlichen  Gesetzbuchs  Frankreichs  ausdrücklich  Bezug  genommen;  dieser  Bestimmung 

zufolge "darf die Unversehrtheit des menschlichen Körpers nur angetastet werden, wenn dies im 

Interesse der betreffenden Person erforderlich ist". Unter objektivem Blickwinkel bedeutet dieser 

Grundsatz, dass auf ein bestimmtes Mittel nur dann zurückgegriffen werden sollte, wenn sich das 

entsprechende  Ziel  nicht  durch  weniger  "invasive",  in  den  Körper  eingreifende  Mittel  erreichen 

lässt.  Dies  ist  im  Wesentlichen  der  Minimierungsgrundsatz,  wie  er  in  verschiedenen  Gesetzen 

zum  Schutz  der  Privatsphäre  enthalten  ist,  beispielsweise  in  Artikel  3  a  des  deutschen 

Bundesdatenschutzgesetzes  und  in  Artikel  3  des  italienischen  Datenschutzgesetzes.  Unter 

subjektivem  Blickwinkel  wird  mit  dem  Minimierungsgrundsatz  die  Existenz  persönlicher 

Umstände  postuliert,  für  die  ohne  die  Verwendung  eines  bestimmten  Mittels  keine  Lösung 

gefunden werden kann, so dass dieses Mittel als unerlässlich anzusehen ist. 

.

93

 
 
Der  Grundsatz  der  Zweckangabe  erfordert,  dass  die  zu  erreichenden  Ziele  benannt  werden. 

Nach dem Übereinkommen über Menschenrechte und Biomedizin zum Beispiel dürfen Tests, mit 

denen genetische Krankheiten prognostiziert werden können, "nur zu gesundheitlichen Zwecken 

oder  für  gesundheitsbezogene  wissenschaftliche  Forschung  durchgeführt  werden"  (Artikel  12). 

Es geht im Wesentlichen darum, die besonderen Umstände, die verfügbaren Mittel und die als 

Referenz  dienenden  Werte  zueinander  ins  Verhältnis  zu  setzen.  Rechtmäßig  ist  nur  die 

Verwendung  der  Mittel,  die  sich  in  einem  gegebenen  Zusammenhang  als  mit  diesen  Werten 

vereinbar erweisen. 

Der Grundsatz der Verhältnismäßigkeit stützt sich ebenfalls auf das Verhältnis zwischen den zu 

verwendenden  Mitteln  und  den  angestrebten  Zielen.  Doch  hier  liegt  der  Schwerpunkt  nicht  auf 

der  Art  der  in  Frage  stehenden  Zwecke,  sondern  auf  der  Verhältnismäßigkeit  der  verwendeten 

Mittel; d.h. selbst wenn der Zweck als solcher  legitim ist, darf er nicht mit unverhältnismäßigen 

Mitteln verfolgt werden. In der weiter oben genannten Kommissionsmitteilung wird ausdrücklich 

ein  Zusammenhang  zwischen  Vorsorge  und  Verhältnismäßigkeit  hergestellt,  wenn  es  heißt:  "In 

manchen Fällen kann ein völliges Verbot eine unverhältnismäßige Reaktion auf ein potenzielles 

Risiko sein, in anderen Fällen hingegen die einzig mögliche." 

Der Grundsatz der Relevanz, der in Artikel 6 der Richtlinie 95/46 ausdrücklich  niedergelegt  ist, 

kann auch in Zusammenhang mit IKT-Implantaten Berücksichtigung finden. Die Anwendung einer 

bestimmten Technologie kann als rechtmäßig gelten, wenn dieser Technologie für die gegebenen 

Umstände eine eindeutige und nicht nur entfernte Relevanz zuzusprechen ist. Hiermit soll einer 

exzessiven und/oder unangemessenen Anwendung der verfügbaren Mittel vorgebeugt werden. 

Alle  diese  Grundsätze  ergänzen  einander  letzten  Endes.  Wurde  ein  legitimer  Zweck  für  die 

Verwendung  eines  IKT-Implantats  ermittelt,  so  gilt  es  festzustellen,  ob  dieses  Implantat 

tatsächlich  notwendig  ist  und  ob  die  verwendeten  bzw.  zu  verwendenden  Mittel  unter  den 

gegebenen Umständen relevant und verhältnismäßig sind. 

4.7. Autonomie und Beschränkungen für IKT-Implantate 

Die Beschränkungen für die Implantierung von IKT-Geräten in den menschlichen Körper, die sich 

aus der Untersuchung der in verschiedenen Rechtstexten enthaltenen Grundsätze ergeben, sind 

im Lichte der allgemeinen Grundsätze und Normen noch näher zu prüfen, die für die Autonomie 

des Einzelnen gelten; diese Autonomie bedeutet im vorliegenden Fall die freie Entscheidung über 

den  Gebrauch  des  eigenen  Körpers,  entsprechend  der  allseits  bekannten  Redensart  "  Ich  bin 

Herr über meinen Körper", die Entscheidungsfreiheit in Bezug auf die eigene Gesundheit und die 

Freiheit von äußerer Kontrolle und Beeinflussung. 

94

.

 
 
Was die Entscheidungen in Bezug auf den eigenen Körper anlangt, so gelten die Erwägungen in 

Zusammenhang  mit  den  Grundsätzen  der  Unversehrtheit  und  Unantastbarkeit  auch  hier, 

insbesondere  hinsichtlich  des  Einwilligungsgebots.  Die  Einwilligung  ist  erforderlich,  aber  nicht 

ausreichend, um die Verwendung von Implantaten zu rechtfertigen – die ohnehin in keinem Fall 

gegen den Willen der Betroffenen und/oder ohne ihr Wissen erfolgen darf. 

Was die Entscheidungen in Bezug auf die eigene Gesundheit betrifft, so hat der Betroffene stets 

das Recht, ein Implantat abzulehnen und seine Entfernung zu veranlassen, soweit dies technisch 

möglich ist, und dies unbeschadet des Gebots der Einwilligung nach vorheriger Aufklärung und 

unbeschadet des Rechts, eine ärztliche Behandlung abzulehnen. 

Was die Kontrolle und Beeinflussung von außen angeht, so erhält die Autonomie des Einzelnen 

besondere  Bedeutung  in  Zusammenhang  mit  dem  Recht  der  Betroffenen,  dass  ihr  Verhalten 

nicht durch die für die elektronischen Schnittstellen zuständigen Personen oder Stellen bestimmt 

und/oder beeinflusst wird, soweit hiermit eine Dauerverbindung zu externen Einrichtungen herge-

stellt  wird.  Selbst  wenn  keine  Dauerverbindung  dieser  Art  gegeben  ist,  ist  zu  berücksichtigen, 

dass IKT-Implantate es ermöglichen können, 

a) 

b) 

den Aufenthaltsort der betroffenen Person ständig und/oder gelegentlich zu ermitteln, 

die in den elektronischen Geräten gespeicherten Informationen ohne Wissen der 

Betroffenen ferngesteuert zu ändern. 

Diese Risiken werden mit der Einführung einheitlicher technischer Normen noch zunehmen; denn 

dadurch  könnte  es  auch  anderen  Personen  oder  Stellen  als  den  Betroffenen  und  den 

Einrichtungen oder Organisationen, die die rechtmäßigen Betreiber der entsprechenden Anlagen 

oder  Schnittstellen  sind,  möglich  werden,  die  Daten  zu  lesen  oder  zu  ändern.  Beide 

Möglichkeiten stehen eindeutig in Widerspruch zu den Datenschutzvorschriften für die Sammlung 

und Verarbeitung von Informationen. Insbesondere die Abänderung der Daten berührt das durch 

Artikel 1 der Richtlinie 95/46/EG ausdrücklich anerkannte Recht auf persönliche Identität. 

4.8. Abschließende Bemerkungen 

Zu der Frage des rechtlichen Rahmens ist Folgendes festzuhalten: 

a) 

Die  einfachsten  Arten  von 

IKT-Implantaten 

im  menschlichen  Körper  sind  derzeit 

anerkanntermaßen  mit  einem  ernsten,  wenn  auch  ungewissen  Risiko  behaftet,  weshalb 

das  Vorsichtsprinzip  zum  Tragen  kommen  muss.  Insbesondere  gilt  es,  zwischen  aktiven 

und  passiven  Implantaten,  zwischen  reversibler  und  irreversibler  Implantierung  sowie 

zwischen Offline- und Online-Implantaten zu unterscheiden. 

95

.

 
 
b) 

Der  Grundsatz  der  Zweckangabe  verlangt  zumindest  eine  Unterscheidung  zwischen 

medizinischen  und  nichtmedizinischen  Anwendungen.  Medizinische  Anwendungen 

müssten  jedoch  ebenfalls  in  kohärenter  und  selektiver  Weise  bewertet  werden,  nicht 

zuletzt um zu verhindern, dass sie zur Rechtfertigung anderer Anwendungsarten geltend 

gemacht werden. 

c) 

Nach  dem  Grundsatz  der  Datenminimierung  sind  IKT-Implantate,  die  lediglich  zur 

Identifizierung  von  Patienten  dienen,  nicht  rechtmäßig,  sofern  an  ihrer  Stelle  weniger 

invasive und gleichermaßen sichere Mittel verwendet werden können. 

d) 

Nach dem Grundsatz der Verhältnismäßigkeit sind Implantate nicht rechtmäßig, wenn sie 

beispielsweise  ausschließlich  dazu  dienen,  den  Zugang  zu  öffentlichen  Orten  zu 

erleichtern. 

e) 

Nach  dem  Grundsatz  der  Unversehrtheit  und  Unantastbarkeit  des  Körpers  reicht  die 

Einwilligung der betroffenen Person nicht aus, um die Implantierung von Geräten jeglicher 

Art zu rechtfertigen. 

f) 

Der  Grundsatz  der  Menschenwürde  verbietet  es,  den  Körper 

in  eine  bloße 

Informationsquelle, in einen Gegenstand zu verwandeln, der ferngesteuert manipuliert und 

überwacht werden kann. 

Aus  diesen  Erwägungen  könnte  der  Schluss  gezogen  werden,  dass  unter  den  gegebenen 

Umständen  und  vorbehaltlich  von  Ausnahmesituationen,  wie  sie  weiter  unten 

(siehe 

Abschnitt 6.4.6)  behandelt  werden,  die  Implantierung  von  –  tatsächlich  verfügbaren  oder  nur 

möglichen  –  IKT-Geräten  in  den  menschlichen  Körper  in  vielen  Fällen  rechtlich  nicht  zulässig 

sind. 

5. ETHISCHER HINTERGRUND 

Die heutige Gesellschaft erfährt einen Wandel, der das Individuum in seinem anthropologischen 

Wesenskern berührt. Der Fortschritt vollzieht sich mit einer schrittweisen Verlagerung: Zunächst 

wurden  die  Menschen  mittels  Videoüberwachung  und  Biometrie  beobachtet,  nun  werden  sie 

mittels diverser elektronischer Geräte, unter die Haut implantierter Chips und digitalen Anhängern   

in  einem  Maße  manipuliert,  so  dass  sie  mehr  und  mehr  zu  vernetzten  Individuen  werden..  Auf 

diese Weise ließe sich eine Dauerverbindung zu einem Menschen schalten, und er könnte neu 

konfiguriert  werden,  so  dass  er  von  Zeit  zu  Zeit  Signale  aussendet  und  empfängt,  mit  denen 

Bewegungen,  Gewohnheiten  und  Kontakte  nachvollzogen  und  definiert  werden  können.  Als 

.

96

 
 
zwangsläufige Folge würde dies die Bedeutung und die Substanz der Autonomie des Menschen 

verändern und seine Würde antasten. 

Angesichts  dieser  unaufhaltsamen  Aushöhlung  der  Persönlichkeitsrechte  –  die  auch  vor  einer 

Umwandlung  des  Körpers  nicht  Halt  macht  –  rückt  zum  einen  die  Frage  der  Würde  und  zum 

anderen  die  bereits  erwähnte  Tatsache,  dass  der  Mensch 

im  Mittelpunkt  der 

verfassungsmäßigen Ordnung steht, immer stärker in den Blickpunkt (siehe die Präambel und die 

Artikel 1,  3  und  8  der  Charta  der  Grundrechte  der  Europäischen  Union  sowie  den  in  den 

Abschnitten 4.2 und 4.4 dieser Stellungnahme dargestellten rechtlicher Rahmen). 

5.1. Grundlegende ethische Prinzipien 

Wie in früheren Stellungnahmen der EGE sowie in einer Reihe von Übereinkünften, Erklärungen 

und Chartas, die in Europa anerkannt werden, sowie in Abschnitt 4 der vorliegenden 

Stellungnahme ("Rechtlicher Rahmen") deutlich zum Ausdruck kommt, sind Würde und Integrität 

des Menschen die Grundprinzipien, aus denen sich wiederum weitere (nachstehend 

beschriebene) Grundsätze ableiten lassen, die für diese Stellungnahme von Bedeutung und eng 

miteinander verknüpft sind. 

Menschenwürde (siehe auch "Rechtlicher Rahmen", Abschnitt 4.2) 

In  dem  Entwurf  des    Vertrages  für  eine    europäische  Verfassung  19  heißt  es:  “Die  Würde  des 

Menschen ist unantastbar. Sie ist zu achten und zu schützen.” (Artikel II-61), und im Weiteren: 

“Die  Würde  des  Menschen  ist  nicht  nur  ein  Grundrecht  an  sich,  sondern  bildet  das  eigentliche 

Fundament  der  Grundrechte.”  (Erklärung  betreffend  die  Erläuterungen  zur  Charta  der 

Grundrechte). Da mit dieser Erklärung die Menschenwürde nicht im eigentlichen Sinne definiert 

wird,  haben  verschiedene  Autoren  versucht,  diese  Lücke  zu  schließen.  Einem  dieser  Autoren 

zufolge 20    beruht  die  Menschenwürde:  “auf    dem  erhabenen  moralischen  Status,  den  jedes 

menschliche  Wesen  in  seiner  Einzigartigkeit  besitzt.  Würde  ist  eine  vorhandene  Realität,  die 

untrennbar  zum  Wesen  des  Menschen  gehört  und  nicht  von  seiner  Funktionsfähigkeit  in  ihren 

unterschiedlichen  Ausprägungen  abhängt.  (…)  Der  Besitz  der  Menschenwürde  bringt  einige 

unumstößliche  moralische  Verpflichtungen  mit  sich.  Dazu  gehört  im  Umgang  mit  allen  anderen 

Menschen  die  Pflicht,  deren  Leben,  Freiheit  und  Sicherheit  zu  schützen,  und  im  Umgang  mit 

Tieren und der Natur ein Pflegeauftrag.” 

Dies ist der wesentliche Kontext für die nachstehend beschriebenen, abgeleiteten ethischen Prin-

zipien, die für diese Stellungnahme zu IKT-Implantaten von unmittelbarer Bedeutung sind. 

19  ABl. C 310 vom 16. Dezember 2004, S. 1 – 482. 
20  William Cheshire, Ethics and Medicine, Ausgabe 18:2, 2002. 

97

.

 
 
                                                 
•  Nichtinstrumentalisierung:  Die  ethische  Forderung,  Personen  nicht  bloß    als  Mittel  zum 

Zweck,  sondern  immer  als  Zweck  an  sich  zu  betrachten  (siehe  u.a.  Abschnitt  6.4.2  dieser 

Stellungnahme). 

•  Privatsphäre:  Der  ethische  Grundsatz,  das  Recht  einer  Person  auf  Privatsphäre  nicht  zu 

verletzen (siehe Artikel 7 und 8 der Charta der Grundrechte der Europäischen Union 21 und 

u.a. die Abschnitte 6.4.2 und 6.4.3 dieser Stellungnahme). 

•  Nichtdiskriminierung:  Menschen  verdienen  Gleichbehandlung,  es  sei  denn,  eine 

unterschiedliche Behandlung ist gerechtfertigt. Dies ist ein allgemein anerkannter Grundsatz, 

bei dem es in diesem Fall in erster Linie um die Bereitstellung von Gesundheitsdiensten geht 

(siehe u.a. Abschnitt 6.3.5 dieser Stellungnahme). 

•  Einwilligung  nach  vorheriger  Aufklärung:  Der  ethische  Grundsatz,  dass  Patienten  nicht 

ohne ihre freiwillige Zustimmung nach Aufklärung Behandlungen oder Versuchen unterzogen 

werden dürfen (siehe u.a. Abschnitt 6.3.3 dieser Stellungnahme). 

•  Gleichheit:  Der  ethische  Grundsatz,  dass  jeder  gleichberechtigten  Zugang  zu  Leistungen 

haben sollte. 

•  Vorsichtsprinzip:  Die  EGE  hat  betont,  dass  die  modernen 

Informations-  und 

Kommunikationstechnologien die Menschheit leistungsfähiger, zugleich aber auch anfälliger 

machen. Die Ethik sollte darauf abstellen, dass die Menschenrechte und Freiheitsrechte des 

Einzelnen gewahrt werden und insbesondere die Vertraulichkeit von Daten sichergestellt ist. 

Mit anderen Worten, die EGE hat als allgemeines ethisches Prinzip im Umgang mit Informa-

tions- und Kommunikationstechnologien zur Vorsicht geraten. Dieser Grundsatz impliziert die 

moralische  Verpflichtung  zu  einer  kontinuierlichen  Risikobewertung  in  Bezug  auf  die  nicht 

vollständig  vorhersehbaren  Auswirkungen  der  neuen  Technologien,  wie  im  Fall  der  IKT-

Implantate im menschlichen Körper 22. Bei dieser Bewertung geht es insbesondere um eine 

Untersuchung aktueller und künftiger Fälle, in denen die Verwendung von IKT-Implantaten im 

menschlichen  Körper  als  potenzielles  Risiko  oder  sogar  als  potenzielle  Bedrohung  für  die 

Menschenwürde  oder  andere  ethische  Grundsätze  angesehen  werden  kann.  Es  sei  darauf 

hingewiesen, dass es keine zuverlässigen wissenschaftlichen Erkenntnisse darüber gibt, ob 

IKT-Implantate  im  menschlichen  Körper  langfristige  gesundheitliche  Auswirkungen  haben 

21  Charta der Grundrechte der Europäischen Union, ABl. C 364 vom 18. Dezember 2000, S. 1-22. 
22  Vorsichtsprinzip: Artikel 174 der konsolidierten Fassung des Vertrags zur Gründung der Europäischen 

Gemeinschaft und Mitteilung der Kommission zum Vorsichtsprinzip (KOM (2000)1 vom 
2. Februar 2000). 

98

.

 
 
                                                 
können  (vgl.  "Rechtlicher  Rahmen",  Abschnitt 4.5;  siehe  auch  Abschnitt  6.5.1  dieser 

Stellungnahme). 

5.2. Wertekonflikte 

Denkbar  ist  ein  Konflikt  zwischen  der  Freiheit  des  Einzelnen,  die  eigenen  wirtschaftlichen 

Ressourcen  zum  Erwerb  eines  Implantats  zur  Steigerung  seiner  körperlichen  und  geistigen 

Fähigkeiten einzusetzen, und der Haltung der Gesellschaft in ihrer Gesamtheit zu der Frage, was 

wünschenswert und ethisch vertretbar ist. Ein weiterer möglicher Wertekonflikt besteht zwischen 

der  Überwachung  und  somit  der  Einschränkung  der  Freiheit  von  Personen,  von  denen  eine 

Gefahr  für  andere  ausgeht,  und  dem  Anliegen,  die  Sicherheit  der  anderen  zu  schützen.  Die 

Wissenschaftsfreiheit kann mit der Pflicht kollidieren, die Gesundheit von  Versuchspersonen zu 

schützen.  Anliegen  wie  Wettbewerbsfähigkeit 

und 

andere  wirtschaftliche  Werte 

(Wirtschaftswachstum)  gefährden  möglicherweise  die  Menschenwürde.  Die  uneingeschränkte 

Freiheit mancher kann die Gesundheit und Sicherheit anderer gefährden. Daher müssen all die 

Werte,  die  in  unserer  Kultur  ihre  Daseinsberechtigung  haben,  in  ein  ausgewogenes  Verhältnis 

zueinander gesetzt werden. 

Wie  in  anderen  Bereichen  auch  kann  die  Freiheit,  IKT-Implantate  im  eigenen  Körper  zu 

verwenden,  d.h.  der  Begriff  der  Freiheit  als  solcher,  mit  möglichen  sozialen  Negativfolgen 

kollidieren.  In  solchen  Fällen  können  sich  ethische  Beratung  sowie  eine  gesellschaftliche  und 

politische Debatte als erforderlich erweisen. 

Die  Grenze  zwischen  Wiederherstellung  und    Verbesserung  menschlicher  Fähigkeiten  ist 

fließend  (obwohl  es  eindeutige  Beispiele  für  beide  Fälle  gibt).  Es  bedarf  einer  rechtlichen 

Regelung, um zu vermeiden, dass die Gesellschaft im Bereich der sozialen Sicherungssysteme 

immer mehr von einer derartigen, in die Privatsphäre eingreifenden Technologie abhängig wird, 

während gleichzeitig die technische Perfektion  von IKT-Implantaten für zahlreiche medizinische 

Zwecke  sowie  rechtmäßige  soziale  Zwecke  hilfreich  ist.  Die  EGE  unterstreicht  daher  die 

Notwendigkeit einer alle Betroffenen einbeziehenden ständigen Debatte darüber, welche Formen 

der    Verbesserung  menschlicher  Fähigkeiten  unter  welchen  Voraussetzungen  und  in  welchen 

Fällen zulässig sein sollten (siehe Abschnitt 6.4.4 dieser Stellungnahme). 

Ein besonderer Fall, der Zweifel aufkommen lässt, ob es für menschliche Fähigkeiten denn eine 

allgemeine Norm gibt, sind Cochlear-Implantate für gehörlose Kinder. Die technologisch bedingte 

Propagierung  der  Cochlear-Implantate  wirft  ethische  Fragen  in  dem  Sinne  auf,  welche 

Konsequenzen dies für den Einzelnen und für die Gehörlosen-Gemeinschaft hat (insbesondere 

für  diejenigen,  die  sich  der  Gebärdensprache  bedienen).  Die  Frage  nach  der  sozialen 

99

.

 
 
Eingliederung der gehörlosen Person in die Gehörlosen-Gemeinschaft wird dabei nämlich nicht 

gestellt. Psychologische, sprachliche und soziologische Aspekte finden zu wenig Beachtung, und 

vor allem wird ein recht eigenartiges  Bild von der “Normalität” vermittelt. Nach Auffassung der 

EGE  bedarf  es  weiterer  Überlegungen  über  diese  Problematik  sowie  über  das  Risiko-Nutzen-

Verhältnis  und  das  Problem  des  gleichberechtigten  Zugangs  (unter  Berücksichtigung  der 

Unterscheidung zwischen unilateralen und bilateralen Cochlear-Implantaten). 

5.3. Erhebliche Wissenslücken in Bezug auf IKT-Implantate im menschlichen Körper 

Aus den bisherigen Ausführungen wird deutlich, dass es noch erhebliche Wissenslücken gibt, die 

sowohl für künftige Forschungsprogramme als auch für die primären ethischen Anliegen relevant 

sind. Letztere betreffen folgende Aspekte: 

Würde, Integrität und Autonomie des Menschen 

• 

Inwieweit  können  Implantate,  insbesondere  Gehirnimplantate  eine  Bedrohung  für  die 

Autonomie des Menschen darstellen? 

• 

Inwieweit  können  Implantate  irreversible  Folgen  für  den  Körper  und/oder  die  Psyche  des 

Menschen haben, und wie kann die Reversibilität bewahrt werden? 

•  Wie beeinflussen Implantate das Erinnerungsvermögen des Menschen? 

•  Hört  ein  Mensch  auf,  er  selbst  zu  sein,  wenn  Teile  seines  Körpers  –  insbesondere  das 

Gehirn –  durch  IKT-Implantate  ersetzt  oder  ergänzt  werden?  IKT-Implantate  können  zur 

Schaffung  “vernetzter  Menschen”  beitragen,  zu  denen  eine  Dauerverbindung  geschaltet 

werden  kann  und  die  so  konfiguriert  werden  könnten,  dass  sie  von  Zeit  zu  Zeit  Signale 

aussenden und empfangen, mit denen Bewegungen, Gewohnheiten und Kontakte nachvoll-

zogen und definiert werden können. Dies tastet zwangsläufig die Würde der Betroffenen an. 

Privatsphäre und Überwachung 

• 

• 

Inwieweit können IKT-Implantate eine Bedrohung für die Privatsphäre darstellen? 

Inwieweit  können 

IKT-Implantate  einer  Einzelperson  oder  einer  Gruppe  spezifische 

Fähigkeiten verleihen, die zu einer Bedrohung für die Gesellschaft werden können? 

•  Welche  Übergriffe  auf  die  Privatsphäre  durch  IKT-Implantate  als  Datenquellen  und/oder 

Datenempfänger sind in einem vernetzten Umfeld potenziell möglich? 

• 

In welchem Maße sollte ein Mensch der Kontrolle durch derartige Geräte bzw. durch deren 

Benutzer unterliegen? 

.

100

 
 
 Verbesserung menschlicher Fähigkeiten und Selbstverständnis des Menschen 

•  Was verbirgt sich hinter dem Konzept der " Verbesserung" menschlicher Fähigkeiten? 

•  Was ist unter der Perfektionierbarkeit des Menschen zu verstehen? 

•  Führt die mit Hilfe der IKT bewirkte Schaffung einer verbesserten “Rasse” zwangsläufig eine 

neue  Form  des  Rassismus  herbei?  Die  mögliche  industrielle  Nutzung  von  IKT-Implantaten 

wirft  die  Frage  der  Grenzziehung  auf,  wenn  es  darum  geht,  mit  Hilfe  dieser  Implantate 

effizientere Körper und Gehirne für wirtschaftliche Zwecke zu schaffen. Es geht auch um die 

Frage,  ob  IKT-Implantate  ein  kultureller  Sprung  in  der  menschlichen  Entwicklung  sind, 

ähnlich  wie  die  Erfindung  von  Maschinen  oder  die  Erfindung  von  Vorrichtungen  zur 

Ergänzung  und  Verbesserung  beispielsweise  des  menschlichen  Gedächtnisses  (durch 

Schreib-, Druck- oder Digitaltechnik) oder anderer Fähigkeiten des Menschen. 

• 

Inwieweit  sollte  die  Verwendung  von  IKT-Implantaten  zur  Erweiterung  der  Fähigkeiten  des 

Menschen zulässig sein? 

• 

Inwieweit  kann  ein  solches  Implantat  als  Teil  des  so  genannten  ‘Körperdesign’  angesehen 

werden,  einschließlich  der  frei  gewählten  Gestaltung  der  eigenen  (verbesserten  )  körper-

lichen und geistigen Fähigkeiten? 

Soziale Aspekte 

•  Wie ist das Verhältnis zu Personen, die IKT-Implantate mit Online-Verbindung tragen? 

• 

• 

Inwieweit sollten IKT-Implantate für den Beobachter unsichtbar bleiben? 

Inwieweit  können  die  Möglichkeiten  der  IKT  mit  Konzepten  wie  Kontrolle  oder  Effizienz 

verknüpft  werden,  was  dazu  führen  könnte,  dass  die  Menschen  noch  stärker  den 

Marktkräften  unterworfen  und  sogar  auf  die  Möglichkeit  angewiesen  sind,  diese  Technik 

(legal) am Arbeitsplatz einzusetzen? 

•  Wie verändert sich das soziale und kulturelle Umfeld durch IKT-Implantate? 

• 

Inwieweit  können  diese  Implantate  eingesetzt  werden,  um  Menschen  zu  orten,  und  in 

welchen Fällen sollte dies rechtlich zulässig sein? 

• 

In  welchem  Maße  ermöglicht  diese  Technologie  eine  Manipulation  durch  die  und  für  die 

Werbung? 

• 

In welchem Maße könnte diese Technologie durch das Militär missbraucht werden? 

.

101

 
 
 
Vorhersehbarkeit von Risiken 

• 

Inwieweit  ist  es  heute  möglich,  den  Nutzen  und  die  Gefahren  von  IKT-Implantaten 

vorherzusehen? 

IKT-Implantate, die besondere Vorsicht erfordern 

• 

IKT-Implantate, die nicht leicht entfernt werden können. 

• 

• 

IKT-Implantate, die psychische Funktionen beeinflussen, bestimmen oder verändern. 

IKT-Implantate, die aufgrund ihrer Netzfähigkeit auf unterschiedliche Weise für alle möglichen 

Formen  der  sozialen  Überwachung  und  Manipulation  missbraucht  werden  könnten, 

beispielsweise bei Kindern und Menschen mit Behinderung. 

• 

IKT-Implantate, die das Nervensystem und insbesondere das Gehirn beeinflussen und somit 

auf die Identität der Person als menschliches Wesen sowie die individuelle Subjektivität und 

Autonomie übergreifen. 

•  Militärische Verwendungszwecke. 

•  Unscharfe Trennung zwischen therapeutischer Anwendung und  Verbesserung menschlicher 

Fähigkeiten (siehe Abschnitt 6.4.4). 

•  Aufdringliche  Techniken, die an die Stelle der normalen Sinneserfahrung treten. 

• 

Implantate, die künftige Generationen biologisch und/oder kulturell beeinflussen werden. 

5.4. Frühere einschlägige Stellungnahmen der EGE 

Stellungnahme Nr. 14 zu den ethischen Aspekten des Doping im Sport 

In  ihrer  Stellungnahme  Nr. 14  hat  die  EGE  Folgendes  festgestellt:  “Es  besteht  die  dringende 

Notwendigkeit  von  Maßnahmen  zur  Berücksichtigung  des  grundlegenden  Wandels,  den  der 

Sport in diesem Jahrhundert unter dem Einfluss wachsender wirtschaftlicher Interessen und der 

Massenmedien  in  zunehmend  globalem  Maßstab  erfahren  hat.  Diese  Einflüsse  haben  die 

medizinischen  und  technischen  Entwicklungen  im  Sport  und  den  damit  zusammenhängenden 

Wirtschaftszweigen  beschleunigt  und  auch  den  Druck  erhöht,  dem  Sportler  ausgesetzt  sind. 

Folglich muss jedes Vorgehen gegen Doping unter dem Vorzeichen stehen, dass infolge dieses 

Wandels Leistung und Sieg heute wichtiger sind als Wettkampf und Dabeisein. Die EGE möchte 

daher  den  Konflikt  zwischen  der  Dopingbekämpfung  und  dem  unstillbaren  Drang  nach  mehr 

Leistung hervorheben.” 

.

102

 
 
Zwischen  dem  Doping 

im  Sport  und 

Implantaten, 

insbesondere  denjenigen  zur 

Leistungssteigerung, lässt sich leicht eine Parallele herstellen. 

Stellungnahme  Nr.  17  zu  den  ethischen  Aspekten  der  klinischen  Forschung 

in 

Entwicklungs-ländern 

Die meisten Empfehlungen der  Stellungnahme Nr. 17 der EGE zu den ethischen Aspekten der 

klinischen  Forschung  in  Entwicklungsländern  sind  in  Bezug  auf  klinische  Prüfungen  von  IKT-

Implantaten  auch  für  diese  Stellungnahme  relevant.  Dies  ist  von  besonderer  Bedeutung,  denn 

Medizinprodukte fallen nicht unter die Richtlinie 2001/20/EG des Europäischen Parlaments und 

des  Rates  vom  4. April  2001  zur  Angleichung  der  Rechts-  und  Verwaltungsvorschriften  der 

Mitgliedstaaten  über  die  Anwendung  der  guten  klinischen  Praxis  bei  der  Durchführung  von 

klinischen Prüfungen mit Humanarzneimitteln 23. 

5.5. Allgemeine ethische Fragen im Zusammenhang mit der Verwendung  

von IKT-Implantaten im menschlichen Körper 

In  früheren  Berichten  und  Stellungnahmen,  so  z.B.  zu  den  Themen  “Bürgerrechte  und  neue 

Technologien:  Eine  Herausforderung  für  Europa”  (23. Mai  2000)  und  “Ethische  Fragen  der 

Gesundheitsversorgung  in  der  Informationsgesellschaft”  (Stellungnahme  Nr. 13  vom  30. Juli 

1999),  hat  die  Gruppe  grundlegende  ethische  Werte  im  Zusammenhang  mit  den  Informations- 

und Kommunikationstechnologien herausgestellt, und zwar insbesondere: 

•  Verbesserung des Schutzes der Privatsphäre (Datenschutz) durch die Achtung des Rechts 

des  Einzelnen,  Grenzen  zu    bewahren  und  ein  Privatleben  sowie  Autonomie  und 

Vertraulichkeit zu bewahren; 

•  Stärkung  der  Position  des  Einzelnen  gegenüber  dem  Einsatz  von  Systemen,  die  seine 

Freiheit  und  Autonomie  einschränken  können  (Videoüberwachung,  Verhaltenskontrolle  und 

Erstellung  von  Persönlichkeitsprofilen  über  das  Internet)  oder  seine  Abhängigkeit  von 

Auswahl- und Entscheidungsmechanismen erhöhen können, die nicht transparent oder nicht 

nachvollziehbar sind. 

Der Mensch ist weder ein rein natürliches noch ein rein kulturelles Wesen. Er ist von Natur 

aus  auf  die  Möglichkeit  angewiesen,  einen  Wandel  vollziehen  zu  können.  Aus  dieser 

anthropomorphen 

  Sicht  können  die 

Informationstechnologien  als  Erweiterung  des 

Menschseins angesehen werden. Allerdings hat die Umwandlung des menschlichen Körpers 

Folgen für das kulturelle Umfeld des Menschen. Die Menschen verstehen sich unter diesen 

23  ABl. L 121 vom 1. Mai 2001, S. 34 - 44. 

103

.

 
 
                                                 
Vorzeichen als Teile eines komplexen, digitalen Systems natürlicher und künstlich erzeugter 

Botschaften.  So  gesehen  kann  der  menschliche  Körper  als  Datenträger  betrachtet  werden, 

wobei  diese  Sichtweise  weitreichende  kulturelle  Folgen  hat,  zumal  sie  höhere  Phänomene 

wie  die  menschliche  Psyche  und  Sprache  ausklammert  bzw.  hauptsächlich  unter  dem 

Gesichtspunkt  ihrer  Digitalisierung  einbezieht,  was  zu  einem  Reduktionismus  führt,  der  die 

komplexen Beziehungen zwischen menschlicher Leiblichkeit, Sprache und Vorstellungskraft 

grob vereinfacht. 

Darüber  hinaus  ermöglicht  eine  derartige 

reduktionistische  Sicht  unterschiedliche 

technologische  Entwicklungen  und  Erfindungen.  IKT-Implantate  im  menschlichen  Körper 

könnten  somit  eine  maßgebliche  Rolle  in  gesundheitlichen  Fragen  spielen  und  sogar  eine 

Steigerung der biologischen und/oder psychischen Fähigkeiten bewirken. Als Zukunftsvision 

wäre sogar eine Umwandlung des Menschengeschlechts vorstellbar. 

Wie  weit  darf  die  IKT  “unter  die  Haut”  gehen?  Ab  wann  stellen  IKT-Implantate  eine 

Bedrohung  für  die  Würde  des  menschlichen  Körpers,  seine  Identität  und  seine  Grundfunk-

tionen  dar?  IKT-Implantate  dienen  dem  Anschein  nach  hauptsächlich  der  menschlichen 

Gesundheit, wie z.B. Herzschrittmacher. Aber besteht nicht auch die Möglichkeit, IKT-Geräte 

für  andere  Zwecke  einzusetzen,  so  z.B.  durch  die  Verknüpfung  digitaler  Daten  in  einem 

vernetzten Umfeld? Wann könnte diese Technik beispielsweise zur Überwachung eingesetzt 

werden, und in welchen Fällen wäre dies rechtmäßig? Wo liegen die Gefahren im Verhältnis 

zu der erhofften Leistungssteigerung durch IKT-Implantate? 

Die Frage der Verwendung von IKT-Implantaten im menschlichen Körper ist also zwischen 

zwei  Extremen  angesiedelt:  Auf  der  einen  Seite  geht  es  um  den  Schutz  des  natürlichen 

menschlichen  Körpers,  d.h.  um  die  Verwendung  von  IKT-Implantaten  für  medizinische 

Zwecke, und zum anderen um die Möglichkeit der Ausschaltung des menschlichen Körpers 

in  seiner  heutigen  Form  und  seine  Ersetzung  durch  ein  künstliches  Gebilde  (mit  allen 

Möglichkeiten, die zwischen diesen beiden  

Extremen  liegen).  Die  Menschenwürde  ergibt  sich  aus  dem  Menschsein  als  leibhaftiges 

Selbst. Daher kann die Frage der Autonomie und der Achtung des Selbst nicht von der Frage 

des  leiblichen  Wohls  und  der  möglichen  Veränderungen  durch  IKT-Implantate  getrennt 

werden. 

.

104

 
 
 
STELLUNGNAHME DER EGE: 

Vor diesem Hintergrund gibt die Europäische Gruppe für Ethik in Naturwissenschaften 

und neuen Technologien die folgende Stellungnahme ab: 

6.1. Gegenstand 

Diese Stellungnahme legt den Schwerpunkt auf Fragen der Verwendung von IKT-Implantaten im 

menschlichen  Körper.  Sie  deckt  nicht  den  gesamten  Bereich  der  IKT-Geräte  oder  den  Bereich 

des  wearable  computing  (in  Kleidungsstücke  integrierte  Computer)  im  Allgemeinen  ab,  auch 

wenn  es  Fälle  geben  mag,  in  denen  derartige  Geräte  als  Quasi-Implantate  angesehen  werden 

können. 

Die  Stellungnahme  betrifft  auch  nicht  die  Frage  der  IKT-Implantate  bei  Tieren,  obwohl  sich  in 

diesem Bereich Beispiele für mögliche Verwendungen beim Menschen finden lassen. 

Gegenstand  dieser  Stellungnahme  sind  die  ethischen  Probleme  im  Zusammenhang  mit  den 

potenziellen  oder  tatsächlichen  Möglichkeiten  des  Online-Zugriffs  auf  IKT-Implantate  sowie  auf 

Stand-alone-Geräte (d.h. solche, die nicht Teil eines Netzes sind). 

In  der  Regel  sind  es  rechtliche  Grundsätze  und  Vorschriften,  mit  denen  technologische 

Fehlentwicklungen  aufgehalten  werden  und  mit  denen  verdeutlicht  wird,  dass  nicht  alles,  was 

technisch möglich ist, auch ethisch vertretbar, gesellschaftlich akzeptabel und rechtlich zulässig 

ist. Andererseits kann einer mit zahllosen Anwendungsmöglichkeiten aufstrebenden Technologie  

ein schwaches und schlussendlich nicht zu begründendes Gesetz nicht Einhalt gebieten. Daher 

ist  es  notwendig,  sich  stets  auf  starke  Werte  zu  berufen,  die  die  Konstitutionalisierung  des 

Individuums  mit  Leben  erfüllen  können;  Letzteres  ist  das  Ergebnis  eines  komplexen  Vorgangs 

und  wurde  in  der  Charta  der  Grundrechte  der  EU  verankert,  in  der  bereits  in  der  Präambel 

ausdrücklich festgestellt wird, dass die Union “den Menschen in den Mittelpunkt ihres Handelns” 

stellt. 

"Niemand soll Hand an dich legen." So lautete das Versprechen der Magna Carta – den Körper in 

seiner  Gesamtheit  zu  achten:  Habeas  Corpus.  Dieses  Versprechen  hat  alle  technologischen 

Entwicklungen überdauert. Jeder Eingriff am Körper und jede Form der Verarbeitung persönlicher 

Daten ist zum Leib in seiner Gesamtheit in Bezug zu setzen, d.h. zu einem Individuum, dessen 

körperliche  und  geistige  Integrität  zu  achten  ist.  Dies  ist  ein  neues  ganzheitliches  Konzept  des 

Individiums, mit dessen praktischer Umsetzung das Recht auf uneingeschränkte Achtung eines 

Körpers  einhergeht,  der  heutzutage  physische  und  elektronische  Komponenten  umfasst.  In 

dieser  neuen  Welt  hat  der  Datenschutz  das  durch  die  geänderten  Umstände  erforderlich 

.

105

 
 
gewordene  Konzept  des  "Habeas  Data"  sicherzustellen  und  wird  somit  –  wie  seinerzeit  der 

Grundsatz des Habeas Corpus – zu einem unverzichtbaren Bestandteil der Zivilisation. 

Gleichzeitig  ist  dieser  Körper  immer  unvollendet.  Er  kann  manipuliert  werden,  um  Funktionen 

wiederherzustellen, die dem Menschen abhanden gekommen sind oder die er nie besessen hat – 

man denke an Verkrüppelung, Blindheit oder Gehörlosigkeit; oder aber der Körper kann seinen 

anthropologischen Normalzustand übertreffen, indem seine Funktionen gesteigert und/oder neue 

Funktionen  ermöglicht  werden  –  wiederum  im  Interesse  des  Wohls  der  Person  und/oder  ihrer 

Wettbewerbsfähigkeit,  wie 

z.B. 

im  Fall 

sportlicher  Leistungssteigerung  oder  bei 

"Intelligenzprothesen".  Die  Gesellschaft  muss  sich  mit  den  Technologien  zur  Wiederherstellung 

wie  auch  zur  Steigerung  menschlicher  Fähigkeiten  auseinander  setzen,  mit  der  Ausbreitung 

körperorientierter  Technologien,  die  das  Konzept  der  "Körperpflege"  erweitern  und  modifizieren 

können  und  die  Ankunft  der  "Cyborgs"  –  der  posthumane  Körper –  ankündigen.  "In  unserer 

Gesellschaft  wird  der  Körper 

immer  mehr  zu  einem  Rohstoff,  der  entsprechend  den 

Umweltgegebenheiten  geformt  werden  kann."  Die  Möglichkeiten  der  Konfiguration  für  den 

individuellen  Bedarf  nehmen  ohne  Zweifel  zu,  ebenso  wie  die  Möglichkeiten  für  politische 

Maßnahmen mit dem Ziel einer Kontrolle des Körpers mit technischen Mitteln. 

Die bloße Reduzierung des Körpers auf eine technische Vorrichtung fördert nicht nur den bereits 

erwähnten Trend, diesen Körper immer mehr in ein Instrument zur ständigen Überwachung der 

Menschen zu verwandeln, sondern die Menschen werden ihrer Körper und damit ihrer Autonomie 

regelrecht  beraubt.  Schlussendlich  unterliegt  der  Körper  der  Kontrolle  anderer.  Was  hat  ein 

Mensch noch zu erwarten, wenn ihm der eigene Körper genommen wurde? 

6.2. IKT-Implantate und Menschenwürde 

Die  Achtung  der  Menschenwürde  muss  die  Grundlage  für  die  Diskussionen    über  die  Frage 

bilden,  wo  bei  den  verschiedenen  Verwendungsmöglichkeiten  für  IKT-Implantate  die  Grenzen 

gezogen werden sollten. 

Nach Auffassung der Gruppe stellen IKT-Implantate nicht an sich eine Gefahr für die Freiheit und 

Würde des Menschen dar, doch muss bei Verwendungen, die beispielsweise die Überwachung 

von  Einzelpersonen  und/oder  Gruppen  ermöglichen,  die  potenzielle  Einschränkung  der  Freiheit 

sorgfältig  abgeschätzt  werden  (siehe  Abschnitt  6.4.6).  Der  Schutz  der  Gesundheit  und/oder 

Sicherheit von Menschen mit schweren neurologischen Störungen mit Hilfe von IKT-Implantaten 

erzeugt nicht notwendigerweise ein ethisches Dilemma zwischen der Unantastbarkeit der Freiheit 

und  der  Notwendigkeit  des  Gesundheitsschutzes.  Dennoch  sollte  auch  in  diesen  Fällen  die 

.

106

 
 
Verwendung  von  Implantaten  keinerlei  den  Menschenrechten  zuwiderlaufende  Diskriminierung 

oder missbräuchliche Verwendung nach sich ziehen. 

6.3. IKT-Implantate für medizinische Zwecke 

Selbstverständlich  ist  eine  Einwilligung  nach  vorheriger  Aufklärung  erforderlich,  wenn  IKT-

Implantate zu medizinischen Zwecken verwendet werden sollen. Die Aufklärung sollte nicht nur 

auf  den  möglichen  Nutzen  und  die  Gesundheitsrisiken  abstellen,  sondern  auch  auf  das  Risiko, 

dass diese Implantate genutzt werden könnten, um den Aufenthaltsort von Personen zu ermitteln 

und/oder Zugang zu den in den Geräten gespeicherten Daten zu erhalten, ohne dass zuvor die 

Zustimmung der Implantatträger eingeholt wird. Wenn die Risiken nur schwer abschätzbar sind, 

sollte darauf bei der Aufklärung ausdrücklich hingewiesen werden. 

Für die Implantierung von IKT-Geräten zu medizinischen Zwecken sollten folgende Grundsätze 

gelten: 

a)  Das verfolgte Ziel muss wichtig sein, wie etwa die Rettung von Menschenleben, die Wieder-

herstellung der Gesundheit oder die Verbesserung der Lebensqualität. 

b)  Das Implantat muss notwendig sein, um dieses Ziel zu erreichen. 

c)  Es darf kein weniger invasives und kostengünstigeres Verfahren zur Verwirklichung des Ziels 

existieren. 

Die  Frage 

der 

aus 

biologischen 

und 

künstlichen  Komponenten 

bestehenden 

Kombinationsimplantate  sollte  besonders  geprüft  werden,  wobei  die  damit  verbundenen 

Probleme und Möglichkeiten zu berücksichtigen sind. 

6.3.1. Individuum und Netz 

In dem Maße, wie ein Individuum durch das Tragen eines IKT-Implantats Teil eines IKT-Netzes 

wird,  muss  der  Betrieb  des  gesamten  Netzes –  und  nicht  nur  des  IKT-Implantats –  betrachtet 

werden. Es ist besonders wichtig, dass die Kontrolle über das Netz (wer hat Zugang dazu, wer 

kann Daten daraus abfragen, wer kann Änderungen daran vornehmen usw.) transparent ist. Dies 

beruht  auf  dem  Grundsatz  der  Achtung  der  Person  sowie  dem  Grundsatz  der 

Schadensvermeidung. 

6.3.2. Freiheit der Forschung 

Wenn  auch  die  Notwendigkeit  von  Forschungsarbeiten  gelegentlich  in  Frage  gestellt  werden 

kann, so ist neues Wissen für die Weiterentwicklung von Individuum und Gesellschaft doch von 

wesentlicher  Bedeutung.  Die  Freiheit  der  Forschung  muss  jedoch  in  der  Achtung  anderer 

107

.

 
 
wichtiger  Werte  und  ethischer  Prinzipien –  etwa  Achtung  der  Person  und  obligatorische 

Vermeidung 

physischer, 

psychischer 

und 

wirtschaftlicher 

Schäden 

für 

die 

Forschungsteilnehmer – ihre Grenzen finden. 

Das ethische Konzept der Unversehrtheit des menschlichen Körpers sollte nicht als Hemmnis für 

den Fortschritt in Wissenschaft und Technik, sondern als ein Schutzwall gegen den potenziellen 

Missbrauch dieses Fortschritts betrachtet werden. 

Die Freiheit der Forschung auf diesem Gebiet sollte nicht nur von der in Kenntnis der Sachlage 

gegebenen  Zustimmung  der  Betroffenen  abhängig  gemacht  werden,  die  ihre  Bereitschaft  zur 

Teilnahme an neuen Versuchen zur Wiederherstellung der Gesundheit bekundet haben, sondern 

auch von der Sensibilisierung in Bezug auf eine potenzielle – nicht nur körperliche, sondern auch 

psychische – Schädigung der an klinischen Versuchen teilnehmenden Personen (siehe Stellung-

nahme Nr. 17 der EGE vom Februar 2003 über die ethischen Aspekte der klinischen Forschung 

in Entwicklungsländern). 

6.3.3. Teilnahme an Forschungsarbeiten zu IKT-Implantaten 

Es bedarf einer Einwilligung nach vorheriger Aufklärung, wenn beispielsweise die Auswirkungen 

des Einsatzes von IKT-Implantaten an gesunden Freiwilligen oder an Patienten erforscht werden 

sollen. Die Aufklärung sollte nicht nur auf den möglichen Nutzen und bestehende Gesundheits-

risiken abstellen, sondern auch auf das Risiko, dass diese Implantate genutzt werden könnten, 

um  den  Aufenthaltsort  von  Personen  zu  ermitteln  und/oder  Zugang  zu  den  in  den  Geräten 

gespeicherten Daten zu erhalten, ohne dass zuvor die Zustimmung der Implantatträger eingeholt 

wird. Das Recht, die Teilnahme an einem Forschungsprojekt jederzeit abzubrechen, sollte stets 

geachtet werden, und den Teilnehmern sollte genau mitgeteilt werden, wie dieses Recht (wenn 

ein IKT-Gerät im Körper einer Person implantiert ist) in der Praxis geachtet wird. 

6.3.4. IKT-Implantate, Minderjährige und geschäftsunfähige Personen 

Die  Einwilligung  nach  vorheriger  Aufklärung  ist  ein  ethischer  Grundsatz,  der  auch  für  IKT-

Implantate  im  menschlichen  Körper  gilt.  Dies  bedarf  jedoch  noch  der  näheren  Spezifikation, 

insbesondere dann, wenn Personen aufgrund ihres Alters (Kinder, alte Menschen) und/oder ihrer 

psychischen  Konstitution  IKT-Implantate  zur  Gesundheitsüberwachung  erhalten  sollen.  IKT-

Geräte  sollten  Minderjährigen  und  geschäftsunfähigen  Personen  nur  dann  implantiert  werden, 

wenn  dies  im  Einklang  mit  dem  Übereinkommen  des  Europarats  über  Menschenrechte  und 

Biomedizin geschieht. 

.

108

 
 
Besondere  Aufmerksamkeit  sollte  der  Frage  der  Cochlear-Implantate  für  Kinder  gewidmet 

werden (siehe Abschnitt 5.2 "Wertekonflikte"). 

6.3.5. Zugang zu IKT-Implantaten für medizinische Zwecke 

Es sollte ein fairer Zugang zu IKT-Implantaten für medizinische Zwecke bestehen. Dies bedeutet, 

dass  der  Zugang  nach  gesundheitlichen  Kriterien  und  nicht  nach  wirtschaftlichen  Mitteln  oder 

sozialer Stellung gewährt werden sollte.. 

6.3.6. Irreversible Implantierung von IKT-Geräten 

In  den  Fällen,  in  denen  die  Implantierung  von  IKT-Geräten  nicht  wieder  rückgängig  gemacht 

werden kann und die Geräte nicht ohne erhebliche Gesundheitsschäden oder nicht ohne Gefahr 

für  das  Leben  des  Betreffenden  wieder  aus  dem  Körper  entfernt  werden  können,  sind  die 

Anforderungen  an  die  Einwilligung  nach  vorheriger  Aufklärung  und  an  den  Datenschutz 

(insbesondere der Schutz der Privatsphäre und der Vertraulichkeit der Daten) strikt einzuhalten. 

Die  betreffenden  Implantate  sollten  nur  dann  für  Forschungszwecke  verwendet  werden,  wenn 

das Ziel der Forschung die Erzielung eines eindeutigen therapeutischen Nutzens für die Person 

ist, an der die Forschungsarbeiten durchgeführt werden. 

6.4. 

IKT-Implantate für nichtmedizinische Zwecke 

Auch  die  große  Bandbreite  der  potenziellen  nichtmedizinischen  Anwendungen  von  IKT-Implan-

taten setzt eine Einwilligung nach vorheriger Aufklärung sowie die Achtung der Privatsphäre usw. 

voraus. Einige dieser Anwendungen werden in den nachstehenden Abschnitten untersucht. Die 

EGE vertritt generell die Auffassung, dass nichtmedizinische Anwendungen von IKT-Implantaten 

eine potenzielle Bedrohung der Menschenwürde und der demokratischen Gesellschaft darstellen. 

Daher  sollten  bei  den  betreffenden  Anwendungen  unter  allen  Umständen  der  Grundsatz  der 

Einwilligung nach vorheriger Aufklärung und der Grundsatz der Verhältnismäßigkeit eingehalten 

werden;  und  immer,  wenn  es  um  Überwachungszwecke  geht,  sollten  die  in  Abschnitt 6.4.6 

dargelegten Regeln eingehalten werden. 

Die EGE betont, dass in den Fällen, in denen Erwachsene in Kenntnis der Sachlage bestimmten 

Anwendungen  zugestimmt  haben,  die  bereitgestellten  Informationen  eindeutige  Angaben  zu 

möglichen  kurz-  und/oder 

langfristigen  Gesundheitsstörungen  sowie  zu  Problemen 

im Zusammenhang mit unfreiwilliger Datenweitergabe enthalten sollten. 

6.4.1. Mentale Funktionen und persönliche Identität 

Die persönliche Identität ist nach vielen ethischen Theorien von ausschlaggebender Bedeutung 

für  die  Zuweisung  moralischer  Verantwortung.  Daher  sollten  IKT-Geräte  nicht  zur  Manipulation 

109

.

 
 
mentaler Funktionen oder zur Änderung der persönlichen Identität verwendet werden. Grundlage 

hierfür ist das Recht auf Achtung der Menschenwürde einschließlich des Rechts auf Achtung der 

physischen und psychischen Unversehrtheit. 

6.4.2. IKT-Implantate und personenbezogene Daten 

In diesem Bereich müssen die Grundsätze des Datenschutzes eingehalten werden, da mit Hilfe 

von IKT-Implantaten Daten über den menschlichen Körper generiert werden können. Der private 

Charakter und die Vertraulichkeit dieser Daten müssen geschützt werden. Jeder Einzelne hat das 

Recht zu bestimmen, welche ihn betreffenden Daten von wem und zu welchem Zweck verarbeitet 

werden  dürfen.  Von  grundlegender  Bedeutung  ist  insbesondere  das  Recht  jedes  Einzelnen  zu 

bestimmen, wer zu welchem Zweck Zugang zu diesen Daten haben soll. 

Diese Rechte sind besonders wichtig in den Fällen, in denen IKT-Implantate mit einem Online-

System  betrieben  werden,  und 

insbesondere  dann,  wenn  die 

Implantate  Teil  eines 

Überwachungssystems  sind.  Damit  betont  die  EGE,  dass  es  wichtig  ist,  dass  nicht  nur  jeder 

Einzelne  das  Recht  hat,  seine  eigenen  personenbezogenen  Daten  zu  schützen,  sondern  dass 

auch  die  Gesellschaft  darauf  zu  achten  hat,  dass  diese  Systeme –  in  den  Fällen,  in  denen  sie 

zugelassen  sind –  sich  nicht  zu  Systemen  entwickeln,  in  denen  grundlegende  Rechte  auf 

unhaltbare  Weise  eingeschränkt  oder  sogar  negiert  werden.  Dies  sollte  insbesondere  dann 

beachtet  werden,  wenn  diese  Systeme  Teile  von  Gesundheitsversorgungssystemen  werden,  in 

denen Daten permanent oder gelegentlich an Dritte weitergegeben werden. Die Verwendung von 

IKT-Implantaten  mit  dem  Ziel,  eine  Fernkontrolle  über  den  Willen  von  Menschen  ausüben  zu 

können, sollte strengstens verboten werden. 

Es  sollten  Rechtsvorschriften  und  Leitlinien  ausgearbeitet  werden,  die  dies  sicherstellen.  Die 

Zuständigkeit hierfür liegt nach wie vor bei den Mitgliedstaaten. Die EGE schlägt jedoch vor, dass 

die Europäische Kommission den betreffenden Prozess anstoßen sollte (siehe Abschnitt 6.5.4). 

6.4.3. Schutz der Privatsphäre und IKT-Implantate 

Sofern  die  IKT-Geräte  entsprechend  den  in  dieser  Stellungnahme  dargelegten  Grundsätzen 

implantiert werden, ist es nicht erforderlich, die Implantate offenzulegen. Sie könnten und sollten 

externen  Beobachtern  gegenüber  verborgen  bleiben.  Das  Recht  auf  Schutz  der  Privatsphäre 

schließt das Recht auf Tragen eines IKT-Implantats ein. 

6.4.4. IKT-Implantate und Steigerung physischer und mentaler Fähigkeiten 

Es  sollte  erreicht  werden,  dass  IKT-Implantate  nicht  zur  Schaffung  einer  Zwei-Klassen-

Gesellschaft oder zur Vergrößerung der Kluft zwischen den Industrieländern und dem Rest der 

110

.

 
 
Welt  verwendet  werden.  Die  Implantierung  von  IKT-Geräten  zur    Verbesserung  menschlicher 

Fähigkeiten sollte nur zulässig sein, 

•  um Kinder und Erwachsene in die "normale" 24 Bandbreite der Bevölkerung zu bringen, wenn 

sie dies wünschen und nach vorheriger Aufklärung ihre Einwilligung erteilen, oder 

•  um die gesundheitlichen Aussichten zu verbessern (um beispielsweise das Immunsystem zu 

stärken, damit es HIV-resistent wird). 

•  Wie bei der Verwendung für medizinische Zwecke sollte der Einsatz von IKT-Implantaten für 

diese  Zwecke  auf  die  Notwendigkeit  und  nicht  auf  wirtschaftliche  Mittel  oder  die  soziale 

Stellung abstellen. 

•  Die EGE betont, dass folgende Verwendungsmöglichkeiten verboten werden sollten: 

•  Verwendung von IKT-Implantaten als Grundlage für Cyber-Rassismus; 

•  Verwendung von IKT-Implantaten zur Änderung der Identität, des Gedächtnisses sowie der 

Selbstwahrnehmung und der Wahrnehmung Anderer; 

•  Verwendung  von  IKT-Implantaten  zur  Steigerung  der  eigenen  Fähigkeiten  mit  dem  Ziel, 

andere zu beherrschen; 

•  Verwendung  von  IKT-Implantaten,  um  Zwang  auf  andere  auszuüben,  die  derartige  Geräte 

nicht verwenden. 

6.4.5. IKT-Implantate, Vermarktung und Verbraucherinteressen 

Obwohl der menschliche Körper an sich nicht zur Gewinnerzielung verwendet werden sollte, gibt 

es –  wie  im  wissenschaftlichen  Teil  dieses  Berichts  aufgeführt –  bereits  einen  kommerziellen 

Markt  für  verschiedene  Arten  von  IKT-Geräten.  Es  ist  wichtig,  dass  diese  Produkte  nicht  ohne 

angemessene  Kontrolle  auf  den  Markt  gebracht  werden.  So  sollten  Produkte,  die  als 

medizinische  Produkte  eingestuft  werden  können,  entsprechend  dem  hierfür  geltenden 

rechtlichen Rahmen kontrolliert werden. Es sollte erreicht werden, dass alle IKT-Geräte vor dem 

Inverkehrbringen auf ihre Sicherheit und sichere Verwendung überprüft werden. 

6.4.6. Verwendung von IKT-Implantaten für Überwachungszwecke 

Für  Überwachungszwecke  verwendete  IKT-Implantate  stellen  eine  besondere  Bedrohung  der 

Würde  des  Menschen  dar.  Sie  könnten  von  staatlichen  Stellen,  Einzelpersonen  und  Gruppen 

24  Der Begriff "normal" ist nicht sehr präzise. Die Verwendung des Begriffs hier in Abschnitt 6.4.4 stellt 

jedoch auf den allgemein vorherrschenden Zustand ohne genetische Fehlfunktion, Krankheit, 
Defizienz oder feststellbare Anomalien ab. 

111

.

 
 
                                                 
verwendet werden, um ihre Macht über Andere zu vergrößern. Die Implantate könnten verwendet 

werden, um den Aufenthaltsort von Personen zu ermitteln (und auch andere Arten von Informa-

tionen  über  sie  zu  beschaffen).  Dies  ließe  sich  mit  der  allgemeinen  Sicherheit  (vorzeitige  Frei-

lassung von Inhaftierten) oder der vorbeugenden Sicherheit (Auffinden von gefährdeten Kindern) 

begründen. 

Die  EGE  vertritt  jedoch  nachdrücklich  die  Auffassung,  dass  derartige  Überwachungsfunktionen 

von  IKT-Implantaten  nur  zugelassen  werden  dürfen,  wenn  nach  Auffassung  des  Gesetzgebers 

für  eine  demokratische  Gesellschaft  die  dringende  und  begründete  Notwendigkeit  besteht 

(Artikel 8  der  Menschenrechtskonvention)  und  wenn  keine  weniger  invasiven  Methoden  zur 

Verfügung stehen. Die EGE ist jedoch nicht für derartige Verwendungen; ihres Erachtens müssen 

Überwachungsanwendungen  unter  allen  Umständen 

in  Rechtsvorschriften  geregelt  sein. 

Überwachungsverfahren in Einzelfällen sollten von einem unabhängigen Gericht genehmigt und 

überprüft werden. 

Die  gleichen  allgemeinen  Grundsätze  sollten  für  die  Verwendung  von  IKT-Implantaten  für 

militärische Zwecke gelten. 

6.5 Allgemeine Erwägungen 

6.5.1 . Entwicklung der Informationsgesellschaft 

Nach Auffassung der EGE sind die ethischen Fragen in Zusammenhang mit der Verwendung von 

IKT-Implantaten  im  menschlichen  Körper  eng  mit  der  Entwicklung  der  Informationsgesellschaft 

insgesamt  verknüpft.  Die  EGE  tritt  nachdrücklich  für  eine  den  Menschen  in  den  Mittelpunkt 

rückende,  integrative  und  entwicklungsorientierte  Konzeption  der  Informationsgesellschaft  ein, 

wie sie in der Grundsatzerklärung des Weltgipfels über die Informationsgesellschaft (Genf, 2003) 

proklamiert wurde. 

6.5.2. Öffentliche Debatte und Information 

Es  muss  eine  breit  angelegte  gesellschaftliche  und  politische  Debatte  darüber  geführt  werden, 

welche  Arten  von  IKT-Anwendungen  akzeptabel  sind  und  rechtlich  zulässig  sein  sollten,  wobei 

insbesondere  auf  diejenigen  Anwendungen  einzugehen  wäre,  die  auf  eine    Verbesserung 

menschlicher  Fähigkeiten  oder  eine  Überwachung  abstellen.  Die  EGE  spricht  sich  dafür  aus, 

dass  hier  auf  das  Vorsichtsprinzip  zurückgegriffen  wird.  Es  liegt  in  der  Verantwortung  der 

Mitgliedstaaten  und 

ihrer 

jeweiligen  Ethikräte  (oder  entsprechenden  Einrichtungen),  die 

Bedingungen für Aufklärungs- und Bildungsarbeit und für konstruktive, durch Sachinformationen 

untermauerte Diskussionen zu diesem Fragenbereich zu schaffen. 

.

112

 
 
6.5.3. Demokratie und Entscheidungsmacht 

Diese  Stellungnahme  unterscheidet  sich 

insofern  von  verschiedenen 

früheren  EGE-

Stellungnahmen, als in ihr ein neuer, in rascher Ausdehnung begriffener Bereich erkundet wird. 

Die  Stellungnahme  enthält  die  Kernpunkte,  die  die  verantwortlichen  Regelungsinstanzen  in 

Europa künftig auf die Tagesordnung setzen müssen. 

Im  Interesse  der  Transparenz  bedarf  es  einer  öffentlichen  Debatte  sowie  Aufklärungs-  und 

Bildungsarbeit; die Mitgliedstaaten tragen die Verantwortung dafür, dass über die Entwicklungs-

leitlinien  und  über  den  Zugang  zu  IKT-Implantaten  im  Wege  demokratischer  Verfahren 

entschieden wird. 

6.5.4. Regelungsbedarf 

Es  liegt  auf  der  Hand,  dass  dieser  Bereich  einer  Regelung  bedarf.  Nichtmedizinische  IKT-

Implantate im menschlichen Körper werden, insbesondere was den Schutz der Privatsphäre und 

den Datenschutz betrifft, durch die gegenwärtigen Rechtsvorschriften nicht ausdrücklich erfasst. 

Jede  einschlägige  Regelung  muss  auf  folgenden  Grundsätzen  beruhen:  Menschenwürde, 

Menschenrechte,  Gleichberechtigung,  Autonomie  und  die  davon  abgeleiteten  Grundsätze, 

Vorsorge,  Datenminimierung,  Zweckangabe,  Verhältnismäßigkeit  und  Relevanz 

(siehe 

Abschnitte 4 und 5). 

Nach Ansicht der EGE sollten für die Implantierung von Geräten zu medizinischen Zwecken die 

gleichen Regeln gelten wie für die Verwendung von Arzneimitteln, wenn damit jeweils das gleiche 

medizinische  Ziel  verfolgt  wird,  zumal  da  solche  Implantate  nur  teilweise  durch  die  Richtlinie 

90/385/EWG des Rates zur Angleichung der Rechtsvorschriften der Mitgliedstaaten über aktive 

implantierbare medizinische Geräte erfasst werden. 

Die EGE spricht sich dafür aus, dass die Europäische Kommission Initiativen zur Rechtssetzung 

für diese Verwendungszwecke von IKT-Implantaten ergreift. 

6.5.5. Folgenforschung und IKT-Geräte 

Die langfristigen gesellschaftlichen, kulturellen und gesundheitlichen Auswirkungen der verschie-

denen Arten von IKT-Implantaten müssen noch eingehender untersucht werden; das besondere 

Augenmerk  hat  dabei  der  Beschreibung  und  Bewertung  der  Risiken  sowie  dem 

Risikomanagement  und  der  Risikokommunikation  zu  gelten.  Nach  Ansicht  der  EGE  sollte  dies 

beim siebten EU-Forschungsrahmenprogramm berücksichtigt werden. Es ist von entscheidender 

Bedeutung,  dass 

in  diesem  sich 

rasch  entwickelnden  Bereich  solche  vorsorglichen 

Forschungsarbeiten durchgeführt werden. 

113

.

 
 
6.5.6. Erfordernis einer neuerlichen Prüfung 

Der  Bereich  der  IKT-Implantate  steckt  noch  in  den  Kinderschuhen  und  die  Entwicklungen  hier 

schreiten  rasch  voran,  was  in  der  Gesellschaft  sowohl  Ängste  als  auch  Hoffnungen  weckt. 

Dementsprechend  hat  sich  die  EGE  mit  den  ethischen  Kernfragen  in  Zusammenhang  mit  den 

gegenwärtigen und den derzeit vorhersehbaren Entwicklungen befasst. Doch selbstverständlich 

wird  die  EGE  später  auf  dieses  Thema  zurückkommen  müssen,  um  Neuerungen  bei  der 

Verwendung  von  IKT-Implantaten  Rechnung  zu  tragen  und  ihre  Empfehlungen  entsprechend 

anzupassen.  Besonders  sorgfältig  werden  Entwicklungen  verfolgt  werden  müssen,  die  auf  den 

ersten Blick harmlos erscheinen (z. B. weil sie auf die Behandlung eines schweren Gesundheits-

problems  abstellen),  aber  sich  als  nicht  so  harmlos  erweisen,  wenn  sie  für  andere  Zwecke 

genutzt werden. Daher könnte es in etwa drei bis fünf Jahren notwendig werden, dass die EGE 

diese Stellungnahme einer Überprüfung unterzieht. 

Die Europäische Gruppe für Ethik in Naturwissenschaften und neuen Technologien 

Der Vorsitzende: Göran Hermerén 

Die Mitglieder: 

Nicos C. Alivizatos 

Inez de Beaufort 

Rafael Capurro 

Yvon Englert 

Catherine Labrusse-Riou 

Anne McLaren 

Linda Nielsen 

Pere Puigdomenech-Rosell 

Stefano Rodota 

Günter Virt 

Peter Whittaker 

.

114

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“ICT Implants in the Human Body” 
A Review 

by 

Dr Fabienne NSANZE, 

European Commission Trainee with the Secretariat of the European Group on Ethics in 
Science and New Technologies 

February 2005 

.

115

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.

 
 
 
Table of contents 

INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................. 119 

1  CATEGORISATION OF THE IMPLANTABLE DEVICES .......................... 120 

2  IMPLANTABLE DEVICES ALREADY AVAILABLE ON THE MARKET ... 121 

2.1 

CURRENT ACTIVE MEDICAL DEVICES ............................................ 121 

2.1.1  CARDIOVASCULAR PACERS FOR PATIENTS WITH  

CONDUCTION DISORDERS OR HEART FAILURE..............................121 
2.1.2  COCHLEAR IMPLANTS .....................................................................................122 
2.1.3  AUDITORY BRAINSTEM IMPLANT (ABI)..............................................123 
2.1.4  IMPLANTABLE PROGRAMMABLE DRUG DELIVERY PUMPS ...........124 
2.1.5  IMPLANTABLE NEUROSTIMULATION DEVICES ..............................124 
2.1.6  DEEP BRAIN STIMULATION (DBS) ..........................................................126 
2.1.7  ARTIFICIAL CHIP-CONTROLLED LEG .....................................................127 
CURRENT IDENTIFICATION AND LOCATION DEVICES ..... 128 

2.2 

2.2.1  INTRODUCTION: THE THREE EMBODIMENTS OF 

2.3 

MICROCHIP DEVICES.......................................................................................128 
2.2.2  RFID DEVICES......................................................................................................129 
CURRENT COMMODITY DEVICES ...................................................... 134 
2.3.1  CREDIT CARD IMPLANT..................................................................................134 
2.3.2  REMOTE-CONTROL ORGASM IMPLANT: ORGASMATRONS........134 

3  IMPLANTABLE DEVICES UNDER DEVELOPMENT ................................ 135 

3.1 

FUTURE ACTIVE MEDICAL DEVICES ............................................... 135 
3.1.1     BIOSENSORS........................................................................................................135 
3.1.2  ARTIFICIAL HIPPOCAMPUS.........................................................................136 
3.1.3  CORTICAL IMPLANT FOR THE BLIND.....................................................138 
3.1.4  OCULAR IMPLANT OR ARTIFICIAL RETINA.......................................139 
3.1.5  BRAIN-COMPUTER INTERFACES (BCI) OR DIRECT  

3.2 

3.3 

BRAIN CONTROL ................................................................................................142 
3.1.6  NEUROFEEDBACK ...............................................................................................145 
FUTURE PERSONAL TRACKING DEVICES...................................... 146 
3.2.1  SUBDERMAL GPS PERSONAL LOCATION DEVICE ............................146 
FUTURE ENHANCEMENT OR COMMODITY DEVICES ............. 147 
3.3.1  ARTIFICIAL HIPPOCAMPUS.........................................................................147 
3.3.2  PROSTHETIC CORTICAL IMPLANT  

(INTELLIGENCE OR SENSORY “AMPLIFIERS”)..................................147 
3.3.3  ARTIFICIAL VISION .......................................................................................147 
3.3.4  ARTIFICIAL NOSE ............................................................................................148 
3.3.5  ARTIFICIAL TONGUE ......................................................................................148 
3.3.6  AUDIO TOOTH IMPLANT OR TOOTH PHONE ....................................149 

4  REFERENCES............................................................................................ 150 

5  BIBLIOGRAPHY......................................................................................... 154 

117

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
.

Introduction 

Most  of  ICT  (Information  and  Communication  Technologies)  implants  are  active  medical  implantable 

devices for “functional electrical stimulation”. They partially replace the neural functions of the body 

by  means  of  electrodes  that  establish  a  direct  contact  to  nerves.1  These  artificial  devices  that  link 

the body’s nervous system with the external environment are called neuroprosthetics. They are quickly 

becoming integrated into medical practice and transforming human lives. 

Although research is focused more on restoring a person’s capabilities, than in improving them, there 

is a real risk of derive. In the future, the new computer technologies could also be used for 

enhancement purposes. As quoted from the ‘Technology Foresight Summit’ “[…] for [healthy] 

beneficiaries, implant technologies involve possibly some future advantages, like rapid math, memory 

capacity or communication by thought“.2 

In  addition,  with  the  rapidly  spread  of  the  wireless  technologies,  we  are  facing  RFID  tags  as  an 

accepted form of intrusion into human body for control/surveillance purposes. This is confirmed by the 

recent  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration  approval  of  implantable  ID  chips  in  humans,  for “security, 

financial and personal identification or safety applications”. 

Although  I  do  not  explicitly  mention  the  “military  devices”,  there  can  be  no  doubt  whatsoever  that 

much  of  the  research  effort  in  general  technology  will  be,  and  is,  military-funded,  and  that  early 

applications of it will be incorporated into military systems.  

1  http://www.medics-network.com/download/schneidersteiglitz_jf04.pdf (Accessed on 16 December 2004)- 

‘Implantable Flexible Electrodes for Functional Electrical Stimulation’, by Andreas Schneider and Thomas Stieglitz, 
originally published in the January/February 2004 issue of Medical Device Technology – Reproducted with 
Copyrights permission from Dr. A. Schneider & Dr. Th. Stieglitz. 

2  UNIDO Technology Foresight Summit, 27-29 March 2003, Budapest : ‘Fostering industrial development in 

catching-up countries’, written by Marek TIITS, originally published at : http://www.unido.org/file-
storage/download/?file_id=10499 – © Marek TIITS, 2003 

119

.

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1. Categorisation of the implantable devices 

Implantable devices can be categorised as medical or non-medical devices, both being either passive 
or active devices. 

  Implantable medical devices  

Most passive implants are structural devices such as artificial joints, vascular grafts and artificial 

valves.  On  the  other  hand,  active  implantable  devices  require  power  to  replace  or  augment  an 

organ’s function or treat an associated disease. 

The  Council  Directive  90/385/EEC  on  active  implantable  medical  devices  gives  the  following 

definition:  

(a) "medical device" means any instrument, apparatus, appliance, material or other article, whether 

used alone or in combination, together with any accessories or software for its proper functioning, 

intended by the manufacturer to be used for human beings in the: 

- diagnosis, prevention, monitoring, treatment or alleviation of disease or injury, 

- investigation, replacement or modification of the anatomy or of a physiological process, 

- control of conception,  

and which does not achieve its principal intended action by pharmacological, chemical, immunological 

or metabolic means, but which may be assisted in its function by such means; 

(b)  "active  medical  device"  means  any  medical  device  relying  for  its  functioning  on  a  source  of 

electrical energy or any source of power other than that directly generated by the human body or 

gravity; 

(c)  "active  implantable  medical  device"  means  any  active  medical  device  which  is  intended  to  be 

totally  or  partially  introduced,  surgically  or  medically,  into  the  human  body  or  by  medical 

intervention into a natural orifice, and which is intended to remain after the procedure; 

The "device" definition within the meaning of Directive 90/385/EEC relates to a product intended 

by the manufacturer for a medical purpose "whether used alone or in combination, together with 

any  accessories  or  software  for  its  proper  functioning".  The  medical  purpose  may  be  achieved 

either by a "stand alone device" or as a result of several devices acting each in combination with 

the other as part of a system. 

  Implantable non-medical devices  

An example of a passive device is the radio frequency identification (RFID) device. Active devices 

may use electrical impulses to interact with the human’s nervous system. 

.

120

 
 
 
 
2. Implantable devices ALREADY AVAILABLE on the market 

This  first  section  contains  information  about  implants  in  the  human  body  that  are  available  in 

commercial form and have been researched, in some cases, for decades.  

2.1 

Current active medical devices  

“The  history  of  active  implantable  devices  […]  in  clinical  practice  started  in  the  1960s  with  the 

development of the first heart pacemakers to replace the autonomic rhythm of the heart. […] Systems 

for bladder stimulation that allow paraplegics to control bladder voiding followed in the 1980s. […] The 

most recent examples of active implants for functional electrical stimulation are stimulators to treat 

pain  in  patients  with  tumours  and  trembling  caused  by  Parkinson’s  disease,  and  to  restore  the  grasp 

function in quadriplegics.” 3 

2.1.1  Cardiovascular pacers for patients with conduction disorders or heart failure 

The first external heart pacemaker was invented by Earl Bakken and Wilson 

Greatbatch. In 1958, Medtronic, Inc (Minneapolis, Minnesota) developed the 

bipolar cardiac pacer and two years later, designed the first pulse generator 

implanted in the USA. Since then many developments have followed improving 

the batteries, incorporating the programmability and the sensor technology 

in the 1980’s.  

Picture: www.thebakken.org 
© 2005 – The Bakken Library 
and Museum Picture : 
« Prototype Pacemaker » 
All Rights Reserved 

Since  2001,  the  new  wireless  technology  in  the  pacemaker  enables  it  to 

automatically communicate with a remote relay unit. 

In May 2004, Medtronic announced the U.S. introduction of its Internet-

based  Medtronic  CareLink®  Network.4    The  latest  application  is  an  SMS-

enabled  pacemaker.  The  unit  was  developed  by  Dutch  manufacturer 

Biotronik,  and  the  first  implant  was  performed  at  VU  University  Medical 

Picture:  http://www.qconline.com/ 
progress99/4pace.shtml 

© 2005 Moline Dispatch  
Publishing Company, LLC, 
All Rights Reserved 

Center in Amsterdam. 5 

3  ‘Implantable Flexible Electrodes for Functional Electrical Stimulation’, by Andreas Schneider and Thomas Stieglitz, 
originally published in the January/February 2004 issue of Medical Device Technology, at : http://www.medics-
network.com/download/schneidersteiglitz_jf04.pdf (Accessed on 16 December 2004) –- Reproduced with 
Copyrights permission from Dr. A. Schneider & Dr. Th. Stieglitz. 

4  Medtronic Inc, at : http://www.medtronic.com/carelink  (Accessed on 18 February 2005) - © Medtronic, Inc. 2005 
5  Biotronik at : http://www.biotronik.nl/frameset.htm  (Accessed on 18 February 2005) - © 2001 BIOTRONIK 

121

.

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
2.1.2  Cochlear implants  

Cochlear transplant research has been around since the 1950s. In short, 

cochlear  implants  provide  electrical  stimulation  of  the  auditory  nerve. 

Today,  in  addition  to  numerous  research  institutions  developing  bionic 

hearing  devices,  several  companies  are  already  selling  commercial 

products. Although there are differences in each product, they all work 

essentially the same way.  

In one hand, manufacturer as Advanced Bionics Corporation© claims that 

its bionic ear “is the only medical technology able to functionally restore 

a human sense – Hearing.” 

On  the  other  hand,  as  quoted  from  the  National  Association  of  the 

Deaf’s  position  statement  on  cochlear  implants  (NAD)6  “cochlear 

implants are not appropriate for all deaf and hard of hearing children 

and adults. Cochlear implantation is a technology that represents a tool 

to be used in some forms of communication, and not a cure for deafness.”  Contrary  to  media 

presentations, “[…] cochlear implants do not eliminate deafness. […] an implanted individual is still 

deaf.”  

The cochlear implant differs from the hearing aid in that it does not amplify sound and it bypasses the 

damaged part to send sound signals directly to the auditory nerve. 

How does it work? 

1.  The  sound  processor  captures  sound  from  the  environment,  processes  the  signal  into  digital 

information  and  transmits  this  to  the  implant  over  a  transmitting  antenna,  or  headpiece,  held  in 

place by magnets in both the headpiece and implant. 

2. The implant converts digital information into electrical signals and sends signals down tiny wires 

to the electrode array in the inner ear. 

3.  The  electrode  array  delivers  electrical  signals  through  tiny  contacts,  or  electrodes,  to  the 

hearing  nerve  and  the  hearing  nerve  carries  the  sound  information  to  the  brain,  where  it  is 

interpreted. 7 

6 NAD – National Association of the Deaf, Silver Spring, MD, U.S.A., at : http://www.nad.org  
7 Advanced Bionics Corporation at : http://www.cochlearimplant.com (Accessed on 6 December 2004) -               

©2005 Advanced Bionics Corporation.  All rights reserved. 

122

.

 
 
 
                                                 
In  November  1984,  the  US  FDA  approved  the  single-electrode  device  for  deafened  adults  and  in 

October 1985 the first multiple-electrode device as safe and effective for clinical use.    

In an entirely different approach, Jonathan Spindel, a biomedical engineer and assistant professor at 

the University of Virginia's department of otolaryngology, is developing an implanted "invisible" 

magnetic hearing aid that does not obstruct the normal hearing process. 

In this approach, the device captures sounds with a miniature microphone implanted in the ear. After 

passing through a small processing unit and an electromagnetic coil, both also implanted, amplified 

vibrations would be sent to the inner ear via a tiny magnet attached to the inner ear's round window, a 

thin membrane at one end of the cochlea. The magnet, about as large as a pencil point, would send 

vibrations through the cochlea, stimulating the thousands of hair cells used in normal hearing.8 

2.1.3  Auditory Brainstem implant (ABI)  

This  is  an  auditory  prosthesis  that  bypasses  the  cochlea  and  auditory  nerve  to  help  individuals  who 

cannot benefit from a cochlear implant because the auditory nerves are no longer working. This often 

occurs  as  a  result  of  type  II  neurofibromatosis,  a  rare  disease  that  causes  tumours  of  the  hearing 

nerves. The brainstem implant stimulates directly the cochlear nucleus situated in the brainstem. 

“During the operation, the brainstem implant is placed behind the ear into the temporal bone, and the 

electrode wire from the implant is connected by the electrode to the surface of the cochlear nucleus 

in the brain stem.”9 

Developed  by  Cochlear®  Ltd,  Australia,  the  first 

implantations took place in 1992. So far, although 

the ABI tend to stimulate only a single frequency 

range  (to  unable  speech  understanding),  the 

expected hearing results of the brainstem implant 

are  not  as  good  as  with  the  traditional  inner  ear 

Picture: Nucleus® 24ABI - http://www.newmedic.be 

implant.  

8 

 ‘Magnetic Hearing Aid Could Open New “Window” for Hearing Impaired’, by Mark Bowman, The Whitaker 
Foundation, Rosslyn VA, U.S.A., originally published on 11 September 1998, at : 
http://www.whitaker.org/news/hearing.html 

9  Dr Anna-Mari HURSTI, ‘Auditory Brainstem Implant (ABI)’, at : 

http://www.hus.fi/default.asp?path=59,403,2252,5752,5754– Reprinted with permission of the author. 

123

.

 
  
                                                 
2.1.4  Implantable programmable drug delivery pumps 

(cid:57)  Insulin pump for Diabetes 

Scientists  at  the  Department  of  Energy's  Lawrence  Livermore  National  Laboratory  in 

partnership  with  Medtronic  MiniMed,  Inc.  of  Northridge,  California,  are  currently  developing 

an  implantable  device  that  will  work  like  an  artificial  “biomechanical”  pancreas.  This  new 

internal device is composed of  

o  a  implantable  pump  that  includes  a  reservoir  for  insulin  and  infuses  it 

directly into the abdomen. 

o  a  glucose  sensor  (imbedded  under  the  skin)  that 

contains 

a 

new  detection  mechanism 

using 

Insulin pump developed by 
Metronic MiniMed, Inc., California 
© MEDTRONIC MiniMed 2004 

fluorescent  molecules.  The  implant  will 

tell 

the 

internal  pump  when 

to 

administer  the  insulin  through  a  watch-

like device worn on the wrist.

10

The  implantable  pump  is  approved  for  distribution  in  Europe  and  is 

undergoing clinical trials in the U.S. 

Prototype Sensor 
Picture: 
http://www.pnl.gov/ene
rgyscience/06-
01/prototype-
sensor.jpg 

(cid:57)  Intrathecal  administration  of  Baclofen  for  patients  with  Multiple  Sclerosis  with  severe 

spasticity. 

2.1.5  Implantable Neurostimulation Devices 

The  term  “neurostimulation”  relates  to  technologies  that  do  not  directly  stimulate  a  muscle  as  a 

functional  electrical  stimulation  device 

(e.g.  cardiac  pacemakers).  Rather,  neurostimulation 

technologies modify electrical nerve activity. 11 

(cid:57)  Spinal cord stimulation for chronic pain management. 

(cid:57)  Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) for mood control in severe depression cases. 

In July 2004, the US Food and Drug Administration approved the implantable VNS therapy as 

a treatment for previously untreatable chronic depression. 

According to studies presented by Cyberonics ®, “stimulation of the left Vagus nerve produces 

widespread and bilateral effects in the parts of the brain implicated in epilepsy, depression, 

anxiety and memory.” 12 

10  Sue GANO – ‘Artificial Pancreas’ – Article and pictures originally published by Energy Science News, June 2001, 

at : http://www.pnl.gov/energyscience/06-01/ws.htm 

11  http://www.health.state.mn.us/htac/neuro.htm (Accessed on 18 October 2004) 
12  http://usmedicine.com/article.cfm?articleID=912&issueID=64 (Accessed on 29 November 2004) - © 2003 

Cyberonics Inc., All Rights Reserved 

124

.

 
 
 
                                                 
(cid:57)  Sacral nerve stimulation for treatment of refractory urinary urge incontinence.  

The  bladder  pacemaker,  surgically 

implanted  in  the  patient's  hip,  is 

attached to a wire that is threaded 

to  a  site  within  the  sacral  canal  at 

the  base  of  the  spine.  The 

pacemaker 

can  be 

externally 

programmed  to  deliver  a  painless 

electrical  stimulus  to  the  sacral 

nerves,  which  regulate  bladder 

function.  This  enables  patients  to 

control urine storage and release. 

Diagram courtesy of Medtronic Inc.  
Copyright © 2002, Stanford University School of Medicine. All rights reserved 
Originally published at : http://mednews.stanford.edu/releases/1998/augreleases/bladder_graph.html 

(cid:57)  Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) for seizure control in epilepsy.  

The  small  generator  and  lead  are  surgically  attached  to  rib  cage,  with  the  wires  travelling 

under  the  skin  up  to  the  neck  and  wrapping  around  the  left  Vagus  nerve.  From  there  the 

generator  sends  electrical  signals  via  the  Vagus 

nerve  to  the  brain.  The  VNS  therapy  system, 

developed by Cyberonics®, Texas, has been widely 

used  to  reduce  epileptic  seizures  for  patients  12 

years of age and older, since 1997 in the US (FDA 

approval in July 1997).  

.

125

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1.6  Deep brain stimulation (DBS) 

(cid:57)  For  treating  patients  with  Parkinson's  disease  (US  FDA  approval  in  January  2001)  and 

Essential  tremor  (US  FDA  approval  in  August  1997):  DBS  offers  a  reversible  and 

programmable  alternative  to  lesioning  techniques  like  thalamotomy  and  pallidotomy.  Bilateral 

DBS  procedures  offer  a  safe,  and  effective  method  for  controlling  bilateral  symptoms  of 

Parkinson’s disease (PD) and Essential Tremor (ET). 

The  subthalamic  nucleus  has  become  a  major  target  for  deep  brain  stimulation  with  many 

surgical  teams  considering  it  the  target  of  choice  for  control  of  major  motor  features  of 

Parkinson’s disease. 

In  April  1998,  Medtronic,  Inc  (http://www.  medtronic.com)  released  Activa®  Therapy, 

combating the symptoms of disabling Parkinson’s disease, onto the European Union market. This 

technology involves mild electrical stimulation of the globus pallidus or the subthalamic nucleus 

in  the  basil-ganglea  region  of  the  brain  which  control  the  major  symptoms  of  Parkinson’s  – 

stiffness  of  limbs  and  joints,  slowness  or  absence  of  movement,  impaired  balance  and  co-

ordination, in addition to the characteristic-involuntary rhythmic shaking (tremor). 

Picture:  http://www.geocities.com/cconstantoyannis/ 

neurosurgeon.html 

.

126

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
More than one million people across Europe are estimated to suffer from Parkinson’s disease. 

Patients whose disease is not controlled by medications have difficulty in performing the basic 

tasks of daily life.” 

The  implantable  system  includes  a  neurostimulator  connected  to  a  lead 

with  four  tiny  electrodes  near  the  tip.  “The  neurostimulator,  which 

contains  a  battery  and  a  microelectronic  circuitry,  is  placed  under  the 

skin near the collarbone and provides the mild electrical stimulation that 

is carried through the lead to the electrodes implanted in the brain. The 

level of stimulation can be adjusted externally to meet individual patient 

needs.  The  therapy  is  completely  reversible.  The  estimated  longevity  of 

the  implanted  battery  is  three  to  five  years.  A  minor  procedure  is 

performed to replace a depleted battery” 13 

Picture: Medtronic, Inc; 
http://www.medtronic.com 
© 2005 Copyrights Metronics 
All rights reserved 

(cid:57)  For  essential  tremor:  Patients  with  essential  tremor  have  no  symptoms  other  than  tremor, 

which may occur in their hands, head, legs, trunk or voice. As for the patients with Parkinson’s 

disease, they can be helped thanks to deep brain stimulation therapy. 

2.1.7  Artificial chip-controlled leg  

The  German  company  Otto  Bock  HealthCare  GmbH  has  developed  a 

prosthesis  called 

“C-Leg®”  which 

is  a  chip-controlled 

leg.  This 

microprocessor-controlled  knee-shin  system  was  introduced  to  the  United 

States in 1999.  

“It is the first lower limb prosthesis system worldwide controlled by a 

microprocessor which reacts to individual movements as people walk, both 

increasing stability and safety […]. Automatically and in real time, the C-

Leg® adjusts itself to how people are walking, whether evenly and quickly, 

or with constant changes of their step lengths and walking speed, and even 

on inclines or on different surfaces.” 14 

Picture: http://www.ottobock.com/
© Copyrights 2005 OTTO BOCK  
HealthCare, All Rights Reserved 

13  http://www.eucomed.be/docs/MT-IP-parkinson%60s%20disease.pdf (Accessed on 25 October 2004) 
14 Otto Bock HealthCare, at : http://www.ottobock.com/en (Accessed on 30 December 2004) 
  © Copyrights 2005 OTTO BOCK HealthCare, All Rights Reserved 

127

.

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
2.2  Current identification and location devices  

2.2.1  Introduction: the three embodiments of microchip devices 

(cid:57)  Read-Only:  this  is  the  simplest  form  of  devices  that  have  a  read-only  character,  similar  to 

that  now  used  for  identification  of  animals.  Even  this  most  basic  form  would  have  numerous 

applications,  for  example,  to  identify  Alzheimer’s  patients,  children  and  the  unconscious.  A 

broader  use  would  be  as  a  sort  of  national  identification  card,  based  upon  the  identifying 

number carried on the microchip. 

(cid:57)  Read-Write: this type of microchip is capable of carrying a set of information which could be 

expanded  as  necessary.  It  allows  the  storage  of  data  and  is  programmable  at  distance.  For 

example,  when  the  microchip  carries  a  person’s  medical  history  and  the  history  evolves,  the 

subsequent information could also be added to the microchip without the necessity of removing 

the  implanted  chip.  It  could  also  facilitate  and  record  financial  transactions.  The  third 

important  set  of  information  that  a  read-write  microchip  might  carry  would  be  criminal 

records. 

At present, the Verichip™ (see below), for instance, includes a memory that holds 128 characters 

only. Larger microchips, and highly specialized and more sophisticated ones, are under development. 

(cid:57)  Read-Write  with  tracking  capabilities:  in  addition  to  the  read-write  capabilities,  a  device 

could also emit a radio signal which could thus be tracked. Applications would again be numerous 

as  evidenced  by  the  less  advanced  technologies  already  in  existence.  Such  a  device  needs  a 

power source, that as to be miniaturized before to be implantable. If a microchip implant had 

tracking capabilities, constant monitoring would be possible. If each chip emitted a signal of a 

unique  identifying  frequency,  implanted  individuals  could  be  tracked  by  simply  dialling  up  the 

correct  signal.  Because  the  receiver  is  mobile,  the  tagged  individual  could  be  tracked 

anywhere.15 

15  Ramesh Elaine M. – ‘Time enough ? Consequences of Human Microchip Implantation’, originally published at : 

http://www.fplc.edu/risk/vol8/fall/ramesh.htm (Accessed on 24 October 2004) 

128

.

 
 
 
                                                 
2.2.2  RFID devices 

Millions of Radio frequency identification (RFID) tags have been sold since the early 1980s. They are 

used for livestock, pet, laboratory animals, and endangered-species identification. 

This technology contains no chemical or battery. The chip never runs down and has a life expectancy of 

20 years.  

How does it work? 

The  chip  is  an  ID  tag  which  is  inert/passive  (not  independently  powered).  When  radio-frequency 

energy  passes  from  a  scanner,  it  energizes  the  chip,  and  which  then  emits  a  radio-frequency  signal 

transmitting the chip's information to the reader, which in turn links with a database.  

How  the  information  is  used  is  determined  by  the  administrator  of  the  security  systems  and 

databases. 

(cid:57)  Wearable ICT devices for tracking the human body 

Applications concern for instance children, older people and people with psychic disorders. 

o 

 Growing  concerns  about  the  safety  of  school  children  in  Japan  has  led  a  primary  school  in 

Wakayama Prefecture to initiate a project using RFID to track them. Since November 2004, 

GPS-embedded backpacks are available for about $350. RFID tag data can be transmitted to 

central databases by wireless connections and tagged items can be tracked in real or near-real 

time. 16 

Despite  widespread  privacy  concerns  about  RFID  technology  in  the  US  and  Europe,  Japan 

appears  to  be  moving  aggressively  toward  finding  novel  uses  for  the  tracking  tools.  Japan 

Telecom recently began promoting software that allows office workers carrying RFID reader-

enabled  PDAs  to  scan  RFID  tags  on  telephones,  allowing  a  central  switching  operation  to  map 

calls for those workers to the phone they happen to be working nearest.17 

o  The Company Wherify Wireless Inc. (http://www.wherifywireless.com/corp_home.htm) offers 

several devices for localizing people for instance “Wherify’s GPS Locator Phone”. 

16  Originally published by WorldNetDaily™ on 6 November 2004 - © 2004 WorldNetDaily.com at : 

http://www.worldnetdaily.com/news/printer-friendly.asp?ARTICLE_ID=41332  (Accessed on 24 December 2004) 
17  ‘Japanese children to be RFID’d’ – originally published by NBR on 8 July 2004 -The National Business Review at : 
http://www.nbr.co.nz/home/column_article.asp?id=9531&cid=5&cname=Asia - © Copyrights reserved by the NBR. 

129

.

 
 
                                                 
o  Digital Angel uses GPS satellites, local based networks, and wireless radio signals for position 

tracking. The Digital Angel system can not only track a person, but also monitor the person's 

health.  

The  components  of  the  Digital  Angel  include  a  biosensor,  pager  device,  GPS  satellites,  the 

AT&T wireless network, as well as a delivery system.  

The  Biosensor  can  read  a  person's  vital  signs  by  touching  the  skin,  and  is  implanted  into  a 

wristwatch.  It  can  also  determine  what  state  the 

person is in (e.g. whether he/she has fallen down).  

The  pager  device  takes  the  data  from  the 

biosensor  by  using  a  cellular  packet  module.  The 

pager  can  organize  the  data  flow  with  a 

microprocessor.  

The  satellites  use  radio  signals  to  stay  in  contact 

with  a  person's  pager  device  and  can  find  the 

exact  position  of  the  person.  This  information  is 

sent  through  cellular  data  packets  and  then  provided  to  the  hosted  data  centre,  which  is 

Digital Angel.18 

Applied Digital has also developed external identification technology that is used in healthcare 

settings,  such  as  its  Hugs™  product.  The  Hugs™  product  contains  a  tiny  radio  transmitter 

designed  to  prevent  infants  from  being  removed  from  a  healthcare  facility  without 

authorization.    Every  infant  wears  a  Hugs™  tag  on  the  ankle  or  wrist,  and  exit  points 

throughout  the  hospital  are  electronically  monitored  to  detect  unauthorized  removal  of  an 

infant.  The  Company  believes  that  for  certain  patients,  the  external  identification  device  is 

appropriate, while for others the VeriChip™ implantable microchip is best19 (see below). 

(cid:57)  Implantable ICT devices for tracking the human body 

o  VeriChip™  is  a  subdermal  RFID  device,  about  the  size  of  a  grain  of  rice,  commercialized  by 

Applied  Digital  Solutions  (ADS)19  .  The  idea  for  employing  the  tags  to  identify  humans  came 

after the 11 September 2001, attacks on the World Trade Centre in New York, USA. 

18  Originally published at: http://www.silentsentry.nhaminated.com/ p2_tracking.html (Accessed on 20 December 

2004) – © Copyright 2003 Governor Livingston High School TechXplore Team, New Jersey. 

19 Applied Digital, Delray Beach, Florida : http://www.adsx.com/ Reprinted with Permission © 2003 Applied Digital. 

130

.

 
 
 
                                                 
The  current  principle  application  of  the  VeriChip™  is  for  certain  patients  who  are  repeat 

visitors  to  healthcare  facilities,  particularly  emergency  rooms.  The  microchip  allows  the 

healthcare  facility  to  rapidly  and  accurately  identify  the  patient  (which  allows  for  prompt 

retrieval of the patient’s medical information, thereby minimizing the risk of providing a non-

communicating  patient  with  medication  or  other  treatment  that  would  be  dangerous  or 

otherwise  inappropriate).    The  microchip  uses  passive  radio  frequency  identification  (it  does 

not contain an energy source) and is very small. The VeriChip™ is injected under the patient’s 

skin.  In  October  2004,  the  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  cleared  VeriChip™  for  

medical  applications  in  the  United  States.  Following  that  approval,  the  VeriChip™  has  been 

marketed  to  patients  with  coronary  disease,  diabetes,  dementia,  medical  devices  and  other 

chronic  diseases.  The  VeriChip™  has  the  potential  to  be  used  for  non-medical  applications 

(such  as  secure  building  access)  but,  according  to  the  company,  the  primary  focus  is  the 

facilitation of rapid and accurate retrieval of medical information. However, the VeriChip™ is 

not  a  FDA-regulated  device  with  regards 

to 

its  security,  financial,  personal 

identification/safety applications. 

FDA  appears  to  have  carried  out  a  preliminary  risk  assessment  (using  the  company’s  safety 

testing  data)  in  giving  marketing  approval  for  this  device.  The  letter  of  approval  lists  all  the 

identified  hazards  and  indicates  that  there  is “reasonable assurance of the safety” of the 

device for the intended use (as a subcutaneous RFID). The potential risks to health identified 

by FDA include “adverse tissue reaction, migration of implanted 

transponder, failure of implanted transponder, electromagnetic 

interference, electrical hazards, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 

incompatibility and needle stick." 20 

“The RFID implant consists of a microchip, an antenna coil and a 

capacitor  all  enclosed  within  a 

sealed  glass  tube.    An  anti-

migration cap surrounds the glass 

tube to inhibit movement of the 

RFID within the tissue where the device is placed.” 21

The biochip is inserted into the subject with a hypodermic syringe. 

Injection  is  simple,  comparable  to  common  vaccines.  Anesthesia  is  not  required  nor 

recommended. 

20  http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/924642/000106880004000587/ex99p2.txt (Accessed on 24 October 2004). 

.

131

 
 
  
                                                 
Current applications of the VeriChip™  

According to ADS, VeriChip™ provides security for:        

o  Medical records and healthcare information (blood type, potential allergies and medical 

history) 

o  Personal information/identity 

o  Financial information (secondary verification). 

Besides  these  areas,  the  extended  applications  include  public  transportation  security,  access 

to sensitive buildings or installations and tracking down people on parole, ex-convicts, criminals, 

etc. 

Right now, a person has to stand within a few feet of a scanner for the tag to “wake up”. Thus, 

the tags can be used to follow someone's steps when they are near scanners. Consequently, the 

VeriChip™ is, for the moment, not an implantable GPS device (see below). 

At present, the implantation is purely voluntary.  

After  promotion  in  Mexico,  Colombia,  Argentine,  Brazil,  Chile,  Paraguay  and  Uruguay,  and 

following a broad advertisement tour in North America, the Verichip™ is now arriving in Europe 

as well. 

o  In  South  America,  facing  a  huge  problem  of  kidnappings,  the  VeriChip™  is  being  marketed 

mainly to identify kidnapped children or adults. 

o  In  Italy:  On  April  2004,  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  the  Instituto  Nazionale  Lazzaro 

Spallanzani  Hospital  started  a  study  to  evaluate  the  VeriMed™  system’s  impact  on  improving 

the quality of care provided to the patients. 

o  In  England:  Surge  IT  Solutions  intends  to  use  the  VeriChip™  technology  for  secure  building 

access  for  government 

installations,  educational  facilities,  and  various 

identification 

applications. 

21  http://www.gospelgrace.com/microchips/Implants.html 

132

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                  
„Smart guns“: one potential use of the VeriChip™ 

Applied  Digital  Solutions  (ADS)  announced  in  April  2004  a  partnership  with  gun  maker  FN 

Manufacturing (http://www.fnmfg.com/) to produce the so-called “smart guns”. 

“Smart  guns”  are  weapons  that  shoot  only  if  operated  by  their  owner  with  a  RFID-chip 

implanted in his hand.  

Similar developments are under way at other gun manufacturers and research firms. The New 

Jersey Institute of Technology (http://www.njit.edu/) and Australian gun maker Metal Storm 

Ltd. are working on the “Personalized Weapons Technology Project ”. They develop a prototype 

smart  gun  (containing  computer  microchip  in  its  handle)  that  would  recognize  its  owner's 

individual grip.  

Once the technology is accepted, legislation could follow to encourage the use of smart guns. 

New  Jersey  has  already  passed  legislation  that  will  require  smart-gun  technology  on  all 

handguns  sold  --  three  years  after  the  state  attorney  general  certifies  that  smart  guns  are 

available in the marketplace.22 

22  Originally published by WIRED News at : 

http://www.wired.com/news/technology/0,1282,63066,00.html?tw=wn_tophead_10 (Accessed on 4 January 2005) 

133

.

 
 
 
                                                 
2.3  Current commodity devices  

2.3.1  Credit card implant 

In the Baja Beach Club (in Spain and The Netherlands, http://www.baja.nl), 

people  use  the  VeriChip™  much  like  a  smartcard  to  speed  drink  orders  and 

payment.  

2.3.2  Remote-control Orgasm Implant: Orgasmatrons 

A machine that delivers an orgasm at the push of 

a button has been patented in the US in January 

2003.  The  implant  could  help  women  whose  lives 

have  been  blighted  by  an  inability  to  achieve 

orgasms naturally.  

For the electronic orgasm device to work, a physician would implant 

electrodes  into  the  spine  and  a  small  signal  generator  in  the  skin 

under  the  buttocks.  A  patient  would  then  control  the  sensation 

with a handheld remote control.23 

The Slightest Touch® does not provide an orgasm […] it stimulates 

the  sexual  nerve  pathways  taking  the  woman  to  a  pre-orgasmic 

plateau.  From  there,  gentle  stimulation  can  then  affect  the 

orgasm. The product which was launched in the United States in June 2003 is now starting to get 

attention in Europe. 24 

23   Ian Sample – ‘Push button pleasure’ – Picture and Article originally published on 7 February 2001 in the New 

Scientist - © 2005 Copyrights - Reproduced with permission of the New Scientist, at :  
http://www.newscientist.com/news/news.jsp?id=ns9999397 (Accessed on 8 December 2004) 

24  http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/low/health/3395507.stm (Accessed on 20 December 2004) 

134

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
3  Implantable devices UNDER DEVELOPMENT 

3.1  Future active medical devices 

3.1.1  Biosensors  

Biosensors  or  MEMS  (Micro  Electro-Mechanical  System)  devices  are  sensors  implanted  inside  the 

human body for accurate monitoring of inaccessible parts of the body. The biosensors form a network 

and collectively monitor the health condition of their host. This involves collection of data about the 

physiological  parameters  such  as  blood  pressure  or  glucose  levels  and  making  decisions  based  on  this 

data, such as alerting doctors to a potential medical crisis. 

The information to be transmitted is crucial medical information that is required by law to be secure. 

Consequently, information technology is a critical component of these biological implants that, with the 

energy, memory and computational capabilities, present challenging research issues.25 

These  devices  require  the  ability  to  communicate  with  an  external  diagnostic  computer  system  via  a 

wireless interface (which seems to be the most suitable option).  

“Existing technology is very crude and not suitable for chronic implanted devices or complex signal 

stimulation and detection.” 26 

There  are  several  biomedical  applications  where  this  technology  will  be  useful  as,  for  example,  the 

sensors  implanted  in  the  brains  of  patients  with  Parkinson's  disease  or  epilepsy,  the  acoustic  and 

optical biosensor arrays for blood analysis, the sensors implanted in the body of a recovering cancer 

patient to detect cancer cells. 

A  prototype  device  that  would  monitor  body  levels  of  lactate  is  one  example  of  present  implantable 

biochip  research.  In  May  2004,  scientists  from  the  Virginia  Commonwealth  University  chemical 

25  ‘Health Care : Biosensors – Medecine on a chip’, written by Alexandra Robbins – Reprinted from : 

http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,1759,1132779,00.asp , July 1, 2003, with permission. Copyright © 2005 Ziff 
Davis Publishing Holdings Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

26  http://shamir.eas.asu.edu/~mcn/bioabstract.html (Accessed on 30 November 2004) - © Copyrights 2005 – Dr 

SANDEEP K.S. Gupta, Drs Loren SCHWIEBERT, Pepe SIY, Gregory AUNER, Raymond IEZZI 

135

.

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
engineering have presented their biochip that would be implanted into a soldier’s leg muscle to ensure 

accurate medical diagnosis and treatment on the battlefield.27 

3.1.2  Artificial hippocampus:  

This is an implantable brain chip (brain prosthesis) that could restore or enhance memory.  

The hippocampus plays a key role in the laying down of memories. Unlike devices like cochlear implants, 

which  merely  stimulate  brain  activity,  this  chip  implant  will  perform  the  same  processes  as  the 

damaged  part  of  the  brain  it  is  replacing.    It  will  be  a  way  to  help  people  who  have  suffered  brain 

damage due to stroke, epilepsy or Alzheimer's disease. 

There  are  several  research  teams  in  Europe  and  the  US  that  are  currently  working  on  so-called 

neural-silicon hybrid chips. 

Theodore  Berger  at  the  University  of 

Southern  California  in  Los  Angeles  is 

emulating  the  neurons’  behaviour  on 

slices  of  rat  brain  bombarded  by 

electrical  input.  “The team expects it 

will take two to three years to develop 

the  mathematical  models  for  the 

hippocampus of a live, active rat and 

translate them onto a microchip, and 

seven or eight years for a monkey. They 

hope to apply this approach to clinical 

applications  within  10  years.  If 

everything  goes  well,  they  anticipate 

seeing an artificial human hippocampus, 

potentially usable for a variety of clinical 

disorders, in 15 years.” 28 

27  ‘VCU professors present implantable biochip research at military forum in Puerto Rico’, by Mike Frontiero, 
University News Services, originally published on 24 May 2004 by VCUNews – Virginia Commonwealth 
University an the VCU Health at http://www.vcu.edu/uns/news/vcuview/archives/2004/may/biochip.html (Accessed 
on 30 November 2004) 

28  Originally published by WIRED News at : http://wired.com/news/medtech/0,1286,65422-

2,00.html?tw=wn_story_page_next1 (Accessed on 24 October 2004). 

136

.

 
 
 
                                                 
Berger and his team have taken nearly ten years to develop their current chip models of 100 neurons. 

However it will need at least a 10,000-neuron chip model for implantation in a primate hippocampus.29 

29 Graham-Rowe Duncan – ‘World’s first brain prosthesis revealed’ - Picture and Article originally published on 12 

March 2003 in the NewScientist, at : http://www.newscientist.com/news/news.jsp?id=ns99993488 (Accessed on 24 
October 2004) -.© 2005 Copyrights - Reproduced with permission of the NewScientist. 

137

.

 
                                                 
3.1.3  Cortical implant for the blind:  

It has been know for many years that electrical stimulation of the eyes evokes phosphenes leading to 

visual perception. Dr. Bill Dobelle, of the Dobelle Institute, first demonstrated that stimulation of the 

visual cortex also resulted in light spots. 

The cortical prosthesis with its own microcomputer will be implanted in the visual cortex of the brain, 

where sight is interpreted. ”With a cortical implant, information from a tiny digital camera, could be 

transmitted  to  electrodes  implanted  in  the 

visual  cortex,  bypassing  the  non-working 

retina  or  optic  nerve.  There  is  research  to 

support this concept. 

Blind 

individuals 

who 

have 

received 

experimental  stimulation  of  the  visual  cortex 

with  electrodes  have  experienced  localized 

images  of  light.  A  learning  process  from  the 

brain is required for effective use. This would 

be  similar  to  cochlear  implants  in  the  ear  for 

the hearing impaired.” 30                    

Figure:  “The  Dobelle  Institute,  Lta,  Portugal 

(http://www.artificialvision.com)  is  the  only 

artificial-vision  provider  that  directly  installs 

an implant into the visual cortex of the brain, 

bypassing the eyes altogether”. 31 

Dobelle says the technology has broad potential.  "It may not work for people blinded as children or as 

infants, because the visual cortex did not develop normally," he says. "But I would say (it will work) for 

the vast majority of the blind -- 98 to 99 percent." 32 

30 Kresge Eye Institute – Information & Research - Potential Approaches to Restoring Sight : Retinal & Cortical 

implants’ at : http://www.med.wayne.edu/kresgeeye/ligon/information.html  (Accessed on 29 November 2004) -      
© 2004 University Eye Associates, PC. All Rights Reserved. 

31 ‘Replaceable Eyeball’ – R. Colin Johnson - originally published on  11 January 2004 by Ee Times on line at : 

http://eetimes.com/consumer/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=51200440 (Accessed on 6 December 2004) – Copyright © 
2005 CMP Media LLC. All rights reserved. 

32 http://www.dobelle.com/cnn.html (Accessed on 17 December 2004) – The Dobelle Institute (Portugal) Lda. – All 

rights reserved. 

138

.

 
                                                 
Until  now,  eight  blind  patients  have  been  implanted  to  test  the  new  technology.  The  experimental 

surgeries  were  performed  in  Portugal  because  FDA  regulations  still  prohibit  the  procedure  in  the 

United States. 33 

3.1.4  Ocular implant or artificial retina 

Other researchers are focusing on new technology to replace damaged retina, the light-sensitive cells 

in the eye. 

Two  major  causes  of  blindness,  age-related  macular  degeneration  (AMD)  and  retinis  pigmentosa  (RP) 

damage the photoreceptor cells in retina but leave the nerve connections to the brain intact.34 

A  retinal  prosthesis  involves  electrically  stimulating  retinal  neurons  beyond  the  receptor  layer  with 

signals  (light)  from  a  microscopic  digital  camera;  it  is  feasible  when  the  inner  retina  and  optic  nerve 

remain intact. Researchers at several locations are investigating how to implant groups of low voltage 

electrodes  into  the  retina  to  take  the  place  of  deteriorated  photoreceptors.  The  image  would  be 

processed by a microcomputer and beamed into the eye.35 

In fact, currently 2 approaches are being investigated for retinal prosthesis, subretinal and epiretinal.   

o  Subretinal prosthesis 

(cid:206)ASR = implant to work independent of any external input device or power source 

The  subretinal  concept  was  first  proposed  by  Chow  in  1994.  Subretinal  stimulation  of  the  retina 

has been show in pigs using visual-evoked potential readings. Subretinal electrical stimulation leads 

to an activation of the visual cortex with responses similar to those evoked by light. 

Optobionics  Corporation  of  Wheaton,  Illinois,36  (http://www.optobionics.com)  is  one  of  the  many 

investigators currently involved with the subretinal approach.  

33 Wm. Dobelle, Joao Lobo Antunes, Domingos Coiteiro, John Girvin – ‘The first Artificial Vision Systems in 

Commercial distribution’ at : http://www.dobelle.com/news.html (Accessed on 17 December 2004) - The Dobelle 
Institute (Portugal) Lda. – All rights reserved. 

34 ‘Artificial Retina Project’ at : http://www.doemedicalsciences.org/abt/resources/Artificial-Retina-Trifold-hi.pdf 

(Accessed on 16 December 2004) - © Copyright 2005 – DOE – Oak Ridge National Laboratory – All Rights Reserved 

35 Kresge Eye Institute – Information & Research - Potential Approaches to Restoring Sight : Retinal & Cortical 

implants’ at : http://www.med.wayne.edu/kresgeeye/ligon/information.html  (Accessed on 29 November 2004)-       
© 2004 University Eye Associates, PC. All Rights Reserved. 

36 Artificial Silicon Retina™ microchip - ASR® Device – Optobionics – Technology for vision – at : 

http://www.optobionics.com - © 2005 Optobionics Corporation, All Rights Reserved. 

139

.

 
 
 
                                                 
The company is developing a solar-powered silicon artificial retina that requires no external power 

source. The tiny chip, about 2 millimetres in diameter, is designed to be inserted between layers of 

tissue (the subretinal space) of the existing retina.  

(Pictures:  http://www.optobionics.com/index.asp?pageid=13 
OPTOBIONICS™ – © 2005 Optobionics Corporation, All Rights Reserved) 

The  device's  solar  cells  stimulate  dormant  photoreceptors  in  the  patient's  eye  to  begin  working 

again.  In  January  2000,  the  US  FDA  authorized  Optobionics  to  implant  their  Artificial  Silicon 

Retina device (ASR®) into the subretinal space of ten patients with retinitis pigmentosa in a two-

year safety and feasibility study.  

The  company  says  six  patients  can  now  see  light  and  some  can  see  shapes.  ASR®  will  be  of  most 

help to people who have suffered from a disease that attacks the retina. 

Optobionics hopes to have the artificial retina on the market in four years, but critics say it will 

take years of independent testing to prove that it helps the blind.  

o  Epiretinal prosthesis:  

Many investigators are currently involved with the epiretinal approach. 

Using  animal  models  of  photoreceptor  loss,  Humayun,  the  associate  director  of  research  of  the 

Doheny  Retina  Institute  of  USC's  Keck  School  of  Medicine-affiliated  Doheny  Eye  Institute, 

demonstrated  that  controlled  electrical  stimulation  of  the  retinal  surface  resulted  in  a  cortical 

response similar to light-evoked responses. 

(cid:57)  The  artificial  retina  component  chip  (ARCC)  is  developed  by  scientists  from  Johns  Hopkins 

University,  North  Carolina  State  University  and  the  University  of  North  Carolina-Chapel  Hill. 

Their  device  is  quite  similar  to  the  ASR.  Both  are  made  of  silicon  and  both  are  powered  by 

solar energy. The ARCC is also a very small device measuring 2 mm square and with a thickness 

of 0.02 millimetres.  

.

140

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
According to researchers, the ARCC will give blind patients 

the ability to see 10 by 10 pixel images, which is about the 

size  of  a  single  letter  on  this  page.  However,  researchers 

have said that they could eventually develop a version of the 

chip  that  would  allow  250  by  250  pixel  array,  which  would 

allow those who were once blind to read a newspaper. 

Because  it  is  so  thin,  light  entering  the  eye  is  allowed  to 

pass  through  the  device  to  strike  the  photosensors  on  the 

back of the chip. However, this light is not the power source 

for  the  ARCC.  Instead,  a  secondary  device  attached  to  a 

pair of common eyeglasses directs a laser at the chip's solar 

cells to provide power. The laser would have to be powered 

by a small battery pack. 

Whereas,  the  ASR®  could  not,  the  ARCC  could  bring  sight 

to people who have always been blind. 37 

Picture : ‘Toward an Artificial Eye’ : 
http://www.spectrum.ieee.org/public
access/9605teaser/9605vis2.html 
© Copyright 1996, IEEE, The 
Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers, Inc. 

(cid:57)  Another microchip device that would restore partial vision that is currently in development is 

the  Artificial  Retina  Project.  This  research  is  funded  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy 

(DOE)  Biological  and  Environmental  Research  (BER)  program.  The  ultimate  goal  is  to  restore 

useful vision for patients blinded by AMD and RP.  

Their work builds upon a first-generation device containing a 16-electrode array on a miniature 

disc  that  can  be  implanted  in  the  back  of  the  eye  to  replace  a  damaged  retina  (see  figure 

below). 

In  the  spring  of  2002,  a  US  Food  and  Drug  Administration  approved  prototype  device  was 

implanted  into  the  eyes  of  two  blind  people  as  part  of  a  limited  clinical  trial  conducted  by 

Doheny Eye Institute (University of Southern California, Los Angeles (USC)) and Second Sight, 

Inc.  (Valencia,  California).  Both  patients  can  now  distinguish  light  from  dark  and  can  see 

shapes. 

37 ‘Artificial Eyes:Giving Sight to the Blind’ – ‘Rebuilding the Body with Bionics’ – Cem 181H – at: 

http://www.cem.msu.edu/~cem181fp/brain/page3.html - Data and picture ‘Toward an Artificial Eye’, by Gislin 
Dagnelie and Robert W. Massof, Lions Vision Research and Rehabilitation Center, Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine : text and picture originally published at : 
http://www.spectrum.ieee.org/publicaccess/9605teaser/9605vis2.html - © Copyright 1996, IEEE - The Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. 

141

.

 
 
 
                                                 
BER  is  supporting  development  of  the  next  generation  artificial  retina—a  1000-array  micro-

electrode capable of restoring limited vision—using materials that will last for a lifetime. 

The second-generation device containing a 60-electrode array is currently being tested in the 

lab and with blind animals. The Doheny Eye Institute plans to implant its new artificial retina in 

a human being in the spring of 2005. 

How does the Artificial Retina work? 

“The  implant  has 
pieces both inside and 
outside the eye. 
Patients wear glasses, 
like  those  shown  at 
left,  with  a  tiny 
camera  embedded  in 
the lens. The camera 
captures  images  and 
sends  the  data  to  a 
micro-processor 
(concealed in the side 
of the glasses) which 
converts the data to 
an electronic signal. An 
antenna in the lens transmits the signal to a receiving antenna in the eye. The signal then 
travels along a tiny wire to the retinal implant. The signal causes the implant to stimulate the 
remaining retinal cells which send the image along the optic nerve to the brain.” 38 

3.1.5  Brain-computer interfaces (BCI) or direct brain control  

The technologies involved here are communication technologies; they take information from the brain 

and externalize it.  

Diagram : ‘Brain implant lets man control computer by thought’ at : http://www.mindcontrolforums.com/news/control-
computer-by-thought.htm - © 1995-2005 Heart, MTC Online Forums, and Survivors – Original source : ‘Brain implant 
lets man control computer bu thought’ - issue 1238, 15 October 1998, by Aisling Irwin, Science Correspondant for 
electronic  Telegraph at : http://www.telegraph.co.uk/htmlContent.jhtml?html=%2F1998%2F10%2F15...- © Copyright 
of Telegraph Group Limited 1998. 

38 Quoted from ‘Artificial Retina Project’ at: http://www.doemedicalsciences.org/abt/resources/Artificial-Retina-

Trifold-hi.pdf (Accessed on 16 December 2004) - © Copyright 2005 – DOE – Oak Ridge National Laboratory – All 
Rights Reserved. 

142

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
There  are  internalizing  technologies  (cochlear  or  optic-nerve  implants)  whose  purpose  is  to  take 

information from the outside and provide individual access to it. These two technologies will eventually 

come together to form interactive technologies which would allow input-output interactions. 

Although  the  research  on  brain-computer  interface  (BCI)  systems  is  still  in  its  infancy,  these 

systems would, in the future, allow people to use signals directly from the brain for communication and 

control of movement. 

In  the  mid-1990’s,  researchers  at  the  Duke  University  clarified  how  the  brain  sends  out  signals 

directing muscles to move. On October 2003, neurobiologists led by Miguel Nicolelis reported having 

successfully used the brain signals from a conscious monkey to drive a robotic arm in real time. 

The  US-based  company,  Cyberkinetics  Inc.  of  Foxborough,  Mass.,  http://www.cyberkineticsinc.com, 

specialized in neurotechnologies wiring computers to human brain, is working with the Brown University 

team, to develop an implantable BCI. 

It  has  received  US  Food  and  Drug  Administration  approval  in  April  2004  for  a  clinical  trial  of  their 

BrainGate™ Neural Interface System. 

Picture : http://www.cyberkineticsinc.com  
© 2005 Cyberkinetics Neurotechnology Systems, Inc. 
Photography by Rich Friedman Photograph 

Cybernetics  has  previously  carried  out  animal  research  where  three  monkeys  received  implants.  It 

hopes to complete the research within three to five years. 

In June 2004, surgeons implanted the BrainGate™ into the motor cortex of a 24-year-old quadriplegic. 

Each electrode taps into a neuron in the patient’s brain. 

This four square-millimetre chip allowed the patient to send computer commands by thought. 

The team now plans to implant devices into four more paralyzed patients. 

.

143

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What is the technology behind this development? 

This  patented  miniature  array  of  microelectrodes, 

on  a  4  mm  by  4  mm  base,  contains,  in  one  array 

design, 100 silicon electrodes that are 1.5 mm long.  

Each of those is ‘connected to a very fine wire that 

provides  an  electrical  connection  to  the  "outside 

world". ‘ 39  

Picture : Microelectrode Arrays - Photography by Friedman Photography - © 2005 Cyberkinetics Neurotechnology 
Systems, Inc. - http://www.cyberkineticsinc.com/content/researchproducts/microelectrodearrays.jsp  

How does the BrainGate™ work?    

“The neural signals are interpreted by the System and a cursor is shown to the user on a computer 
screen that provides an alternate "BrainGate pathway". Then, the user can use that cursor to 
control the computer, just as a mouse is used.”  

Although human studies demonstrate the feasibility of using brain signals to command and control 

external devices,  the  researchers  emphasize that many years of development and clinical testing 

will  be  required  before  such  devices  -  including  “neuroprosthetic”  limbs  for  paralyzed  people, 

become available.40 

On  another  note,  the  Rehabilitation  Institute  of  Chicago  has  been  using  brain  waves  to  control 

bionic arms since 2003. The new nerve-muscle graft procedure to control a myoelectric prosthesis 

allows  a  full  arm  prosthesis  to  be  driven  by  the  user’s  own  thought-generated  nerve  impulses. 

These  impulses  are  sensed,  via  electrodes,  from  the  pectoral  muscle  (where  the  existing  nerve 

endings of the patient’s shoulder are transplanted) and carried through to the mechanical arm. 41 

At the same time, because of what most people mean by brain-computer interfaces, there is also a 

lot of work in progress to create non-invasive BCIs.  

39 Cyberkinetics – Bionic® Research Products – Technology Overview – at : 

http://www.cyberkineticsinc.com/technology.htm - © 2005 Cyberkinetics Neurotechnology Systems, Inc. 

40 Jose M. Carmena, Mikhail A. Lebedev, Roy E. Crist, Joseph E. O’Doherty, David M. Santucci, Dragan F. Dimitrov, 
Parag G. Patil, Craig S. Henriquez, Miguel A.L. Nicolelis – ‘Learning to Control a Brain-Machine Interface for 
Reaching and Grasping by Primates – PloS Biology, 1(2) :193-208, November 2003 – at : 
http://www.plosbiology.org/pips/plbi-01-02-carmena.pdf - © 2003 Carmena et al. 

41 ‘Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago Announces Truly Bionic Arm’ – 15 September 2003 at : 

http://www.ric.org/research/pr_display.php?id=151 - © 2005 RIC™, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago - All Rights 
Reserved. 

144

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
“A  similar  device  known  as  the  Brain  Communicator  is  under  development  at  Neural  Signals  in 

Atlanta.  Researchers  say  the  device  can  operate  using  either  a  single  electrode  implanted  under 

the brain's surface or a conductive skull screw that does not enter the brain and records signals 

from the surface.  

The major difference between the Brain Communicator and the BrainGate system is that the Brain 

Communicator  uses  wireless  technology  to  transmit  signals  to  external  processors  rather  than 

requiring the user to have wires protruding from their head, which could pose an infection risk.  

Cyberkinetics says they plan to introduce an updated, fully implanted version of the BrainGate that 

will make use of wireless technology before marketing the device.“ 42 

In  addition,  the  BCI  field  received,  in  2003,  a  tremendous  boost  from  the  US  military.  The 

Defense  Advanced  Research  Project  Agency  (DARPA)  invested  $24  million  in  BCI  programs,  split 

among six different laboratories.   

3.1.6  Neurofeedback 

Neurofeedback is a learning procedure – a kind of exercise for the brain - that is already widely used 

for conditions such as depression, epilepsy, sleep disorders and many others. 

Several companies are now looking to find a way to increase mental well being and mental prowess using 

brain-computer interface and neurofeedback techniques.  

This  process  involves  connecting  electrical  impulses  from  the  user’s  brain  to  the  computer  and  back 

again,  creating  a  feedback  loop  between  the  computer  and  the  user.  Neurofeedback  allows  the 

computer to interact with the user through electrical impulses.  

Such  devices  induce  brain  states  that  are  similar  to  those  seen  on  an  EEG  when  one  is  learning  or 

concentrating on a task. By artificially inducing these brain states researchers hope to provide a means 

of personal control of ones own mood and emotional state. 

42 ‘Brain Implants Move at the Speed of Thought – New Devices Operate on the Power of Thought Alone, Testing 

Beginning in Humans, by Jennifer Warner, for WebMD Medical News, 15 April 2004 at : 
http://my.webmd.com/content/Article/85/98694.htm?pagenumber=1 (Accessed on 21 October 2004) - © 2004 
WebMD Inc. – All Rights Reserved. 

145

.

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
3.2  Future personal tracking devices  

3.2.1  Subdermal GPS Personal Location Device  

A  subdermal  GPS  device  would  allow  an  individual  with  a  scanner  to  pinpoint  someone's  position 

anywhere on the globe. 

In  response  to  a  kidnapping  epidemic  in  Central  and  South  America,  Applied  Digital  developed  a 

prototype  for  such  an  implantable  device  that  would  track  a  user’s  location.  The  prototype  was 

approximately the size of a pacemaker and would have required surgery to be implanted. Although the 

tests  were  successful,  Applied  Digital  suspended  work  on  the  development  project  to  devote  its 

resources  on  the  VeriChip™  (see  section  2.2.2.),  a  much  smaller  implantable  microchip  used  for 

identification (not location tracking).43 

On  15  December  2004,  ORBCOMM,  a  wireless  telecommunications  company,  described  possible 

satellite and telecommunication services for applications to be developed for use with the implantable 

radio frequency identification (RFID) microchip - Verichip™. 44  Currently, it consists of an antenna to 

receive  signals  from  the  satellite  constellation  that  comprises  the  Global  Positioning  System  and  an 

induction-based power-recharging system. The latter should make it possible to recharge the device's 

batteries  from  outside  the  user's  body.  Eventually  the  device  will  need  to  connect  to  a  cell  phone 

network if it is to relay the satellite-determined position of its host to another person.  

This  GPS  monitoring  could  be  used  for  military,  security,  and  healthcare  applications,  such  as  for 

example,  providing  alerts  in  case  of  medical  emergencies  (heart  attack,  epilepsy  or  diabetes),  or  for 

identification  and  location  purposes  (for  people  in  high  risk  occupations,  children,  stalkers  or 

suspected terrorists). 

In England, Kevin Warwick, a researcher at Reading University, is also developing a GPS microchip of 

his own that can be implanted into a person.45  

43 ‘APPLIED DIGITAL SOLUTIONS announces working prototype of subdermal GPS Personal Location Device’, 

first published by APPLIED DIGITAL, Palm Beach, FL, on May 13 2003 at : 
http://www.adsx.com/news/2003/051303.html (Accessed on 18 October 2004) – Reprinted with Permission © 2003 
Applied Digital - Applied Digital, Delray Beach, Florida. 

44 ‘ORBCOMM Announces Application Development Agreement with VERICHIP™ Corporation’ – ORBCOMM 

News – Press Release of 15 December 2004 at : http://www.orbcomm.com/ - © 2004 ORBCOMM, INC. All Rights 
Reserved. 

45 Professor Kevin Warwick, Professor of Cybernetics – University of Reading, U.K. - http://www.kevinwarwick.com 

146

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
3.3  Future enhancement or commodity devices  

According  to  Ellen  McGee,  Director  at  The  Long  Island  Center  for  Ethics,  Brookville,  New  York, 

“computer scientists predict that within the next twenty years neural interfaces will be designed that 

will not only increase the dynamic range of senses, but will also enhance memory and enable 

"cyberthink" — invisible communication with others.” 46 

3.3.1  Artificial hippocampus  

As mentioned above, this implantable brain chip could enhance memory. 

3.3.2  Prosthetic cortical implant (intelligence or sensory “amplifiers”) 

Initially developed for the blinds, the cortical implant will allow “healthy” people permanent access to 

information  from  a  computer  based  either  on  what  a  digital  camera  sees  or  based  on  an  artificial 

"window" interface.  

3.3.3  Artificial Vision 

According  to  recent  research  undertaken  to  develop  an  artificial  retina  (see  above,  the  Artificial 

Retina Project), it will be possible, one day, to see light in the infrared. In this case, instead of using a 

standard  video  camera,  an  infrared  camera  could  be  used. “Because the camera is external to the 

current design, almost any type of input device can be substituted, enabling people to "see" smells, for 

instance.” 47 

Another company, Advanced Medical Electronics Corp., MINNEAPOLIS, (AME; www.ame-corp.com) is 

currently  building  a  thermal-imaging  array  that  is  only  5  millimetres  diagonal  [2.2  mm  square],  which 

could allow people to see thermally, or to be used in combination with a visual imager to provide more 

information than a normal eye. 

46 Quoted from http://www.bu.edu/wcp/Papers/Bioe/BioeMcGe.htm, (Accessed on 18 October 2004) - Ellen M. McGee 
and G. Q. Maguire, Jr. – ‘Ethical Assessment of Implantable Brain Chips’ – Bioethics and Medical Ethics - 20th 
WCP: The Paideia Project On-Line– Reprinted with Permission © 2005 The Paideia Project, Boston, Masachussetts, 
U.S.A. 

47 Johnson R. Colin – ‘Replaceable Eyeball’ – originally published on 1 November 2004 by Ee Times on line at : 

http://eetimes.com/consumer/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=51200440 (Accessed on 6 December 2004) – Copyright  
© 2005 CMP Media LLC. All rights reserved. 

147

.

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
The  smallness  of  AME's  infrared  sensors  (MEMS  devices)-called  microbolometers-could  enable  an 

implant chip to augment low-vision patients with new information that compensates for vision loss.48 

3.3.4  Artificial Nose 

Unlike sight and hearing, scientists know little about the human senses of smell and taste. 

Nevertheless, they have been able to re-create these abilities. They try to mimic human noses by using 

sensors that can detect a variety of volatile compounds.  

For example, at the Oak Ridge National Laboratories (ORNL; http://www.ornl.gov/), in Oak Ridge, 

Tennessee, a "nose on a chip" is proving able to sniff out mercury, carbon monoxide and other 

chemicals. It consists of an array of minuscule sensors on one integrated circuit, with the electronics 

on a separate one. By selectively coating the arrays with different chemicals, researchers can 

customize the chip to detect virtually any odour.49 

3.3.5  Artificial Tongue 

In 1998, at the University of Texas (UT) in Austin, researchers have developed an electronic tongue 

that mimics the human ability to detect sweet, sour, salty and bitter tastes. To do this, the team 

attached four different chemical sensors to tiny beads made of polyethylene glycol and polystyrene. 

The beads were then positioned in micromachined wells on a silicon wafer. The sensors represent 

various combinations of the four different taste elements with combinations of the colors red, green 

and blue. For example, when exposed to an acidic "taste" one sensor turns yellow. It becomes purple 

when a basic mixture is sensed.  

Artificial noses and tongues are simply laboratory tools at this time, and there are no plans to 

incorporate them into humans in the future.50  

48 ‘Sensory Substitution, Vision Prosthesis, or Low-Vision Enhancement Systems’ - Advanced Medical Electronics 

Corporation, Minneapolis, MN, U.S.A. at : http://www.ame-corp.com/vision.htm (Accessed on 6 December 2004) – 
Copyright © 2004 Advanced Medical Electronics Corporation. 

49 ‘Nose on a chip provides low-cost chemical detection’, by Ron Walli – News Release 865.576.0226 of 28 April 1998, 

Oak Ridge, Tenn. – originally published by Oak Ridge National Laboratory, at : 
http://www.ornl.gov/info/press_releases/get_press_release.cfm?ReleaseNumber=mr19980428-01. 

50 ‘A taste of the future : the electronic tongue’, 28 January 1999, CNN, originally published at : 

http://edition.cnn.com/TECH/science/9901/28/t_t/taste.buds/ - © 2000 Cable News Network. All Rights Reserved. 

148

.

 
 
 
 
                                                 
3.3.6  Audio tooth implant or tooth phone 

Described  in  2002,  the  Audio  tooth  implant,  designed  by  James  Auger,  still  only  exists  in  concept 

form.  

A  micro-vibration  device  and  a  wireless  low  frequency  receiver 

are  implanted  in  the  tooth  during  routine  dental  surgery.  The 

tooth  communicates  with  an  array  of  digital  devices,  such  as 

mobile telephones, radio and computers.  

Sound  information  is  transferred  from  the  tooth  into  the  inner 

ear  by  bone  transduction.  Sound  reception  would  be  totally 

discreet  enabling  information  to  be  received  anywhere  at 

anytime.51 

Picture Reference: 10328750 – ‘Audio Tooth implant, 2002’ 
Reproduced with permission - © Science Museum / Science & Society Picture Library, London, U.K.- All Rights Reserved 

51 ‘Audio tooth implant, 2002’ – Medicine & Health, Orthopaedics, Prosthetics– originally published at : 

http://www.scienceandsociety.co.uk/results.asp?image=10328750&wwwflag=&imagepos=2 - Data and picture 
reproduced with Copyrights permission of Science Museum/Science & Society Picture Library, London, U.K. 

149

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
4  References 

1. Schneider Andreas, Stieglitz Thomas - Implantable Flexible Electrodes for Functional Electrical 
Stimulation, at: http://www.medics-network.com/download/schneidersteiglitz_jf04.pdf (Accessed on 16 
December 2004) - originally published in the January/February 2004 issue of Medical Device Technology 

2. Tiits Marek - Fostering industrial development in catching-up countries - Technology Foresight Summit 
Budapest, 27-30 March 2003 - © Marek TIITS, 2003 – originally published at:  
http://www.unido.org/file-storage/download/?file_id=10499 

3. Schneider Andreas, Stieglitz Thomas - Implantable Flexible Electrodes for Functional Electrical 
Stimulation, at: http://www.medics-network.com/download/schneidersteiglitz_jf04.pdf (Accessed on 16 
December 2004) - originally published in the January/February 2004 issue of Medical Device Technology 

4. Medtronic, Inc, at:  http://www.medtronic.com/carelink (Accessed on 18 February 2005) 
© Medtronic, Inc. 2005 – All rights reserved. 

5. Biotronik at: http://www.biotronik.nl/frameset.htm (Accessed on 18 February 2005) - © 2001 
BIOTRONIK 

6. NAD – National Association of the Deaf, Silver Spring, MD, U.S.A., at : http://www.nad.org 

7. Advanced Bionics Corporation at: http://www.cochlearimplant.com (Accessed on 6 December 2004) - © 
2005 Advanced Bionics Corporation. All rights reserved. 

8. ‘Magnetic Hearing Aid Could Open New “Window” for Hearing Impaired’, by Mark Bowman, The 
Whitaker Foundation, Rosslyn VA, U.S.A., originally published on 11 September 1998, at:  
http://www.whitaker.org/news/hearing.html 

9. Dr Anna-Mari HURSTI - ‘Auditory Brainstem Implant (ABI)’ – Reprinted with permission of the author - 
Finland’s first brainstem implant operation - Hospital district of Helsinski, Finland – at: 
http://www.hus.fi/default.asp?path=59,403,2252,5752,5754  

10. Sue GANO – ‘Artificial Pancreas’ - Advanced Bionics, Boston – Article and pictures originally published 
by Energy Science News, June 2001, at: http://www.pnl.gov/energyscience/06-01/ws.htm 

11. Minnesota Department of Health, Health Technology Advisory Committee, at: 
http://www.health.state.mn.us/htac/neuro.htm (Accessed on 18 October 2004) 

12. Spotswood Stephen - FDA Approves Implant To Treat Depression, July 2004 – U.S. Medicine, at: 
http://usmedicine.com/article.cfm?articleID=912&issueID=64 (Accessed on 29 November 2004) on 
Studies presented by Cyberonics® - © 2003 Cyberonics Inc., All Rights Reserved 

13. Breakthrough implant technology for Parkinson’s disease – Eucomed, Medical Technology, at: 
http://www.eucomed.be/docs/MT-IP-parkinson%60s%20disease.pdf (Accessed on 25 October 2004) 

14. Otto Bock HealthCare, at: http://www.ottobock.com/en (Accessed on 30 December 2004) – 
©  Copyrights 2005 OTTO BOCK HealthCare, All Rights Reserved 

15. Ramesh Elaine M. – ‘Time Enough? Consequences of Human Microchip Implantation’, originally published 
at: www.fplc.edu/risk/vol8/fall/ramesh.htm (Accessed on 24 October 2004) 

16. ‘School daypack features satellite tracking – Manufacturer responds to parents’ concerns about crime’ 
– Originally published by WorldNetDaily™ on 6 November 2004 - © 2004 WorldNetDaily.com at:  
http://www.worldnetdaily.com/news/printer-friendly.asp?ARTICLE_ID=41332  (Accessed on 24 
December 2004) 

.

150

 
 
17. ‘Japanese children to be RFID’d’ – originally published by NBR on 8 July 2004 -The National Business 
Review at : http://www.nbr.co.nz/home/column_article.asp?id=9531&cid=5&cname=Asia - © Copyrights 
reserved by the NBR. 

18. Digital Angel Devices – ‘Exterior Tracking Devices’ - © Copyright 2003 Governor Livingston High School 
TechXplore Team, New Jersey – Originally published at: http://www.silentsentry.nhaminated.com/ 
p2_tracking.html (Accessed on 20 December 2004) 

19. Applied Digital, at: http://www.adsx.com/ – Reprinted with Permission © 2003 Applied Digital - Applied 
Digital, Delray Beach, Florida 

20. Donna-Bea Tillman, Director- Office of Device Evaluation - Center for Devices and Radiological Health 
- Food and Drug Administration, Rockville, MD – 12 October 2004, at: 
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/924642/000106880004000587/ex99p2.txt (Accessed on 24 
October 2004) 

21. AngelFire, at: http://www.gospelgrace.com/microchips/Implants.html 

22. Associated Press - No Chip in Arm, No Shot From Gun – 14 April, 2004 – originally published by Wired 
News at: http://www.wired.com/news/technology/0,1282,63066,00.html?tw=wn_tophead_10 (Accessed on 
4 January 2005) 

23. Ian Sample – ‘Push-button pleasure’ – New Scientist © 2005 Copyrights - Reproduced with permission 
of the New Scientist – Picture and Article originally published on 7 February 2001- at: 
http://www.newscientist.com/news/news.jsp?id=ns9999397 (Accessed on 8 December 2004) 

24. Orgasms 'at the touch of a button' - 14 January, 2004 - BBC News – Health, at: 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/low/health/3395507.stm (Accessed on 20 December 2004) 

25. Alexandra Robbins – ‘Medicine on a chip - Health Care: Biosensors’ - reprinted from: 
http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,1759,1132779,00.asp, July 1, 2003 with permission. Copyright © 2005 
Ziff Davis Publishing Holdings Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

26. Arizona Board of Regents - Wireless Networking Solutions for Smart Sensor Biomedical Applications -  
March, 2004, originally published at: http://shamir.eas.asu.edu/~mcn/bioabstract.html, (Accessed on 30 
November 2004) - © Copyrights 2005 – Dr SANDEEP K.S. Gupta, Drs Loren SCHWIEBERT, Pepe SIY, 
Gregory AUNER, Raymond IEZZI 

27. ‘VCU professors present implantable biochip research at military forum in Puerto Rico’, by Mike 
Frontiero, University News Services -  originally published on 24 May 2004 by VCUNews – Virginia 
Commonwealth University an the VCU Health at : 
http://www.vcu.edu/uns/news/vcuview/archives/2004/may/biochip.html (Accessed on 30 November 2004) 
© 2005 Copyrights - Reproduced with permission of VCUNews. 

28. Sandhana Lakshmi – ‘Chips Coming to a Brain Near You’ – 22 October 2004 – originally published by 
Wired News at: http://wired.com/news/medtech/0,1286,65422-2,00.html?tw=wn_story_page_next1 
(Accessed on 24 October 2004) 

29. Graham-Rowe Duncan, New Scientist – ‘World's first brain prosthesis revealed’ -– Picture and Article 
originally published on 12 March 2003 at: http://www.newscientist.com/news/news.jsp?id=ns99993488 
(Accessed on 24 October 2004) - © 2005 Copyrights - Reproduced with permission of the New Scientist 

.

151

 
 
30. Kresge Eye Institute – Ligon Research Center of Vision, Detroit, MI – ‘Information & Research’ – 
‘Potential Approaches to Restoring Sight: Retinal & Cortical implants’ at: 
http://www.med.wayne.edu/kresgeeye/ligon/information.html - (Accessed on 29 November 2004)  
© 2004 University Eye Associates, PC. All Rights Reserved. 

31. Johnson R. Colin – ‘Replaceable Eyeball’ – originally published by EE Times on 1 November 2004 at: 
http://eetimes.com/consumer/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=51200440 (Accessed on 6 December 2004) – 
Copyright © 2005 CMP Media LLC. All rights reserved. 

32. Dr. Gupta Sanjay, Petersen Kristi – CNN – ‘Could bionic eye end blindness?’ – originally published on 13 
June 2002 at: http://www.dobelle.com/cnn.html (Accessed on 17 December 2004) - The Dobelle Institute 
(Portugal) Lda. – All rights reserved. 

33. Wm. Dobelle, Joao Lobo Antunes, Domingos Coiteiro, John Girvin – ‘The first Artificial Vision Systems 
in Commercial distribution’ at: http://www.dobelle.com/news.html (Accessed on 17 December 2004) - The 
Dobelle Institute (Portugal) Lda. – All rights reserved. 

34. ‘Artificial Retina Project’ - U.S. Department of Energy, originally published at:  
http://www.doemedicalsciences.org/abt/resources/Artificial-Retina-Trifold-hi.pdf (Accessed on 16 
December 2004) - © Copyright 2005 – DOE – Oak Ridge National Laboratory – All Rights Reserved 

35. Kresge Eye Institute – Ligon Research Center of Vision, Detroit, MI – ‘Information & Research’ – 
‘Potential Approaches to Restoring Sight: Retinal & Cortical implants’ at: 
http://www.med.wayne.edu/kresgeeye/ligon/information.html (Accessed on 29 November 2004) - © 2004 
University Eye Associates, PC. All Rights Reserved 

36. Artificial Silicon Retina™ microchip - ASR® Device – Optobionics – Technology for vision – originally 
published at: http://www.optobionics.com - © 2005 Optobionics Corporation, All Rights Reserved. 

37. ‘Artificial Eyes:Giving Sight to the Blind’ – ‘Rebuilding the Body with Bionics’ – Cem 181H – at: 
http://www.cem.msu.edu/~cem181fp/brain/page3.html - Data and picture ‘Toward an Artificial Eye’, by 
Gislin Dagnelie and Robert W. Massof, Lions Vision Research and Rehabilitation Center, Wilmer Eye 
Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine : text and picture originally published at : 
http://www.spectrum.ieee.org/publicaccess/9605teaser/9605vis2.html - © Copyright 1996, IEEE - The 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc  

38. ‘Artificial Retina Project’ – U.S. Department of Energy - Advanced Biomedical Technology Program, 
originally published at: http://www.doemedicalsciences.org/abt/resources/Artificial-Retina-Trifold-hi.pdf 
© Copyright 2005 – DOE – Oak Ridge National Laboratory – All Rights Reserved 

39. Cyberkinetics - Bionic® Research Products – Technology Overview, at: 
http://www.cyberkineticsinc.com/technology.htm - © 2005 Cyberkinetics Neurotechnology Systems, Inc. 

40. Jose M. Carmena, Mikhail A. Lebedev, Roy E. Crist, Joseph E. O’Doherty, David M. Santucci, Dragan F. 
Dimitrov, Parag G. Patil, Craig S. Henriquez, Miguel A. L. Nicolelis – ‘Learning to Control a Brain–Machine 
Interface for Reaching and Grasping by Primates’ - PLoS Biology, 1(2):193-208, November 2003 – 
originally published at: http://www.plosbiology.org/pips/plbi-01-02-carmena.pdf - © 2003 Carmena et al. 

41. ‘Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago Announces Truly Bionic Arm’ – 15 September 2003 at: 
http://www.ric.org/research/pr_display.php?id=151 - © 2005 RIC™, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago - 
All Rights Reserved. 

.

152

 
 
42. ‘Brain Implants Move at the Speed of Thought – New Devices Operate on the Power of Thought Alone, 
Testing Beginning in Humans’, by Jennifer Warner, for WebMD Medical News, 15 April 2004 at : 
http://my.webmd.com/content/Article/85/98694.htm?pagenumber=1 (Accessed on 21 October 2004) - 
© 2004 WebMD Inc. – All Rights Reserved. 

43. ’APPLIED DIGITAL SOLUTIONS announces working prototype of subdermal GPS Personal Location 
Device’, first published by APPLIED DIGITAL , Palm Beach, FL on May 13 2003 – at: 
http://www.adsx.com/news/2003/051303.html (Accessed on 18 October 2004) - Reprinted with 
Permission © 2003 Applied Digital - Applied Digital, Delray Beach, Florida 

44. ‘ORBCOMM Announces Application Development Agreement with VERICHIP™ Corporation’ – 
ORBCOMM News – Press Release of 15 December 2004, at: http://www.orbcomm.com/ - © 2004 ORBCOMM, 
Inc. – All Rights Reserved. 

45. Professor Kevin Warwick, Professor of Cybernetics – University of Reading, U.K. – at: 
http://www.kevinwarwick.com 

46. Ellen M. McGee and G. Q. Maguire, Jr. – ‘Ethical Assessment of Implantable Brain Chips’ – Bioethics 
and Medical Ethics - 20th WCP: The Paideia Project On-Line at : 
http://www.bu.edu/wcp/Papers/Bioe/BioeMcGe.htm (Accessed on 18 October 2004) – Reprinted with 
Permission © 2005 The Paideia Project, Boston, Masachussetts, U.S.A. 

47. Johnson R. Colin – ‘Replaceable Eyeball’ – originally published on 1 November 2004 by Ee Times on line 
at: http://eetimes.com/consumer/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=51200440 (Accessed on 6 December 
2004) – Copyright © 2005 CMP Media LLC. All rights reserved 

48. ‘Sensory Substitution, Vision Prosthesis, or Low-Vision Enhancement Systems’ - ADVANCED MEDICAL 
ELECTRONICS CORPORATION, Minneapolis, MN, at:  http://www.ame-corp.com/vision.htm (Accessed on 
6 December 2004) - Copyright © 2004 Advanced Medical Electronics Corporation. 

49. ‘Nose on a chip provides low-cost chemical detection’ , by Ron Walli – News Release 865.576.0226 of 
28 April 1998, Oak Ridge, Tenn. – originally published by Oak Ridge National Laboratory, at : 
http://www.ornl.gov/info/press_releases/get_press_release.cfm?ReleaseNumber=mr19980428-01 

50. A taste of the future: the electronic tongue’, 28 January 1999, CNN, originally published at: 
http://edition.cnn.com/TECH/science/9901/28/t_t/taste.buds/ - © 2000 Cable News Network. All Rights 
Reserved. 

51. ‘Audio tooth implant, 2002’ – Medicine & Health, Orthopaedics, Prosthetics– originally published at : 
http://www.scienceandsociety.co.uk/results.asp?image=10328750&wwwflag=&imagepos=2 - Data and 
picture reproduced with Copyrights permission of Science Museum/Science & Society Picture Library, 
London, U.K.Audio tooth implant, 2002  

.

153

 
 
5  Bibliography 

CARLSON P. – Biochip/Implant – Nutty Professor wants a second biochip transplant 
The Washington Post (Letting silicon-chip implants do the talking) – 02/01/2000 

CHERUKURI S. – K. VENKATASUBRAMANIAN K. – GUPTA S.K.S. – Biosec : a biometric based 
approach for securing communication in wireless networks of biosensors implanted in the human body 
Proceedings of the 2003 International Conference on Parallel Processing Workshops 

GILLMOR D. – Biochip/Implant - Will these implants ensure our safety? 
SiliconValley.com (Chip Implants : electronic leash would undermine our values) – 09/03/2000 

GOSSETT S. – Bio-chip implant arrives for cashless transactions – announcement at global security 
confab unveils syringe-injectable ID microship 
WorldNetDaily.com – 21/11/2003 

HORN T. – Test marketing the Mark of the Beast 
RaidersNewsUpdate – 2004 

HUNT G. – Nanotechnology and Survival – Ethics and Organisational Accountability 
Freedom to care – 18th January 2004 

KANELLOS M. – Under-the-skin ID chips move towards U.S. hospitals 
CNET News.com - 27/07/2004 

LIPMAN J. – Future Technologies to Help you ‘live long and prosper’ 
TechOnLine – 22/05/2002 

McCULLAGH D. – RFID tags : Big Brother in small packages 
CNET News.com - 13/01/2003 

McGEE E. & MAGUIRE G.O., Jr – Ethical assessment of implantable Brain Chips 
Bioethics and Medical Ethics 

METCALF G. – Technological marvel or liberty destroyer? 

O’DONNELL C. – Bionics, Cybernetics and a New Class Hierarchy 

SOYKAN O. – Power Sources for Implantable Medical Devices 
Business Briefing : medical device manufacturing & technology – 2002 

TAYLOR P. – Going all the way ? – cybernetics and nanotechnology 
Nucleus - April 2004 

WASEEM K. – The privacy implications of personal locators : Why you should think twice before 
voluntarily availing yourself to GPS monitoring - 2004 

.

154

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix: 

Secretariat of the EGE 

.

155

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.

 
 
Secretariat of the European Group on Ethics 

Dr Michael D. Rogers 
Head of the EGE Secretariat 

Tel: 32 (0) 2 295 45 47 
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65 
E-mail: michael.rogers@cec.eu.int 

Ms Patricia Mommens 

Tel: 32 (0) 2 296 84 74 
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65 
E-mail: patricia.mommens@cec.eu.int 

Ms Joelle Bezzan 

Tel: 32 (0) 2 296 19 48 
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65 
E-mail: joelle.bezzan@cec.eu.int 

Ms Cécile Delgrange 

Tel: 32 (0) 2 295 23 97 
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65 
E-mail: cecile.delgrange@cec.eu.int 

Mail address 

European Commission 
Secretariat of the European Group on Ethics in Science and New technologies 
BERL 8/261 
B – 1049 – Brussels - Belgium 

Office 

European Commission 
Berlaymont Building – rue de la Loi 200 
B – 1049 – Brussels - Belgium 

Web site 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics 

.

157

 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.

 
 
European Commission 

Opinion N° 20  — Opinion on the ethical aspects of ICT implants in the human body 

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities 

2005 — 157 pp. — 21 x 29.7 cm 

ISBN 92-894-9351-8 

.

 
 
 
 
.

 
 
