OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS  

IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES  

TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

N° 20 

Original in English 

Adopted on 16/03/2005 

**************************************************************************************************************************** 

ETHICAL ASPECTS OF ICT IMPLANTS IN THE HUMAN BODY 

Reference:  

Opinion produced on the direct initiative of the EGE 

Rapporteurs:   Professor Stefano Rodotà and Professor Rafael Capurro 

***************************************************************************************************************************** 

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE), 

Having  regard  to  the  European  Union  Treaty  and  in  particular  Article  6  of  the  common  provisions 

concerning the respect for fundamental rights; 

Having regard to the EC Treaty and in particular Article 152 on public health; 

Having regard to the Charter of Fundamental rights of the European Union of 28 September 2000, 

approved by the European Council in Biarritz on 14th October 2000 and proclaimed solemnly in Nice 

by the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission on December 7th 2000, in particular 

Article 1 on « Human dignity », Article 3 on the « Right to the integrity of the person », and Article 8 

on « Protection of personal data »; 1 

Having  regard  to  Directive  2002/58/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  12  July 

2002  concerning  the  processing  of  personal  data  and  the  protection  of  privacy  in  the  electronic 

communications sector; 2 

1 Official Journal C 364 of 18th November 2000, p. 1 - 22 
2 Official Journal L 201 of 31 July 2002, p 37-47 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
  
Having regard to Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of the European 

Union of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal 

data and on the free movement of such data; 3 

Having regard to the Council Directive 90/385/EEC of 20 June 1990 on the approximation of the laws 

of the Member States relating to active implantable medical devices; 4 

Having regard to the Council of Europe Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, signed on 4 

April  1997  in  Oviedo;  in  particular  Article  1  “Purpose  and  object”,  Article  2  “Primacy  of  the  human 

being”, Articles 5 to 9 on consent and Article 10 “Private life and right to information”; 5 

Having regard to the Universal Declaration on the human genome and the rights of man adopted by 

the UNESCO on 11 November 1997; 6 

Having  regard  to  the  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Individuals  with  regard  to  Automatic 

Processing of Personal Data of the Council of Europe of 1 January 1981; 7 

Having regard to the Declaration of Principles of the World Summit on the Information Society of 12 

December  2003,  in  particular  Article  58  on  the  use  of  ICTs  and  Article  59  on  the  abusive  uses  of 

ICTs; 8 

Having  regard  to  the  hearings  of  experts  and  Commission  Services  by  the  EGE  on  15/12/2003, 

16/03/2004 and 15/06/2004 in Brussels; 

Having regard to the report by Dr Fabienne Nsanze “ICT implants in the human body – A Review”, 

February 2005; 9 

Having regard to the Roundtable organised by the EGE on 21st December 2004 in Amsterdam; 10 

Having heard the EGE rapporteurs, Professor Stefano Rodotà and Professor Rafael Capurro; 

3 Official Journal L 281 of 23rd November 1995, p. 31 – 50 
4 Official Journal L 189 of 20th July 1990, p. 17 - 36 
5 http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/en/treaties/html/164.htm 
6 http://portal.unesco.org/shs/en/ev.php-URL_ID=2228&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html 
7 http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Treaties/Html/108.htm)  
8 http://www.itu.int/wsis/ 
9 Annexed to this Opinion 
10  Proceedings  of  the  Round  Table  Debate  –  The  ethical  aspects  of  ICT  implants  in  the  human  body  dated  21st 
December 2004 

4 

 
                                                      
  
WHEREAS: 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Information  and  communication  technologies  (ICT)  pervade  our  lives.  Thus  far,  this  pervasive 

influence has mainly involved devices that we use for private purposes or at the work place such 

as  personal  computers,  mobile  phones,  laptops  and  the  like.  Due  to  new  developments  these 

devices are becoming more and more part of our bodies, either because we wear them (wearable 

computing) or because they are implanted in our bodies. 

At  first  sight  ICT  implants  are  ethically  unproblematic  if  we  think  for  instance  about  cardiac 

pacemakers. However, although ICT implants may be used to repair deficient bodily capabilities 

they  can  also  be  misused,  particularly  if  these  devices  are  accessible  via  digital  networks.  One 

might even think of such devices as a threat to human dignity and particularly to the integrity of 

the  human  body  (see  Section  5),  while  for  others  such  implants  might  be  seen  primarily  as  a 

means for restoring damaged human capabilities and therefore as a contribution to the promotion 

of human dignity. 

The idea of letting ICT devices get under our skin in order not just to repair but even to enhance 

human capabilities gives rise to science fiction visions with threat and/or benefit characteristics. 

However, in some cases, the implantation of microchips is already taking place with the potential 

for individual and social forms of control. 

The  intimate  relation  between  bodily  and  psychic  functions  is  basic  to  our  personal  identity. 

Modern  neurosciences  are  emphasising  this  view.  Language  and  imagination  influence  in  a 

unique way our perception of time and space; the way we perceive ourselves and others; the way 

we  relate  to  other  non-human  living  beings  and  to  the  natural  environment;  the  way  we  create 

historically, culturally, politically, legally, economically, and technically our societies; the way we 

acquire  knowledge  about  ourselves  and  about  the  world;  and  the  way  we  produce,  create,  and 

exchange things. 

ICT  devices  are  the  products  of  human  invention.  The  functions  they  achieve  are  based  on 

programmable or algorithmic calculations mostly using non-biological substances such as silicon. 

This allows a simulation of some biological and psychic functions11. Furthermore, it is in principle, 

and today also in practice, possible to implant ICT devices in the human body in order for instance 

11 It should be noted that there is a lively debate about the mechanistic view of the brain, which is not addressed in 
this Opinion. 

5 

 
 
                                                      
  
to restore bodily functions or, as in the case of prostheses and artificial limbs, to substitute some 

body parts. 

These are the essential reasons why potential and actual ICT implants in the human body have 

large and important ethical consequences. 

Consequently,  the  objective  of  this  Opinion  is  primarily  to  raise  awareness  and  questions 

concerning the ethical dilemmas created by a range of ICT implants in this rapidly expanding field. 

Ethical awareness and analysis must take place now in order to ensure an appropriate and timely 

impact  on  the  various  technological  applications.  Nevertheless,  where  necessary  this  Opinion 

proposes  clear  ethical  boundaries,  legal  principles  and  suggests  several  steps  that  should  be 

taken  by  responsible  regulators  in  Europe.  The  Opinion  focuses  on  ICT  implants  in  the  human 

body (see Section 6.1). 

2. GLOSSARY 

ICT devices: Devices using information and communication technologies usually based on silicon 

chip technology. 

Active  medical  device:  Any  medical  device  relying  for  its  functioning  on  an  internal  and 

independent source of electrical energy or any source of power other than that directly generated 

by the human body or gravity.12 

Active implantable medical device: Any active medical device which is intended to be totally or 

partially introduced surgically or medically, into the human body or by medical intervention into a 

natural orifice, and which is intended to remain after the procedure.13 

Passive ICT implants: ICT implants in the human body that rely on an external electromagnetic 

field for their operation (see for example Section 3.1.1 the “Verichip”). 

Online ICT implants: ICT implants that rely for their operation on an (“online”) connection to an 

external  computer  or  which  can  be  interrogated  (“online”)  by  an  external  computer  (see  for 

example Section 3.1.2 Biosensors). 

Offline ICT implants: ICT implants that operate independently of external ICT devices (perhaps 

after an initial setting up operation) (see for example Section 3.1.1 Deep Brain Stimulation). 

12 Definition taken from Council Directive 90/385/EEC on active implantable medical devices. 
13 Definition taken from Council Directive 90/385/EEC on active implantable medical devices. 

6 

 
 
                                                      
  
3. SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL BACKGROUND 

(See  detailed  report  by  Dr  Fabienne  Nsanze  “ICT  implants  in  the  human  body  –  a  review”  of 

February 2005 – annexed to this Opinion) 

3.1. Current Applications and Research 

3.1.1. Applications: ICT implants on the market 

This  section  contains  information  about  implants  in  the  human  body  that  are  available  in 

commercial form and have been researched, in some cases, for decades. 

Active medical devices 

The history of implantable devices in clinical practice started in the 1960s with the development of 

the  first  heart  pacemakers  to  replace  the  autonomic  rhythm  of  the  heart.  Systems  for  bladder 

stimulation  that  allow  paraplegics  (paralysis  of  the  lower  limbs  often  resulting  from  spinal  cord 

injuries) to control voiding followed in the 1980s. The most recent examples of active implants for 

functional electrical stimulation are stimulators to treat pain in patients with tumours and trembling 

caused by Parkinson’s disease, and to restore the grasp function in quadriplegics (paralysis of the 

arms, legs and trunk below the level of an associated spinal cord injury). Typical devices include 

the following: 

• 

• 

Cardiovascular pacers for patients with conduction disorders or heart failure 

Cochlear  implants:  the  cochlear  implant  differs  from  the  hearing  aid  in  that  it  does  not 

amplify  sound  and  bypasses  the  damaged  part  to  send  sound  signals  directly  to  the 

auditory nerve. 

• 

Auditory Brainstem implant (ABI) is an auditory prosthesis that bypasses the cochlea and 

auditory nerve to help individuals who cannot benefit from a cochlear implant because the 

auditory  nerves  are  not  working.  The  brainstem  implant  stimulates  directly  the  cochlear 

nucleus situated in the brainstem. 

• 

Implantable programmable drug delivery pumps: 

(cid:57)  Administration of Baclofen for patients with Multiple Sclerosis with severe spasticity 

(intrathecal administration i.e. within the spinal canal) 

(cid:57) 

Insulin pump for Diabetes 

7 

 
  
• 

Implantable  Neurostimulation  Devices:  the  term  “neurostimulation”  relates  to  technologies 

that  do  not  directly  stimulate  a  muscle  as  a  functional  electrical  stimulation  device  (i.e., 

cardiac pacemakers). Rather, neurostimulation technologies modify electrical nerve activity. 

(cid:57)  Spinal cord stimulation for chronic pain management 

(cid:57)  Sacral nerve stimulation for treatment of refractory urinary urge incontinence 

(cid:57)  Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) for seizure control in epilepsy or for mood control in 

severe depression cases 

• 

Deep brain stimulation (DBS): 

(cid:57) 

for tremor control in patients with Parkinson's disease 

(cid:57) 

for  essential  tremor:  Patients  with  essential  tremor  have  no  symptom  other  than 

tremor, which may occur in their hands, head, legs, trunk or voice. As for patients with 

Parkinson’s disease, they can be helped with deep brain stimulation therapy. 

• 

Artificial  chip-controlled  leg:  the  German  company  Otto  Bock  Healthcare  GmbH  has 

developed a prosthesis called “C-Leg®” which is a chip-controlled leg. 

Identification and location devices 

Microchip devices come in three forms: 

1) 

Read-Only: this is the simplest form of devices that have a read-only character, similar to 

that now used for identification of animals. Even this most basic form would have numerous 

applications, for example, to identify Alzheimer’s patients, children and the unconscious. A 

broader use would be as a sort of national identification card, based upon the identifying 

number carried on the microchip. 

2) 

Read-Write: this type of microchip would be capable of carrying a set of information which 

could  be  expanded  as  necessary.  It  allows  the  storage  of  data  and  is  programmable  at 

distance.  For  example,  when  the  microchip  carries  a  person’s  medical  history  and  the 

history evolves, the subsequent information could also be added to the microchip without 

the  necessity  of  removing  the  implanted  chip.  It  could  also  facilitate  and  record  financial 

transactions. The third important set of information that a read-write microchip could carry 

might be criminal records. 

3) 

Devices with tracking capabilities: besides the read-write capabilities described above, a 

device  can  also  emit  a  radio  signal  which  could  be  tracked.  Applications  would  again  be 

numerous  as  evidenced  by  the  less  advanced  technologies  already  in  existence.  Such  a 

8 

 
  
device needs a power source that has to be miniaturized before being implantable. With a 

microchip implant, constant monitoring would be possible. If each chip emitted a signal of a 

unique  identifying  frequency,  implanted  individuals  could  be  tracked  by  simply  dialling  up 

the correct signal. Because the receiver is mobile, the tagged individual could be tracked 

anywhere. 

Typical devices include: 

• 

RFID devices: millions of Radio frequency identification (RFID) tags have been sold since 

the  early  1980s.  They  are  used  for  livestock,  pet,  laboratory  animals,  and  endangered-

species identification. This technology contains no chemical or battery. The chip never runs 

down and has a life expectancy of 20 years. 

• 

VeriChip™ or the “human bar code”: VeriChip™ (www.4verichip.com) is a subdermal RFID 

device,  about  the  size  of  a  grain  of  rice,  which  is  implanted  in  the  fatty  tissue  below  the 

triceps. Current applications of the VeriChip include: 

(cid:57)  Medical  records  and  healthcare  information  (blood  type,  potential  allergies  and 

medical history) 

(cid:57)  Personal information/identity: In the Baja Beach Club (in Spain and The Netherlands, 

http://www.baja.nl),  people  use  the  VeriChip™  like  a  smartcard  to  speed  up  drink 

orders and payment. 

(cid:57)  Financial information (secondary verification) 

Besides  these  areas,  the  extended  applications  include  public  transportation  security, 

access  to  sensitive  buildings  or  installations  and  tracking  down  people  on  parole,  ex-

convicts, criminals, etc. Currently, a person has to stand within a few feet from a scanner 

for the tag to “wake up”. Thus, the tags can be used to follow someone's steps only when 

they  are  near  scanners.  Consequently,  the  VeriChip™  is,  for  the  moment,  not  an 

implantable GPS (Global Positioning System) device. 

• 

The Bavarian company Ident Technology (http://www.ident-technology.com) offers tracking 

devices using the human body (particularly the skin) as a digital data transmitter. 

• 

Female remote-control Orgasm Implant: A machine that delivers an orgasm at the push of 

a button was patented in the US in January (2004). 

9 

 
  
3.1.2. Research on ICT Implants 

Medical devices 

• 

Biosensors: Biosensors or MEMS (Micro Electro-Mechanical System) devices are sensors 

implanted inside the human body for accurate monitoring of inaccessible parts of the body. 

The biosensors form a network and collectively monitor the health condition of their host. 

This involves the collection of data about physiological parameters like blood pressure or 

glucose  levels  and  making  decisions  based  on  it,  such  as  alerting  doctors  to  a  potential 

medical crisis. 

The information to be transmitted is crucial medical information that is required by law to be 

secure.  Consequently,  information  technology  is  a  critical  component  of  these  biological 

implants that, with the energy, memory and computational capabilities, present challenging 

research issues. 

There are several biomedical applications where this technology will be useful. Examples 

include  sensors  implanted  in  the  brain  of  patients  with  Parkinson's  disease  or  epilepsy, 

acoustic and optical biosensor arrays for blood analysis, and sensors implanted in the body 

of a recovering cancer patient to detect cancer cells. 

• 

Artificial hippocampus: an example of a future brain prosthesis is the implantable brain chip 

that  could  restore  or  enhance  memory.  The  hippocampus  plays  a  key  role  in  the  laying 

down of memories. Unlike devices such as cochlear implants, which merely stimulate brain 

activity, this chip implant will perform the same processes as the damaged part of the brain 

it is replacing. It promises to be a way to help people who have suffered brain damage due 

to stroke, epilepsy or Alzheimer's disease. 

• 

Cortical implant for the blind: it has been known for many years that electrical stimulation of 

the  eyes  evokes  phosphenes  leading  to  visual  perception.  With  a  cortical  implant, 

information from a tiny digital camera could be transmitted to electrodes implanted in the 

visual cortex, bypassing the non-working retina or optic nerve. 

• 

Ocular  implant  or  artificial  retina:  other  researchers  are  focusing  on  new  technologies  to 

replace damaged retina, the light-sensitive cell layer in the eye. 

A  retinal  prosthesis  involves  electrically  stimulating  retinal  neurons  beyond  the  receptor 

layer  with  signals  (light)  from  a  microscopic  digital  camera;  it  is  feasible  when  the  inner 

retina  and  optic  nerve  remain  intact.  In  fact,  currently  two  approaches  are  being 

investigated for retinal prosthesis: sub-retinal and epi-retinal. 

10 

 
  
• 

Brain-computer interfaces (BCI) or direct brain control: the technologies involved above are 

communication technologies; they take information from the brain and externalize it. There 

are internalizing technologies (cochlear or optic-nerve implants) whose purpose is to take 

information from the outside and provide individual access to it. These two technologies will 

eventually  come  together  to  form  interactive  technologies  which  would  allow  input-output 

interactions.  These  systems  could  allow  people  to  use  signals  directly  from  the  brain  for 

communication and control of movement. 

Although human studies demonstrate the feasibility of using brain signals to command and 

control  external  devices,  researchers  emphasize  that  many  years  of  development  and 

clinical testing will be required before such devices - including “neuro-prosthetic” limbs for 

paralyzed people, become available. 

Surveillance or tracking devices 

• 

Wearable ICT devices for tracking the human body: such a device allows an individual with 

a receiver to pinpoint someone's position worldwide. 

• 

Subdermal GPS Personal Location Devices: in May 2003, Applied Digital Solutions (ADS) 

(http://www.adsx.com)  claimed  that  “Digital  Angel”,  a  prototype  implantable  GPS  tracking 

device had been successfully tested. However, technical experts are questioning whether 

the  system  could  really  work.  The  disc-shaped  "personal  location  device"  measures  6.35 

centimetres in diameter and 1.27 centimetres in depth - roughly the same size as a pace-

maker. This GPS monitoring could be used for several purposes, such as for example, in 

case of medical emergencies (heart attack, epilepsy or diabetes), or for identification and 

location  purposes  (for  people  in  high  risk  occupations,  children,  stalkers  or  suspected 

terrorists). 

Enhancement or commodity devices 

Computer  scientists  have  predicted  that  within  the  next  twenty  years  neural  interfaces  will  be 

designed that will not only increase the dynamic range of senses, but will also enhance memory 

and enable “cyber think” — invisible communication with others. 

Possible devices include: 

• 

Prosthetic  cortical  implant  (intelligence  or  sensory  “amplifiers”):  initially  developed  for  the 

blind, the cortical implant will allow “healthy” people permanent access to information from 

a computer based either on what a digital camera sees or based on an artificial “window” 

interface. 

11 

 
  
• 

Artificial Vision: according to recent research undertaken to develop an artificial retina, it will 

be possible, one day, to see light in the infrared. In this case, instead of using a standard 

video camera, an infrared camera could be used. 

• 

Audio  tooth  implant  or  tooth  phone:  designed  in  2002,  the  Audio  tooth  implant,  still  only 

exists in concept form. A micro-vibration device and a wireless low frequency receiver are 

implanted in the tooth during routine dental surgery. The tooth communicates with an array 

of digital devices, such as mobile telephones, radio and computers. Sound information is 

transferred from the tooth into the inner ear by bone transduction. Sound reception is totally 

discreet enabling information to be received anywhere at anytime. 

• 

Artificial  hippocampus:  as  mentioned  above,  this  implantable  brain  chip  could  enhance 

memory. 

3.2. Other Potential Uses 

Other potential uses of implantable ICT devices include: 

• 

Microsoft  patent  number  6,754,472  (June  22,  2004)  concerns  the  human  body  as  a 

medium for transmission of data (and energy) to “other devices” like PDAs (Personal Digital 

Assistant), cellular phones, medical devices (for surveillance purposes: like for instance in 

retired  people’s  homes),  RFID  making  possible  to  localize  other  persons.  In  a  family 

website your children could log onto the surveillance system and look at what their parents 

or grandparents are doing. The patent does not describe any specific device. 

• 

“Smart guns”: Applied Digital Solutions (ADS), which created the VeriChip™, announced in 

April  2004  a  partnership  with  gun  manufactures  FN  Manufacturing  to  produce  so-called 

“smart guns”. Such weapons can be fired only if operated by their owner with a RFID-chip 

implanted in his or her hand. 

3.3. The 6th Research and Development Framework Programme (FP6) 

“The  objectives  of  the  Information  Society  Technologies  (IST)  theme  within  FP6  are  to  ensure 

European leadership in generic and applied technologies at the heart of the knowledge economy. 

It aims to increase innovation and competitiveness in European businesses and industry and to 

contribute to greater benefits for all European citizens. 

The  focus  of  IST  in  FP6  is  on  the  future  generation  of  technologies  in  which  computers  and 

networks  will  be  integrated  into  the  everyday  environment,  rendering  accessible  a  multitude  of 

services  and  applications  through  easy-to-use  human  interfaces.  This  vision  of  “ambient 

12 

 
  
intelligence”  places  the  user  at  the  centre  of  future  developments  for  an  inclusive  knowledge-

based society for all”.14 

Examples of Projects funded by the FP6 

Nano scale materials and sensors and Microsystems for medical implants improving health and 

quality of life 

In this project key micro system technologies and communication methods will be developed that 

bring  intelligence  directly  to  the  human,  in  the  form  of  medical  implants  and  ambulatory 

measurement systems, and also enable information from these devices to be transmitted out into 

the wider environment. The overall objective is to develop the technologies that go to make up a 

micro  system,  and  then  to  produce  specific  medical  devices  to  exploit  these  technologies.  

The  resulting  final  medical  products  include  cochlear  and  retina  implants,  nerve  stimulation, 

bladder control and pressure monitoring systems. It is estimated from the available statistics that 

around 50% of the western population i.e. around 500 million citizens, will suffer from at least one 

of the health problems targeted in this project. 

The OPTIVIP project 

The  aim  of  OPTIVIP  is  the  optimization  of  an  implantable  visual  prosthesis  based  on  the 

stimulation of the optic nerve and its demonstration within a pre-clinical study. 

Ethical issues are tackled in this project by specific project tasks being devoted to obtaining input 

from the blind community and especially from patients and their representatives. Various aspects 

of  the  prosthesis,  namely  functionality,  appearance  and  ethics  are  covered.  This  is  essential  in 

order to direct research efforts in accordance with real needs. 

4. LEGAL BACKGROUND 

4.1. General Principles 

The innovative features of the issues addressed in this Opinion make it difficult to pinpoint rules that 

are  specifically  applicable  to  ICT  implants  in  the  human  body.  Therefore,  the  legal  background 

should  be  derived  from  general  principles  underlying  national  legislation  and  international 

instruments. Such general principles can provide the guidance required to outline the legal standards 

necessary  for  the  regulation  of  a  technology  that  modifies  the  body  and  its  relationship  with  the 

environment and thereby impacts deeply on personal identity and life. These legal principles can be 

14 FP6 2003-2004 work Programme IST theme, http://www.cordis.lu/ist/workprogramme/en/2_2.htm 

13 

 
                                                      
  
found  in  texts  concerning  different  subject  matters:  from  bioethics  to  electronic  information 

processing, from the limitations on consent to the definition of medical devices. 

As for the European legal background, specific importance should be attached to the Charter of 

Fundamental Rights of the EU, which is currently Part II of the Treaty Establishing a Constitution 

for Europe. This sets out the general principles of dignity, freedom, equality, solidarity, citizenship 

and  justice,  as  well  as  integrity  and  inviolability  of  the  body,  with  particular  regard  to  informed 

consent (Article 3), and personal data protection (Article 8). Data protection issues are developed 

in Directives 95/46 and 2002/58. The precautionary principle is expressly referred to in Article 174 

of the EC Treaty as well as, in greater detail, by the Commission’s Communication (2000/1) of 2 

February 2000.15 Active medical devices are defined and regulated by Directive 90/385. 

Among  international  instruments,  specific  importance  is  to  be  attached  to  the  Convention  on 

Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine  of  the  Council  of  Europe  (1997)  and  UNESCO’s  Universal 

Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights (1997), in particular as regards respect for 

the  dignity  and  integrity  of  individuals  and  the  informed  consent  principle.  Significant  guidelines 

are also provided by points 58 and 59 of the Declaration of Principles of the World Summit on the 

Information Society (2003), which point out the need for ICT to be always implemented in such a 

manner as to respect fundamental rights and private life. 

National constitutional charters and domestic laws contain several provisions applying to respect 

for  dignity,  protection  of  physical  integrity  and  health,  informed  consent,  and  transplantation 

matters. 

A  number  of  judicial  and  administrative  decisions  deal  directly  or  indirectly  with  the  issues 

addressed in this Opinion, such as the judgment of 14 October 2004 by the European Court of 

Justice  in  the  Omega  v.  Oberbürgermeister  Bonn  case  (Case  C-36/0216)  and  the  Order  of  12 

October 2004 by the US Food and Drug Administration on the testing of the VeriChip for medical 

purposes. 

On  the  whole,  these  instruments  allow  one  to  derive  a  set  of  principles  on  which  the  legal 

framework can be built and on which the lawfulness of ICT implants in the human body can be 

assessed. 

15 http://europa.eu.int/comm/dgs/health_consumer/library/pub/pub07_en.pdf 
16http://curia.eu.int/jurisp/cgi-
bin/form.pl?lang=en&Submit=Submit&alldocs=alldocs&docj=docj&docop=docop&docor=docor&docjo=docjo&numaff=
36%2F02&datefs=&datefe=&nomusuel=&domaine=&mots=&resmax=100 

14 

 
                                                      
  
4.2. Human Dignity 

The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union opens with the dignity principle. Article 

1 of which states that “human dignity is inviolable”. This is modelled on the German Grundgesetz 

and is in line with the declaration made in the Preamble to the Charter, whereby the Union is said 

to  “place  the  individual  at  the  heart  of  its  activities”.  This  principle  was  upheld  as  an  absolute 

boundary in the Omega decision, which considered it lawful for German authorities to prohibit a 

game called “Playing at Killing” because it was found to be “a threat to public policy by reason of 

the  fact  that,  in  accordance  with  the  concept  prevailing  in  the  public  opinion,  the  commercial 

exploitation  of  games  involving  the  simulated  killing  of  human  beings  infringed  a  fundamental 

value, enshrined in the national constitution, namely human dignity”. 

This  “affront  to  human  dignity”  is  not  only  of  such  import  as  to  legitimise  a  prohibition  limiting 

freedom of enterprise; it also acts as a boundary on the freedom of individual choice, because it 

rules  out  that  the  players’  informed  consent  can  be  regarded  as  an  item  making  the  game  in 

question something that is socially and legally acceptable. Therefore, the dignity principle should 

be regarded as a tool to identify the cases in which the body should be absolutely “inviolable”. 

In the very well-known Census Act Case of Germany, it was stressed exactly that “the focus of the 

constitutional order is the value and dignity of the person, who operates in self-determination as a 

member of a free society” (Judgement of the Bundesverfassungsgericht of 15 December 1983). 

This is in line with the clear-cut guidance contained in the Preamble as well as in Article 1 of the 

1948  Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights,  which  expressly  refers  to  dignity  as  an  essential 

component of the human being and a condition for freedom and equality. As regards more recent 

constitutional experiences, one need only consider Article 16 in the French Civil Code or Article 2 

in  the  Italian  Data  Protection  Code,  which  expressly  mention  dignity.  This  also  applies  in 

international  instruments  such  as  the  Helsinki  Declaration  (1964),  the  Council  of  Europe’s 

Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine (1997), which begins by re-affirming the principle 

of human dignity, and UNESCO’s Universal Declaration on the Human Genome (1997). Finally, 

Article  1  of  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  EU  (2000)  states  that  “Human  dignity  is 

inviolable. It must be respected and protected”. 

One can therefore reach the conclusion that dignity is a universal, fundamental, and inescapable 

term of reference even though it should always be seen against a specific cultural background. 

This conclusion might be supported nowadays by underlining that dignity is referred to with ever-

increasing  frequency  in  the  instruments  adopted  by  international  organisations  representing  all 

world  cultures  –  such  as  UNESCO  (indeed,  dignity  is  mentioned  fifteen  times  in  the  Universal 

15 

 
  
Declaration on the Human Genome). From this standpoint, dignity is bound to become a cross-

cultural concept. However, one should take into account that there is also a measure of ambiguity 

in  the  reference  made  to  this  word.  “Dignity”  is  used  both  to  convey  the  need  for  absolutely 

respecting an individual’s autonomy and rights and to support the claim to controlling individuals 

and  their  behaviour  for  the  sake  of  values  that  someone  plans  to  impose  on  other  individuals. 

Moreover, Article 1 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights provides that dignity is to be not only 

“respected”,  but  also  “protected”  –  after  the  pattern  followed  in  the  German  Grundgesetz.  This 

means that public authorities are required not only to refrain from tampering or interfering with an 

individual’s private sphere, but also to take steps actively in order to bring about the conditions 

allowing individuals to live with dignity. 

4.3. Human Inviolability 

The principle of inviolability of the body and physical and psychological integrity set out in Article 3 

of the Charter of Fundamental Rights rules out any activity that may jeopardise integrity in whole 

or in part - even with the data subject’s consent. WHO observes that “health is a state of complete 

physical,  mental  and  social  well-being  and  not  merely  the  absence  of  disease  or  infirmity”. 

However,  here  one  has  to  deal  with  a  different  situation  because  integrity  is  not  regarded  as 

absolutely inviolable – reference being made to interventions that cause “permanent diminution” of 

one’s body (as per Section 5 of Italy’s Civil Code) or else are in conflict with public order and/or 

morals. 

This  is  the  framework  applying,  for  instance,  to  the  assessment  of  the  lawfulness  of  organ 

donation, which is limited by the loss of essential functions. This consideration might lead one to 

conclude that the integrity principle should not be referred to whenever body functions are actually 

reintegrated and/or enhanced. Furthermore, the freedom to use one’s body is specifically limited 

by the many provisions under which it is prohibited to turn the body, its parts and/or products into 

sources of profit (Article 3 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights; Article 21 of the Convention on 

Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine;  Article  4  of  UNESCO’s  Universal  Declaration).  Extensive 

construction of the principles of non-commodification and non-instrumentalisation might lead one 

to conclude that implanting ICT for purposes that are, broadly speaking, profit-related (e.g. to get 

into a disco under preferential conditions) should not be permitted. (see Opinion Section 6.4). 

4.4 Privacy and Data Protection 

The view that data subjects are not free to make whatever use of their own bodies they wish is 

confirmed, albeit indirectly, by Article 8(2) of EC Directive 95/46 on personal data protection. Here, 

it is stated that States can provide that the data subject’s express consent is not enough to allow 

16 

 
  
others to use his/her “sensitive data” – concerning sex life, opinions, health, ethnic origin – without 

an  ad  hoc  authorisation  issued,  for  instance,  by  a  supervisory  authority  (see  Section  26  of  the 

Italian Personal Data Protection Code). This is meant to protect the most sensitive portion of the 

“electronic  body”  by  preventing  data  subjects  themselves  from  making  available  parts  of  their 

electronic bodies in such a manner as to jeopardise their integrity. 

From  a  more  general  standpoint,  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  EU  has  drawn 

distinctions  between  the  protection  of  private  and  family  life  (Article  7),  and  the  protection  of 

personal data (Article 8), which consequently has become an autonomous individual right. Thus, 

one has to deal with a kind of protection that is opposed to any relevant intrusion into one’s private 

sphere  and,  on  the  other  hand,  confers  the  right  of  informational  self-determination  on  each 

individual  –  including  the  right  to  remain  master  of  the  data  concerning  him  or  her.  This  is  a 

veritable instance of “constitutionalisation of the individual”, which mandates respect for both the 

physical and the electronic body. More specifically, protection of personal data in the EU is based 

on  EC  Directive  95/4617  as  well  as  on  EC  Directive  2002/5818.  The  latter  also  contains  specific 

provisions applying to the location of individuals. The set of principles and rules on personal data 

protection  is  currently  shared  by  all  the  Member  States  of  the  EU  as  well  as  by  several  other 

states  that  –  from  Canada  to  Australia,  from  Japan  to  many  Latin  American  countries  –  have 

endorsed a strong data protection standard based first and foremost on the provision of detailed 

information  coupled  with  the  data  subjects’  explicit  consent.  Therefore,  any  type  of  ICT  implant 

requires a strict preliminary evaluation in order to assess the “privacy impact”. 

4.5. The Precautionary Principle 

The precautionary principle does not necessitate impassable boundaries or downright bans. It is a 

general  risk  management  tool,  which  was  originally  restricted  to  environmental  matters.  In  the 

Commission’s Communication of February 2000 it is stated that “The precautionary principle is not 

defined in the Treaty, which prescribes it only once - to protect the environment. But in practice, its 

scope  is  much  wider,  and  specifically  where  preliminary  objective  scientific  evaluation  indicates 

that  there  are  reasonable  grounds  for  concern  that  the  potentially  dangerous  effects  on  the 

environment, human, animal or plant health may be inconsistent with the high level of protection 

chosen 

for 

the  Community”  (Communication  Summary  paragraph  3).  Accordingly, 

the 

17  Directive  95/46/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  24  October  1995  on  the  protection  of 
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data Official Journal L 
281, 23/11/1995, pages 31 - 50 
18 Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2002 concerning the processing of 
personal  data  and  the  protection  of  privacy  in  the  electronic  communications  sector  (Directive  on  privacy  and 
electronic communications) Official Journal L 201, 31/07/2002 pages 37 - 47 

17 

 
                                                      
  
Commission believes that “the precautionary principle is a general one” (i.e. a general principle) 

(Section  3  of  the  Communication),  whose  scope  goes  beyond  the  EU  –  as  shown  by  several 

international instruments starting with the Declaration on Environment and Development adopted 

in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. 

The basic constituents and the prerequisites for the application of the precautionary principle are 

existence of a risk, possibility of harm, and scientific uncertainty concerning the realisation of this 

harm. Having invoked the precautionary principle the risk manager has to decide on precautionary 

actions that are proportionate to the potential harm being mitigated and which do not attempt to 

create  “zero  risk”  situations.  The  risk  management  actions  should  be  aimed  at  identifying  the 

“acceptable risk” threshold with regard to the values at stake – and respect for the human body is 

undoubtedly one of the values deserving the highest legal protection. However, though rooted in 

fundamental  requirements, 

the  precautionary  principle 

is  of  a  “procedural”  rather 

than 

“substantive” nature, which means that it is not applied to gauge an innovation as such but rather 

its  effects.  If  the  negative  effects  are  found  to  be  absent,  or  if  the  application  mechanisms  are 

modified,  then  a  given  scientific  or  technological  innovation  may  be  regarded  as  acceptable. 

Therefore, the precautionary principle is a dynamic tool that can follow the evolution of a sector 

and continuously verify that the acceptability conditions of a given innovation are fulfilled – thereby 

enhancing governance in what has been called the “risk society”. 

The  risks  related  to  ICT  implants  were  highlighted  by  the  Order  of  the  US  Food  and  Drug 

Administration  in  respect  of  a  subcutaneous  chip  called  “VeriChip”  (see  Section  3):  “adverse 

tissue reaction; migration of the implanted transponder; compromised information security; failure 

of  implanted  transponder;  failure  of  inserter;  failure  of  electronic  scanner;  electromagnetic 

interference;  electrical  hazards;  magnetic  resonance  imaging  incompatibility;  and  needle  stick”. 

One might wonder that the tests on the VeriChip were authorised for medical purposes in the face 

of  such  a  detailed  list  of  potential  risks!  The  authorisation  might  have  been  denied  if  the 

precautionary principle had been taken into account in regard to those risks with high uncertainty. 

4.6. Data Minimisation, Purpose Specification, Proportionality Principle and Relevance 

Specific  importance  is  also  to  be  attached  to  the  principles  of  data  minimisation,  purpose 

specification, proportionality, and relevance. All of these principles are unrelated to the lawfulness 

of using the individual ICTs, but relate more to the specific conditions applying to their use – i.e., 

the context within which they are used. 

The data minimisation principle is expressly referred to, for instance, in Article 16(2) of the French 

Civil  Code,  where  it  is  provided  that  “il  ne  peut  être  porté  atteinte  à  l’integrité  du  corps  humain 

18 

 
  
qu’en cas de nécessité pour la personne” (it can only violate the integrity of the human body in the 

case of personal necessity). Objectively, this principle means that one should only avail oneself of 

a given tool if the relevant target cannot be achieved by means of less “body-intrusive” tools. This 

is basically the “minimisation” principle set out in several privacy laws, such as Section 3(a) of the 

German Bundesdatenschutzgesetz and Section 3 of the Italian data protection code. Subjectively, 

the  data  minimisation  principle  postulates  the  existence  of  a  personal  condition  that  cannot  be 

coped with unless by using a specific tool, which proves indispensable. 

The purpose specification principle entails the need for selecting the targets to be achieved. For 

instance,  the  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine  provides  that  tests  predictive  of 

genetic diseases “may be performed only for health purposes or for scientific research linked to 

health  purposes”  (Article  12).  Basically,  a  relationship 

is  established  between  specific 

circumstances, available tools, and reference values. Only those tools that, within a given context, 

pass the consistency test with such values may be used lawfully. 

The  proportionality  principle  is  also  grounded  on  the  relationship  between  tools  to  be  used  and 

purposes sought. However, here emphasis is not put on the nature of the purposes in question, 

but on the proportionality of the tools that are used, i.e., even if the purpose as such is legitimate, 

it may not be pursued by using disproportionate tools. In fact, the aforementioned Communication 

by  the  Commission  sets  forth  an  express  relationship  between  precaution  and  proportionality 

when it says that “A total ban may not be a proportional response to a potential risk in all cases. 

However, in certain cases, it is the sole possible response to a given risk.” 

As for the relevance principle, which is expressly laid down in Article 6 of Directive 95/46, it can be 

taken into consideration with regard to ICT implants as well. Indeed, a given technology may be 

lawfully applied if it is closely and unambiguously relevant to the circumstances. This is meant to 

prevent excessive and/or inappropriate applications of the available tools. 

Ultimately, all these principles supplement one another. After identifying a legitimate purpose for 

using an ICT implant, one should establish whether this is actually necessary as well as whether 

the tools (to be) used are relevant and proportionate. 

4.7. Autonomy and Limits on ICT Implants 

The limitations on ICT implants in the human body as deriving from an analysis of the principles 

contained  in  various  legal  instruments  should  be  assessed  further  by  having  regard  to  general 

principles  and  rules  concerning  the  autonomy  of  individuals,  which  here  takes  the  shape  of 

freedom to choose how to use one’s body, to quote a well-known slogan, “I am the ruler of my 

19 

 
  
own  body”,  freedom  of  choice  as  regards  one’s  health,  freedom  from  external  controls  and 

influence. 

As regards any choice related to one’s body, the considerations made in respect of integrity and 

inviolability principles still apply – in particular as for the consent requirement. Indeed, consent is 

necessary, but is not sufficient, in order to legitimise use of implants – which anyhow should never 

be performed against the data subject’s wishes and/or unbeknownst to him/her. 

As regards any choice related to one’s health, the data subject has the right to always object to an 

implant  and  have  it  removed,  if  this  is  technically  possible  –  without  prejudice  to  the  informed 

consent requirement as well as to the right to refuse medical treatment. 

As  regards  external  controls  and  influence,  autonomy  of  the  individual  becomes  especially 

important  in  connection  with  the  right  to  rule  out  that  a  person’s  conduct  may  be  determined 

and/or  influenced  by  the  entities  managing  electronic  links  –  if  the  latter  give  rise  to  permanent 

connections with external entities. Even in the absence of this type of permanent connection, it 

should be taken into account that ICT implants may: 

a) 

b) 

allow individuals to be located on a permanent and/or occasional basis; 

allow  the  information  contained  in  electronic  devices  to  be  changed  remotely  without  the 

data subject’s knowledge. 

These  risks  are  bound  to  increase  with  the  adoption  of  unified  technical  standards,  which  may 

allow  data  to  be  read  and  modified  also  by  entities  other  than  the  data  subject  and  the 

bodies/organisations lawfully managing the relevant plant or connection. Both circumstances are 

clearly  in  conflict  with  data  protection  rules  concerning  collection  and  processing  of  the 

information.  In  particular,  “re-writing”  the  data  impacts  on  the  right  to  personal  identity  that  is 

expressly recognised by Article 1 of EC Directive 95/46. 

4.8. Concluding Comments 

For the legal background, it should be noted that: 

a) 

the existence of a recognised serious but uncertain risk, currently applying to the simplest 

types of ICT implant in the human body, requires application of the precautionary principle. 

In  particular,  one  should  distinguish  between  active  and  passive  implants,  reversible  and 

irreversible implants, and between offline and online implants; 

b) 

the  purpose  specification  principle  mandates  at  least  a  distinction  between  medical  and 

non-medical  applications.  However,  medical  applications  should  also  be  evaluated 

20 

 
  
stringently  and  selectively,  partly  to  prevent  them  from  being  invoked  as  a  means  to 

legitimise other types of application; 

c) 

the data minimisation principle rules out the lawfulness of ICT implants that are only aimed 

at identifying patients, if they can be replaced by less invasive and equally secure tools; 

d) 

the  proportionality  principle  rules  out  the  lawfulness  of  implants  such  as  those  that  are 

used, for instance, exclusively to facilitate entrance to public premises; 

e) 

the principle of integrity and inviolability of the body rules out that the data subject’s consent 

is sufficient to allow all kinds of implant to be deployed; and 

f) 

the  dignity  principle  prohibits  transformation  of  the  body  into  an  object  that  can  be 

manipulated and controlled remotely – into a mere source of information. 

These  considerations  might  lead  one  to  conclude  that,  given  the  current  circumstances,  many 

actual or potential ICT implants in the human body are legally inadmissible, subject to the specific 

consideration of exceptional situations as set out hereunder in the Opinion Section (see Section 

6.4.6). 

5. ETHICAL BACKGROUND 

Contemporary  society  is  confronted  with  changes  that  have  to  do  with  the  anthropological 

essence  of  individuals.  There  is  a  stepwise  shift  in  progress  –  after  being  observed,  via  video 

surveillance and biometrics, individuals are being modified, via various electronic devices, under 

skin  chips  and  smart  tags,  to  such  an  extent  that  they  are  increasingly  turned  into  networked 

individuals. Thus we might be continuously connected and could be configured differently so that 

from time to time we would transmit and receive signals allowing movements, habits and contacts 

to  be  traced  and  defined.  This  would  be  bound  to  modify  the  meaning  and  contents  of  an 

individuals’ autonomy and to affect their dignity. 

This unrelenting erosion of personal prerogatives – going as far as transforming the body – co-

exists not only with the growing attention paid to dignity, but also with the already mentioned fact 

that the person is at the centre of the constitutional order (see Preamble and Articles 1, 3 and 8 of 

the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and see the Legal Background of this 

Opinion, Sections 4.2 and 4.4). 

5.1. Fundamental Ethical Principles 

As in former EGE Opinions, as well as in a number of Conventions, Declarations and Charters 

accepted  in  Europe  and  as  highlighted  in  the  Legal  Background  (Section  4),  the  fundamental 

21 

 
  
principles  are  human  dignity  and  integrity.  These  fundamental  principles  entail  in  turn  several 

derived principles (described below) which are relevant in the context of this Opinion and which 

are closely related to one another. 

Human Dignity (also discussed in Legal Background Section 4.2) 

The EU’s draft Treaty Establishing a Constitution for Europe19, which states that “Human dignity is 

inviolable. It must be respected and protected” (Article II-61), goes on to explain that “The dignity 

of  the  human  person  is  not  only  a  fundamental  right  in  itself  but  constitutes  the  real  basis  of 

fundamental  rights”  (Declaration  concerning  the  explanations  relating  to  the  Charter  of 

Fundamental Rights). This explanation doesn’t strictly define human dignity and so various writers 

have  attempted  to  fill  this  gap.  One  such  attempt20  suggests  that  human  dignity  be  defined  as 

follows: “the exalted moral status which every being of human origin uniquely possesses. Human 

dignity  is  a  given  reality,  intrinsic  to  human  substance,  and  not  contingent  upon  any  functional 

capacities which vary in degree. (…) The possession of human dignity carries certain immutable 

moral obligations. These include, concerning the treatment of all other human beings, the duty to 

preserve  life,  liberty,  and  the  security  of  persons,  and  concerning  animals  and  nature, 

responsibilities of stewardship.” 

This provides the essential context for the following derived ethical principles, which are of direct 

relevance to this Opinion on ICT implants. 

• 

Non-instrumentalisation:  The  ethical  requirement  of  not  using  individuals  merely  as  a 

means but always as an end of their own (see for example Opinion Section 6.4.2). 

• 

Privacy:  The  ethical  principle  of  not  invading  a  person’s  right  to  privacy  (see  Charter  of 

Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European  Union,  Articles  7  &  821)  (see  for  example  Opinion 

Sections 6.4.2 and 6.4.3). 

• 

Non-discrimination: People deserve equal treatment, unless there are reasons that justify 

difference  in  treatment.  It  is  a  widely  accepted  principle  and  in  this  context  it  primarily 

relates to the distribution of health care resources (see for example Opinion section 6.3.5). 

• 

Informed  Consent:  The  ethical  principle  that  patients  are  not  exposed  to  treatment  or 

research without their free and informed consent (see for example Opinion Section 6.3.3). 

19 Official Journal of the European Union, Volume 47, C 310, pages. 1 – 482, 16 December 2004 
20 William Cheshire, Ethics and Medicine, Volume 18:2, 2002 
21 Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, Official Journal of the European Communities, 18.12.2000, 
C364, pages 1-22 

22 

 
                                                      
  
• 

Equity: The ethical principle that everybody should have fair access to the benefits under 

consideration. 

• 

The  Precautionary  Principle:  The  EGE  has  stressed  that  modern  information  and 

communication  technologies  make  mankind  more  powerful  but  at  the  same  time  more 

vulnerable. Ethics should aim at ensuring the respect for human rights and freedoms of the 

individual,  in  particular  the  confidentiality  of  data.  In  other  words,  the  EGE  has 

recommended  caution  as  a  general  ethical  principle  with  regard  to  information  and 

communication  technologies.  This  principle  entails  the  moral  duty  of  continuous  risk 

assessment with regard to the not fully foreseeable impact of new technologies as in the 

case  of  ICT  implants  in  the  human  body22.  This  assessment  concerns  particularly  the 

analysis  of  present  and  future  situations  in  which  the  use  of  ICT  implants  in  the  human 

body may be considered as a potential risk, or even as a potential threat to human dignity 

or  to  other  ethical  principles.  It  should  be  stressed  that  there  are  no  reliable  scientific 

investigations concerning the long-term health impact of ICT implants in the human body 

(cf. Legal Section 4.5) (see also for example Opinion Section 6.5.1). 

5.2. Value Conflicts 

There could be conflict between the personal freedom to use one’s economic resources to get an 

implant  that  will  enhance  one’s  physical  and  mental  capabilities  and  what  society  at  large 

considers desirable or ethically acceptable. Another value conflict concerns the potential conflict 

between  limiting  the  freedom  of  people  dangerous  to  others  by  surveillance  and  promoting  the 

safety of others. Freedom of researchers may conflict with the obligation to safeguard the health 

of  research  subjects.  Concern  for  economic  competitiveness  and  other  economic  values 

(economic  growth)  may  come  into  conflict  with  respect  for  human  dignity.  The  unrestricted 

freedom of some may endanger the health and safety of others. Therefore a balance has to be 

struck between values that are all legitimate in our culture. 

As in other areas, the freedom to use ICT implants in ones own body, i.e. the principle of freedom 

itself might collide with potential negative social effects. In these cases ethical counselling as well 

as social and political debate might be necessary. 

The borderline between repairing and enhancing is not strict. (Although there are clear examples 

of  both  applications.)  Legislation  is  necessary  in  order  to  avoid  a  situation  in  which  society  is 

becoming  more  and  more  dependent  on  such  intrusive  technology  in  order  to  provide  social 

22 Precautionary Principle: Article 174 of the consolidated version of the Treaty establishing the European Community 
and Communication from the Commission on the precautionary principle (COM (2000)1 of 2nd February 2000). 

23 

 
                                                      
  
security while at the same time the technical perfection of such implants is helpful for all kinds of 

medical  purposes  as  well  as  for  legitimate  social  applications.  Consequently,  the  EGE  stresses 

the need for a continuing, inclusive debate on which kinds of enhancement should be allowed – 

under what conditions and in which situations (see Opinion Section 6.4.4). 

A  particular  case,  which  challenges  the  view  that  there  is  a  general  standard  for  human 

capabilities,  concerns  cochlear  implants  for  deaf  children.  The  technological  drive  to  promote 

cochlear implants raises ethical questions concerned with how this drive impacts on the individual 

and on the deaf community (and of the signing community in particular). It leaves unquestioned 

the  social  integration  of  the  deaf  person  with  the  deaf  community.  It  does  not  pay  sufficient 

attention to the psychological, linguistic and sociological issues. Above all it promotes a particular 

view of “normality”. In the view of the EGE this issue, the risk benefit assessment and the problem 

of  fair  access  need  further  study  (paying  attention  to  the  distinction  between  unilateral  and 

bilateral cochlear implants). 

5.3. Some Important Knowledge Gaps Regarding ICT Implants in the Human Body 

It is clear from the preceding sections that there are important knowledge gaps that are relevant 

both to future research programmes and to the primary ethical concerns. These include: 

Human Dignity, Integrity and Autonomy 

• 

How  far  can  such  implants  be  a  threat  to  human  autonomy  particularly  when  they  are 

implanted in our brains? 

• 

How  far  can  such  implants  have  irreversible  impacts  in  the  human  body  and/or  in  the 

• 

• 

human psyche and how can reversibility be preserved? 

How will they influence human memory? 

Does a human being cease to be such a “being” in cases where some parts of his or her 

body  –  particularly  the  brain  -  are  substituted  and/or  supplemented  by  ICT  implants? 

Particularly as ICT implants can contribute to creating “networked persons” that are always 

connected and could be configured differently so that from time to time they can transmit 

and  receive  signals  allowing  movements,  habits  and  contacts  to  be  traced  and  defined. 

This is bound to affect their dignity. 

Privacy and Surveillance 

• 

How far can ICT implants become a threat to privacy? 

24 

 
  
• 

How  far  can  ICT  implants  give  an  individual,  or  a  group,  specific  capabilities  that  could 

become a threat to society? 

• 

What  are  the  potential  invasions  of  privacy  through  ICT  implants  as  sources  and/or 

receivers of information in a network environment? 

• 

How far should we be subject to the control of such devices or by other people using these 

devices? 

Enhancement and Human Self Awareness 

• 

• 

What lies behind the idea of an “enhanced” human being? 

What does perfectibility of human beings mean? 

Does the creation of an improved “race” on the basis of ICT enhancements mean necessarily a 

new form of racism? The potential industrial use of ICT implants raises the question of the limits of 

such  implants  for  the  creation  of  more  efficient  bodies  and  brains  for  economic  purposes.  The 

question of the use of ICT implants as a cultural leap in human evolution, similar to the invention 

of machines or to the invention of devices complementing and enhancing such devices as human 

memory (through writing, printing, digital technology) or other human capabilities. 

• 

• 

How far should the use of such implants to enhance human capabilities be allowed? 

How  far  can  such  implants  be  considered  as  part  of  what  could  be  called  ‘body  design’ 

including the personal free design of one’s (enhanced) bodily and psychic capabilities? 

Social Aspects 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

How do we relate to persons with ICT implants that are connected online? 

How far should ICT implants remain invisible to an external observer? 

How far are such possibilities dependent on such values as control or efficiency that may 

lead  human  beings  to  become  even  more  dependent  on  market  forces  and  even  on  the 

possibility of their (legal) use in the work place? 

How far do we transform our social and cultural environment through ICT implants? 

How far can they be used in order to track human beings and in which cases should this be 

legally allowed? 

To what extent does this technology allow manipulation by and for advertising? 

To what extent might this technology be misused by the military? 

25 

 
  
Risk Predictability 

• 

How far can we predict today the benefits and threats of such ICT implants? 

ICT Implants for which Special Caution is Necessary 

• 

• 

• 

ICT implants that cannot be removed easily. 

ICT implants that influence, determine or change psychic functions. 

ICT implants that due to their network capability could be misused in several ways for all 

kinds of social surveillance and manipulation, such as for instance in the case of children, 

or disabled persons. 

• 

ICT  implants  influencing  the  nervous  system  and  particularly  the  brain  and  thus  human 

identity as a species as well as individual subjectivity and autonomy. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Military applications. 

The distinction between therapeutic applications and enhancements (see Section 6.4.4) is 

not always clear. 

“Intrusive” technology that by-passes normal sensory experience. 

Implants that will influence biologically and/or culturally future generations. 

5.4. Previous Relevant EGE Opinions 

Opinion N° 14 on the ethical aspects arising from doping in sport 

In its Opinion N° 14, the EGE stated that “There is an urgent need for policy to take into 

account  the  profound  change  that  has  taken  place  in  sport  in  this  century  due  to  the 

influences of growing economic interests and of the mass media on an increasingly global 

scale. These influences have accelerated medical and technological developments in sport 

and  related  industries  as  well  as  increased  the  pressure  put  on  the  sports  person.  As  a 

result,  all  action  concerning  doping  must  take  into  consideration,  in  accordance  with  this 

change,  the  realisation  that  today  performance  and  victory  prevail  over  competition  and 

participation. The Group thus intends to stress the tension that exists between anti doping 

measures and an unlimited demand for enhanced performance.” 

A  parallel  can  easily  be  drawn  between  doping  in  sport  and  implants,  especially  those 

dedicated to enhancement. 

26 

 
  
Opinion N° 17 on the ethical aspects of clinical research in developing countries 

Most of the recommendations made in EGE Opinion N° 17 on the ethical aspects of clinical 

research in developing countries are relevant to this Opinion in respect of clinical trials of 

ICT implants. This is particularly important as medical devices are not covered by Directive 

2001/20/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  4  April  2001  on  the 

approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States 

relating  to  the  implementation  of  good  clinical  practice  in  the  conduct  of  clinical  trials  on 

medicinal products for human use23. 

5.5. General Ethical Questions Relating to ICT Implants in the Human Body 

In  former  Reports  and  Opinions  such  as  “Citizens  Rights  and  New  Technologies:  A  European 

Challenge” (23 May 2000), and “Ethical Issues of Healthcare in the Information Society” (Opinion 

N° 13, 30 July 1999), the Group has identified key ethical values with regard to information and 

communication technologies in particular: 

• 

to improve the protection of privacy (data protection), respecting people’s right to maintain 

boundaries and also to preserve privacy, autonomy and confidentiality; and 

• 

to  empower  individuals  against  the  introduction  of  systems  likely  to  reduce  their  freedom 

and  autonomy  (video  surveillance,  behaviour  control,  and  personal  profiling  based  on 

Internet transactions) or likely to increase people’s dependency on selection and decision 

mechanisms which are not transparent or understandable. 

Human  beings  are  neither  purely  natural  nor  purely  cultural  beings.  Indeed  our  very  nature 

depends  on  the  possibility  of  transforming  ourselves.  Information  technologies  have  been 

considered under this anthropomorphic bias as extensions of man. However, the transformation of 

the  human  body  has  consequences  also  on  the  cultural  human  environment.  Under  these 

premises, human beings are seen as parts of a complex system of natural and artificial messages 

that function on a digital basis. In this sense the human body can be seen as data. This view has 

large cultural effects particularly as it precludes higher level phenomena such as human psyche 

and human language or conceives them mainly under the perspective of its digitization, giving rise 

to reductionism that oversimplifies the complex relations between the human body, language and 

imagination. 

Furthermore,  such  a  reductive  view  permits  different  kinds  of  scientific  and  technological 

developments  and  inventions.  ICT  implants  in  the  human  body  might  thus  play  a  major  role  in 

23 Official Journal L 121 of 1st May 2001, p. 34 - 44 

27 

 
                                                      
  
questions  of  health  care  and  even  lead  to  the  enhancement  of  biological  and/or  psychic 

capabilities. Extrapolating into the future, this logic might even lead to the transformation of the 

human race. 

How  far  should  we  let  ICT  devices  get  “under  our  skins”?  When  do  ICT  implants  threaten  the 

dignity  of  the  human  body,  its  identity  and  its  basic  capabilities?  ICT  implants  may  seem  to  be 

mainly of benefit for human health, as with e.g. cardiac pacemakers. However, are there possible 

situations  in  which  ICT  devices  may  be  used  for  other  goals,  due,  for  instance,  to  the 

interconnection of digital data within a networked world? When  might such devices be used for 

instance  for  surveillance  and  in  which  cases  would  this  be  legitimate?  Where  are  the  threats 

related to the hopes of enhanced capabilities based on ICT implants? 

The question of ICT implants in the human body is thus located between two extremes. On the 

one hand, the protection of the natural human body, that is to say, the medical use of ICT implants 

for health care, and, on the other hand, the elimination of the human body as we know it today 

and its substitution by an artificial one – with all possibilities in between. Human dignity concerns 

the  human  self  as  an  embodied  self.  Thus  the  question  of  autonomy  and  respect  of  the  self 

cannot  be  separated  from  the  question  of  bodily  care  and  of  the  possible  changes  due  to  ICT 

implants. 

EGE OPINION: 

Against this background, the European Group on Ethics of Science and New 

Technologies submits the following Opinion: 

6.1. SCOPE 

This Opinion focuses on the question of ICT implants in the human body. It does not deal with the 

whole field of ICT devices or with “wearable” computing in general, although there may be cases 

in which such devices could be considered as quasi-implants. 

This  Opinion  does  not  address  the  question  of  ICT  implants  in  animals  although  these 

applications provide examples of what could be done with humans. 

28 

 
  
This Opinion addresses the ethical problems raised by the potential or actual online accessibility 

of  such  ICT  implants  as  well  as  of  stand-alone  devices  (i.e.  those  that  do  not  form  part  of  a 

network). 

Legal principles and rules act in general as a check against technological drift and serve to highlight 

that not everything that is technically possible is also ethically admissible, socially acceptable, and 

legally approved. On the other hand, the power of a technology manifesting itself with an unlimited 

range of applications cannot be constrained by a weak law that lacks its ultimate reason. Hence, it is 

necessary to always refer to strong values, capable to breathe life into the constitutionalisation of the 

individual  that  is  the  outcome  of  a  complex  process  and  was  clearly  outlined  in  the  Charter  of 

Fundamental Rights of the EU – starting from its Preamble, where it is stated exactly that the Union 

“places the individual at the heart of its activities”. 

“We shall not lay hand upon thee”. This was the promise made in the Magna Carta – to respect 

the body in its entirety: Habeas Corpus. This promise has survived technological developments. 

Each  intervention  on  the  body,  each  processing  operation  concerning  individual  data  is  to  be 

regarded as related to the body as a whole, to an individual that has to be respected in its physical 

and mental integrity. This is a new all-round concept of individual, and its translation into the real 

world entails the right to full respect for a body that is nowadays both physical and electronic. In 

this  new  world,  data  protection  fulfils  the  task  of  ensuring  the  “habeas  data”  required  by  the 

changed circumstances – and thereby becomes an inalienable component of civilisation, as has 

been the history for habeas corpus. 

At the same time, this is a permanently unfinished body. It can be manipulated to restore functions 

that either were lost or were never known – only think of maiming, blindness, deafness; or, it can 

be stretched beyond its anthropological normality by enhancing its  functions and/or adding new 

functions  –  again,  for  the  sake  of  the  person’s  welfare  and/or  social  competitiveness,  as  in  the 

case of enhanced sports skills or intelligence prostheses. We have to contend with both repairing 

and  capacity  enhancing  technologies,  the  multiplication  of  body-friendly  technologies  that  can 

expand and modify the concept of body care and herald the coming of “cyborgs” – of the post-

human  body.  “In  our  societies,  the  body  tends  to  become  a  raw  material  that  can  be  modelled 

according  to  environmental  circumstances”.  The  possibilities  of  customised  configuration 

undoubtedly increase, and so do the opportunities for political measures aimed at controlling the 

body by means of technology. 

The  downright  reduction  of  our  body  to  a  device  does  not  only  enhance  the  trend  –  already 

pointed  out  –  towards  turning  it  increasingly  into  a  tool  to  allow  continuous  surveillance  of 

29 

 
  
individuals.  Indeed,  individuals  are  dispossessed  of  their  own  bodies  and  thereby  of  their  own 

autonomy. The body ends up being under others’ control. What can a person expect after being 

dispossessed of his or her own body? 

6.2. ICT IMPLANTS AND HUMAN DIGNITY 

The respect for human dignity must be the fundamental basis of discussions of where the limits 

should be drawn for different uses of ICT implants. 

The Group considers that ICT implants are not per se a danger to human freedom or dignity but in 

the  case  of  applications,  which  entail  for  instance  the  possibility  of  individual  and/or  group 

surveillance, the potential restriction of freedom must be carefully evaluated (see Section 6.4.6). 

The protection of the health and/or security of people with severe neurological disorders on the 

basis of ICT implants does not create necessarily an ethical dilemma between the inviolability of 

freedom  and  the  need  for  health  protection.  However,  even  in  these  cases,  the  use  of  such 

implants should not result in any discrimination or abuse contrary to human rights. 

6.3. ICT IMPLANTS FOR HEALTH PURPOSES 

It  goes  without  saying  that  informed  consent  is  required,  when  ICT  implants  are  to  be  used  for 

health purposes. This information should not only concern possible benefits and health risks, but 

also risks that such implants could be used to locate people and/or obtain access to information 

stored in these devices without the permission of the person in whom the devices are implanted. 

When risks are difficult to predict, this should be made clear in the supplied information. 

Implantation of ICT devices for health purposes should be governed by the principles that: 

a) 

b) 

c) 

the objective is important, like saving lives, restoring health or improving the quality of life; 

the implant is necessary to achieve this objective; and, 

there is no other less invasive and more cost-effective method of achieving the objective. 

The  question  of  mixed  bio-artificial  implants  should  be  specifically  considered  taking  into 

consideration their problems and possibilities. 

6.3.1. The Individual and the Network 

To  the  extent  that  an  individual  via  an  ICT  implant  has  become  part  of  an  ICT  network,  the 

operation  of  this  whole  network  –  not  just  the  ICT  implant  –  needs  to  be  considered.  It  is 

particularly  important  that  the  power  over  this  network  (who  has  access  to  it,  who  can  retrieve 

information from it, who can change it, and so forth) is transparent. This is based on the principle 

of respect for persons, as well as the principle of avoiding harm. 

30 

 
  
6.3.2. Freedom of Research 

Although the necessity for research can sometimes be questioned, new knowledge is essential for 

the  development  of  individuals  and  societies.  However,  the  freedom  of  research  has  to  be 

restricted  by  respect  for  other  important  values  and  ethical  principles,  for  example  respect  for 

persons  and  the  obligation  to  avoid  physical,  mental  and  economic  harm  as  a  result  of 

participation in research. 

The  ethical  notion  of  the  inviolability  of  the  human  body  should  not  be  understood  as  a  barrier 

against the advancement of science and technology but as a barrier against its possible misuse. 

The  freedom  of  research  in  this  field  should  be  subject  not  only  to  the  informed  consent  of  the 

persons  willing  to  participate  in  new  experiments  aiming  at  health  recovery  but  also  to  the 

awareness of the possibility of damaging not only bodily but also psychic functions of the people 

participating in clinical trials (see EGE Opinion N° 17 on the ethical aspects of clinical research in 

developing countries, February 2003). 

6.3.3. Participation in Research on ICT Implants 

Informed consent is required when research on e.g. the effects of ICT implants is carried out on 

healthy volunteers or on patients. This information should not only concern possible benefits and 

present health risks, but also long term risks as well as risks that such implants can be used to 

locate people and/or obtain access to information stored in these devices without the permission 

of  the  person  in  whom  the  devices  are  implanted.  The  right  to  discontinue  participation  in  a 

research project should always be respected, and it should be made clear to participants how this 

right (when ICT devices are implanted in a person’s body) will be respected, in practice. 

6.3.4. ICT Implants, Minors and Legally Incapacitated 

Informed  consent  is  an  ethical  principle  which  applies  also  in  the  field  of  ICT  implants  in  the 

human body. However, this needs specification particularly in cases in which persons due to their 

age (children, elderly people) and/or psychic constitution are supposed to submit to ICT implants 

for  reasons  of  health  surveillance.  ICT  devices  should  be  implanted  in  minors  and  legally 

incapacitated only if this is done in accordance with the principles set out in the Council of Europe 

Convention on Biomedicine and Human Rights. 

The question of cochlear implants for children requires special attention (see Section 5.2 – Value 

Conflicts). 

31 

 
  
6.3.5. Access to ICT Implants for Health Purposes 

There  should  be  fair  access  to  ICT  implants  for  health  purposes.  This  means  that  such  access 

should be based on health care needs rather than on economic resources or social position. 

6.3.6. Irreversible ICT Implants 

The requirements of informed consent and data protection (privacy and confidentiality of the data 

in  particular)  need  to  be  strictly  enforced  in  cases  where  the  ICT  implants  are  irreversible  and 

cannot  be  removed  from  the  body  without  risk  of  severe  damage  or  the  individual’s  life.  Such 

implants  should  not  be  used  for  research  purposes  unless  the  objective  of  the  research  is  to 

provide a clear therapeutic benefit for the individual research subject. 

6.4. ICT IMPLANTS FOR NON-MEDICAL PURPOSES 

The  wide  range  of  potential  non-medical  applications  of  ICT  implants  also  demands  informed 

consent,  respect  for  privacy,  etc.  Some  of  these  applications  are  analysed  in  the  following 

sections. The EGE makes the general point that non-medical applications of ICT implants are a 

potential  threat  to  human  dignity  and  democratic  society.  Therefore,  such  applications  should 

respect in all circumstances the principles of informed consent and proportionality and, whenever 

aiming at surveillance purposes, they should comply with the rules set out hereunder in Section 

6.4.6. 

The EGE emphasizes that where adults give their informed consent to specific applications, the 

provided information should include clear data on possible health disturbances in the short and/or 

long term as well as problems of unwilling data processing. 

6.4.1. Mental Functions and Personal Identity 

Personal  identity  is  crucial  for  the  attribution  of  moral  responsibility  according  to  many  ethical 

theories.  ICT  devices  should  therefore  not  be  used  to  manipulate  mental  functions  or  change 

personal  identity.  The  right  to  respect  of  human  dignity,  including  the  right  to  the  respect  of 

physical and mental integrity, is the basis for this. 

6.4.2. ICT Implants and Personal Data 

The principles of data protection need to be applied to this area, since data about the human body 

can  be  generated  via  such  implants.  The  privacy  and  confidentiality  of  such  data  need  to  be 

guaranteed. The individual has a right to determine what data about oneself is to be processed, 

by whom and for what purposes. In particular the right of the individual to decide who should have 

access to such data and for what purpose is crucial. 

32 

 
  
These  rights  are  particularly  important  in  the  case  where  ICT  implants  function  with  an  online 

system  and  particularly  in  the  case  where  the  implants  are  part  of  a  surveillance  system.  This 

means that the EGE stresses the importance that not only the individual has the right to protect 

his or her own personal data but that society should take care that such systems, where they are 

permitted, should not become systems of untenable restriction or even negation of basic rights. 

This  should  be  particularly  considered  in  case  such  systems  become  part  of  health  systems  in 

which data is permanently or occasionally transmitted to other parties. The use of ICT implants in 

order to have a remote control over the will of people should be strictly prohibited. 

Legislation and guidelines should be developed to ensure this. The responsibility for this rests with 

the  Member  States.  However,  the  EGE  suggests  that  the  European  Commission  should  initiate 

such a process (see Section 6.5.4). 

6.4.3. Privacy and ICT Implants 

Provided that ICT devices are implanted in accordance with the principles outlined in this Opinion, 

there is no need to declare these implants. They could and should remain unrecognizable to an 

external observer. The right to privacy includes the right to have an ICT implant. 

6.4.4. ICT Implants and Enhancement of Physical and Mental Capabilities 

Efforts should be made to make sure that ICT implants are not used to create a two class society 

or to increase the gap between the industrialized countries and the rest of the world. Access to 

ICT implants for enhancement should be used only: 

• 

To bring children or adults into the “normal”24 range for the population, if they so wish and 

give their informed consent, or, 

• 

To improve health prospects (e.g. to enhance the immune system to be resistant to HIV). 

As  for  health  purposes,  access  to  ICT  implants  for  these  purposes  should  be  based  on 

need rather than on economic resources or social position. 

The EGE stresses that the following possibilities should be banned: 

• 

• 

ICT implants used as a basis for cyber-racism. 

ICT  implants  used  for  changing  the  identity,  memory,  self  perception  and  perception  of 

others. 

• 

ICT implants used to enhance capabilities in order to dominate others. 

33 

 
  
• 

ICT implants used for coercion towards others who do not use such devices. 

6.4.5. ICT Implants, Commercialisation and Consumer Interests 

Whilst  the  human  body,  as  such,  should  not  give  rise  to  financial  gain,  there  is  –  as  has  been 

documented  in  the  scientific  background  part  of  this  report  –  already  a  commercial  market  for 

various kinds of ICT devices. It is essential that these products are not put on the market without 

adequate  control.  For  instance,  products  that  can  be  regarded  as  medical  products  should  be 

controlled according to the relevant legal framework. Efforts should be made to make sure that all 

ICT devices are checked for safety and security before being put on the market. 

6.4.6. ICT Implants for Surveillance Purposes 

ICT  implants  for  surveillance  in  particular  threaten  human  dignity.  They  could  be  used  by  state 

authorities,  individuals  and  groups  to  increase  their  power  over  others.  The  implants  could  be 

used to locate people (and also to retrieve other kinds of information about them). This might be 

justified  for  security  reasons  (early  release  for  prisoners)  or  for  safety  reasons  (location  of 

vulnerable children). 

However,  the  EGE  insists  that  such  surveillance  applications  of  ICT  implants  may  only  be 

permitted if the legislator considers that there is an urgent and justified necessity in a democratic 

society  (Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention)  and  there  are  no  less  intrusive  methods. 

Nevertheless  the  EGE  does  not  favour  such  uses  and  considers  that  surveillance  applications, 

under  all  circumstances,  must  be  specified  in  legislation.  Surveillance  procedures  in  individual 

cases should be approved and monitored by an independent court. 

The same general principles should apply to the use of ICT implants for military purposes. 

6.5. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 

6.5.1. Development of the Information Society 

The  EGE  considers  that  the  ethical  questions  related  to  ICT  implants  in  the  human  body  are 

intimately  related  to  the  development  of  the  Information  Society  as  a  whole.  The  EGE  strongly 

supports the vision of a people-centred, inclusive and development-oriented Information Society 

as  proclaimed  in  the  Declaration  of  Principles  of  the  World  Summit  on  the  Information  Society 

(Geneva 2003). 

24  The  concept  of  “normal”  is  not  precise.  However,  what  is  implied  in  6.4.4,  in  using  this  term,  is  the  condition 
generally  prevailing  and  not  caused  by  genetic  malfunction,  disease  or  deficiency  and  lacking  observable 
abnormalities. 

34 

 
  
                                                                                                                                                            
6.5.2. Public Debate and Information 

A broad social and political debate is needed as to what kind of applications should be accepted 

and  legally  approved,  particularly  concerning  surveillance  and  enhancement.  A  precautionary 

approach is recommended by the EGE. The Member States and their national ethics councils (or 

corresponding  institutions)  have  a  responsibility  to  create  conditions  for  education  and 

constructive, well-informed debates in this area. 

6.5.3. Democracy and Power 

This Opinion differs from several of the earlier ones of the EGE in that it moves into a new and 

rapidly  expanding  area.  The  Opinion  contains  the  essential  elements  for  a  future  agenda  for 

responsible regulators in Europe. 

Public debate and education are essential to ensure transparency and the Member States have a 

responsibility to ensure that the power of development and access to ICT implants are decided 

through democratic processes. 

6.5.4. Need for Regulation 

It is clear that this field needs regulation. Currently, non-medical ICT implants in the human body 

are  not  explicitly  covered  by  existing  legislation,  particularly  in  terms  of  privacy  and  data 

protection.  Any  regulations  need  to  be  based  on  the  following  principles:  dignity,  human  rights, 

equity,  autonomy  and 

the  derived  principles,  precautionary,  data  minimisation,  purpose 

specification, proportionality and relevance (see Sections 4 and 5). 

In the EGE’s view, implantable devices for medical purposes should be regulated in the same way 

as drugs when the medical goal is the same, particularly as such implants are only partly covered 

by Council Directive 90/385/EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating 

to active implantable medical devices. 

The  EGE  recommends  that  the  European  Commission  should  launch  legislative  initiatives  in 

these areas of ICT implant applications. 

6.5.5. Impact Research and ICT Devices 

More research on the long term social, cultural and health impact of different types of ICT implants 

needs  to  be  carried  out,  with  a  particular  focus  on  risk  characterisation,  risk  assessment,  risk 

management and risk communication. The EGE considers that this should be kept in mind for the 

Seventh  EU  Research  Framework  Programme.  This  sort  of  precautionary  research  in  a  rapidly 

developing field is of crucial importance. 

35 

 
  
6.5.6. Need for Review 

The  field  of  ICT  implants  is  in  its  infancy  and  rapid  developments  are  taking  place  that  raise 

societal  fears  as  well  as  hopes.  Consequently,  the  EGE  has  addressed  the  key  ethical  issues 

regarding  developments  that  are  current  or  can  be  foreseen  at  the  present  time.  However,  it  is 

clear  that  the  EGE  will  have  to  return  to  this  subject  to  update  our  advice  in  the  light  of  future 

applications of ICT implants. Particularly care will need to be taken concerning developments that 

appear benign at first sight (addressing for example a serious health problem) but which prove to 

be less benign when used for other applications. Consequently, we consider that a review of this 

Opinion by the EGE may be necessary in about three to five years time. 

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 

The Chairperson: Göran Hermerén 

The Members: 

Nicos C. Alivizatos 

Inez de Beaufort 

Rafael Capurro 

Yvon Englert 

Catherine Labrusse-Riou 

Anne McLaren 

Linda Nielsen 

Pere Puigdomenech-Rosell 

Stefano Rodota 

Günter Virt 

Peter Whittaker 

36 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
