THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS 

IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES 

TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

GENERAL REPORT 

n the Activities of the  
European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 
to the European Commission  

o

2000 - 2005 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers  
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number:

00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11

A great deal of additional information on the European Union is available on the Internet.
It can be accessed through the Europa server (http://europa.eu.int).

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication.

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, 2005

ISBN 92-894-9950-8

© European Communities, 2005
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Printed in Italy

PRINTED ON WHITE CHLORINE-FREE PAPER

II

2005_1870_EN.indd   2

14-09-2005   12:55:10

The EGE members with President Barroso, 16.03.2005

iii

III

2005_1870_EN.indd   3

14-09-2005   12:55:22

 
 
FOREWORD BY JOSÉ MANUEL BARROSO 

PRESIDENT OF THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

Ethical advice on Science and New Technologies has played an important role in policy development in the 

European Commission for the last fourteen years. In fact, the Commission created the European Group on 

Ethics (EGE), which was initially named the Group of Advisers on the Ethical Implications of Biotechnology, 

in 1991, making this one of the first ethics committees in the world. 

The EGE plays a leading role in the ethical debate at EU level and I would like to take this opportunity to 

extend my sincere congratulations and thanks to the current President and all the Members of the Group for 

the quality of the work they have done over the last four years. 

The EGE produced a report on Citizen’s Rights and New Technologies in May 2000, which emphasised the 

importance  of  the  ethics  of  responsibility,  especially  in  response  to  the  major  risks  arising  from  the 

instrumentalisation  of  the  human  body,  discrimination  based  on  genetic  characteristics  and  the 

merchandising of the human body, its components and products. These views have been reflected in the 

Charter of Fundamental Rights of the Union. 

This  2000-2005  report  not  only  presents  the  Opinions  and  other  statements  which  the  Group  published 

during its term of office, but also sets out the more general impressions of the President and other Members 

concerning the evolution in ethical affairs that the Group has experienced during this mandate and the role it 

has played in the international debate on ethics. 

The Group has continued to work with the European Parliament and the Council, to exchange views with 

non-governmental organisations and to establish systematic links with national bodies. This open approach 

has contributed to the undoubted success of their efforts. 

On the basis of the ideas discussed in this report, the Commission will further strengthen the EGE so that it 

can  respond  better  to  the  expectations  of  the  people  of  Europe  and  ensure  that  the  ethical  aspects  of 

science and technology are properly taken into account in all the activities of the European Commission.  

v

 
 
 
 
 
 
The  new  EGE  Mandate,  which  was  adopted  on  11  May  2005,  gives  us  the  opportunity  to  increase  the 

membership  from  twelve  up  to  a  maximum  of  fifteen  and  thus  to  reflect  better  the  enlarged  EU.  It  also 

allows  us  to  increase  the  range  of  disciplines  among  the  membership  in  order  to  further  diversify  the 

composition of the Group. I expect that the appointment procedure will be complete before the autumn. The 

Commission will ensure through the work of the Secretariat that the new Group will be able to respond to 

the challenge of producing shorter and quicker ethical analyses, when this is deemed necessary because of 

rapid advances in Science and Technology, as well as their more traditional full Opinions. 

Ultimately, the EGE is concerned not with what can be done but with what ought to be done. There are few 

absolutes in this analysis and just as what can be done is driven by the dynamics of science and technology 

so what ought to be done is driven by changing social values. This makes the EGE, which strives to seek 

consensus, so important. Their analyses are not carved in stone but strive to look back at the evolution of 

science and society and also to look forward to likely  future developments. This makes multidisciplinarity 

and  interdisciplinarity  vital  to  their  membership.  The  Commission  needs  such  polymaths  that  can  work 

outside and between the traditional disciplines. 

José Manuel Barroso 

vi

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

  PROLOGUE BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE EGE 

VALUE CONFLICTS AND THE INTEGRATION OF EUROPE 

Göran Hermerén ......................................................................................................................1 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

1.1.  THE ROLE OF THE EGE...................................................................................................7 

1.2.  OPINIONS and REPORTS ISSUED BY THE EGE...........................................................9 

1.3.  THE EGE AND THE PUBLIC ..........................................................................................12 

1.4.  PROSPECTS FOR THE FUTURE 

1.4.1. New Fields of Science and Technology – New Challenges ..................................15 

1.4.2. Strengthening the EGE’s status and role under the next mandate........................15 

2.  REFLECTIONS ON ETHICS, SCIENCE AND LAW 

By Members of the EGE 

2.1.  ETHICS AND PUBLIC POLICY WITHIN A DIGITAL ENVIRONMENT 

Rafael Capurro .......................................................................................................................19 

2.2.  POSSIBLE FUTURE MEDIA STORIES INVOLVING ETHICS 

Inez de Beaufort......................................................................................................................26 

2.3.  DO PEOPLE’S VIEWS COUNT? 

Anne McLaren.........................................................................................................................33 

2.4.  FOOD, GENOMICS AND ETHICS 

Pere Puigdomenèch ...............................................................................................................35 

2.5.  TRANSFORMATIONS OF THE BODY 

Stefano Rodotá........................................................................................................................41 

vii

 
 
 
 
2.6.  UNITY  AND  VARIETY  OF  ETHICAL  PRINCIPLES:  HUMAN  DIGNITY 

ENDANGERED 

Günter Virt ..............................................................................................................................57 

2.7.  BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ETHICS / THE NEXT 10 YEARS 

Peter Whittaker.......................................................................................................................63 

3.   A SELECTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES OF THE MEMBERS 

  Göran Hermerén, President of the EGE.................................................................................69 

  Linda Nielsen, Vice-President of the EGE..............................................................................70 

  Rafael Capurro, Member of the EGE .....................................................................................71 

Inez de Beaufort, Member of the EBE....................................................................................73 

  Yvon Englert, Member of the EGE .........................................................................................73 

  Catherine Labrusse-Riou, Member of the EGE......................................................................74 

  Anne McLaren, Member of the EGE ......................................................................................75 

  Günter Virt, Member of the EGE ............................................................................................77 

4.  THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS 

4.1. Members 2001-2005...........................................................................................................79 

4.2.  Remit 26/03/2001 ..............................................................................................................89 

4.3.  Rules of procedure 03/07/2001 .........................................................................................91 

4.4.  Secretariat of the EGE.......................................................................................................95 

viii

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GENERAL REPORT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE EGE 

2000-2005 

 
 
 
 
PROLOGUE BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE EGE  

VALUE CONFLICTS AND THE INTEGRATION OF EUROPE 

Göran Hermerén 

Principles, values and goods  

In previous Opinions the recommendations proposed by the EGE have been based on principles, such as 

human  dignity,  autonomy,  confidentiality,  proportionality,  equity  and  so  forth.  This  approach  has  a  long 

tradition in ethical analyses. What I want to do here is to call attention to the values and goods underlying 

(and justifying) such principles and norms. In fact, there are more than five or six values involved in ethical 

debates.  

Values and goods are more basic than norms, principles and goals. If norms, principles and goals are to be 

justified,  we  have  to  fall  back  ultimately  on  values  and  goods.  For  instance,  we  want  people  to  follow  a 

particular norm, presumably because this promotes certain values or goods (leads to good things or to good 

states of affairs). This can be said without taking a stand on issues like whether or in what sense values are 

objective and how exactly they are related to other concepts like interests, duties and rights.  

Values,  which  are  all  regarded  as  perfectly  legitimate,  can  be  ranked  in  many  ways.  If  different  possible 

ranking orders between these values are made explicit, the complexity of moral and ethical issues becomes 

more apparent. Such ranking orders also play a crucial role in different ideologies, and what I want to do 

here, in other words, is to call attention to the important role they play in underpinning and as tacit premises 

in policy-making and ethical discourse.  

Some of the broad categories of values involved include: 

freedom  

(including autonomy) 

economic growth 

Integrity, dignity 

health and quality of life 

new knowledge 

participation, democracy 

justice 

Including fairness of access 

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These values are all perfectly legitimate and have played – and still play – an important role in the European 

cultural heritage. (The diagram makes no claim of completeness; privacy and confidentiality, for example, 

are missing.) 

The  relations  between  the  values  in  the  diagram  are  complex  and  not  static,  especially  when  they  are 

contextualized.  Some  of  the  relations  suggested  by  the  straight  lines  indicate  potential  tensions,  others 

potential promotion. For example, freedom can promote economic growth; economic growth can promote 

new  knowledge,  which  in  its  turn  can  help  to  improve  health  care  and  health.  On  the  other  hand,  the 

unrestricted  freedom  of  some  can  also  endanger  the  integrity  and  dignity  of  others,  which  in  turn  may 

undermine or threaten their health and quality of life. 

This raises the question of how the terms in this diagram are to be interpreted, how the values are to be 

ranked  in  order  of  importance  –  and/or  what  limits  are  to  be  set,  and  by  whom  –  to  the  promotion  and 

pursuit of certain values.  

European norms and values? 

What  holds  a  union  of  states  together?  Not  just  geography,  not  just  a  particular  leader,  not  just  the 

possession of powerful weapons, not even a common history: In fact norms and values will play a crucial 

role in the integration of the members of the European Union. That is why deep value conflicts – and the 

assumptions on which they are based – have to be taken seriously. They include not only the obvious and 

much  discussed  ones,  for  instance,  on  the  moral  status  of  the  embryo  (with  implications  for  abortion, 

embryonic  stem  cell  research,  cloning,  in  vitro  fertilization,  designer  babies,  and  so  forth),  but  also  many 

others. 

The  values  of  one  individual  may  differ  from  those  of  another.  Similarly,  values  may  differ  between 

professions and institutions. However, to survive in the long run, a society requires a minimal shared set of 

values;  otherwise  it  would  fall  apart  into  “social  atoms”,  as  it  were.  These  shared  values  form  the  moral 

identity of a particular society, and they provide the basis when trade-offs between different values have to 

be made.  

Are there any distinctively European norms and values? At first sight, all the values listed in the diagram 

above  can  be  found  also  in  other  cultures,  and  that  also  goes  for  some  of  the  values  and  principles  not 

listed in the diagram but to which the EGE often refers in its Opinions, such as privacy, confidentiality, the 

principle of proportionality and the precautionary principle.  

The values per se are thus not distinctively European, but rather the particular ranking order of the values. 

For instance, it is obvious that the principle of autonomy, based on the value of freedom, on the whole is 

ranked  differently  in  Europe  than  in  the  Japanese  or  American  culture.  On  the  basis  of  different  ranking 

orders between the values listed in the diagram, different types of societies can be identified. 

2

 
 
The value of health 

Health is a good thing! People feel good when they are healthy and bad when they are ill or suffer from a 

disease. However, this does not mean that health and other values always are interpreted and understood 

in the same way. Nor does it mean that health and other values merely are feelings, that they are subjective 

and arbitrary, and that reasons cannot be given for and against values. 

Health is clearly one of the basic values of our culture – not only in Europe. Health is not just the absence of 

disease  but  what  more  is  required?  There  are  many  definitions  of,  and  theories  about,  health  in  the 

literature. However, in declarations on human rights, which include the right to health, food and security, the 

precise definition of health is usually left open.  

It would carry us too far to go into this – let me just stress that the choice of definition is not innocent: it will 

have consequences for individuals, for insurance companies, for doctors, for social and well-fare statistics 

(which provides a basis for planning health care reforms) and for societies at large. 

The tradition of social solidarity 

“Social solidarity” is clearly an important value in Europe. At least two dimensions need to be distinguished. 

The  first  is:  Who  is  responsible  for  social  solidarity  -  the  state,  certain  authorities,  charity  organizations, 

volunteers, neighbours and friends? The second and more important dimension is: What is meant by “social 

solidarity”? 

In a weak sense, “social solidarity” requires only that medical (social, psychological, economic) help should 

be provided to those who need it, without specifying how much help should be provided, and when it should 

be  distributed.  However,  in  a  somewhat  stronger  sense,  it  requires  that  help  to  those  who  need  it  be 

provided before others will get anything. In a still somewhat stronger and more egalitarian sense, it requires 

that  so  much  help  is  provided  that  the  gap  between  the  underprivileged  and  the  others  is  reduced  or 

eliminated. Even stronger versions can be obtained by adding time parameters, specifying when or within 

what time limit the help or assistance is to be given.  

It is only too easy to slide between these and other different senses of social solidarity. At different times 

and also at the same time people may be talking about the importance of social solidarity without noticing 

that  they  attach  different  meanings  to  this  term.  Clearly,  there  can  be  clashes  between  the  values  of 

freedom and solidarity. However, there can also be conflicts between those who advocate social solidarity 

in different senses of this expression. 

Similar points can be made about the other values in the introductory diagram. For instance, there 

are different kinds or dimensions of freedoms. There is freedom from something and freedom to do 

something.  The  freedom  of  one  stakeholder  can  impose  restrictions  on  the  freedom  of  others. 

Hence the issue of limits to freedom is bound to come up. There can also be tensions between 

those  who  advocate  freedom  for  various  stakeholders  in  different  senses  and  in  specified 

situations. 

3

 
Pluralism and harmonisation 

Pluralism is a source of strength. Besides, pluralism is an important European value. To respect it is in line 

with Article 22 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Article 6 of the Amsterdam Treaty. However, there 

is a tension between the desire to respect and encourage pluralism and the desire for harmonization. Both 

are legitimate, but a balance has to be struck between these competing values. 

There are important differences between the Member States in terms of culture and history, political and 

religious  traditions,  as  well  as  concerning  economic  and  technological  development,  the  extent  of  private 

care, what is covered by health insurance, how the national health service is financed, etc. With ten new 

Member  States  these  differences  are  even  more  conspicuous  than  before.  All  this  makes  harmonization 

difficult.  

Nevertheless,  harmonization  of  values  is  also  desirable  not  only  in  view  of  what  we  want  to  avoid,  for 

instance, medical tourism, but also in terms of what we want to achieve, such as more cost-effective drugs 

for European citizens or more efficient cooperation between researchers in different countries. 

The need for debate 

We need an enlightened debate about what we take to be the essential European values, which need to be 

protected, in particular about their interpretation and ranking order in cases of conflict. Creating conditions 

for such debates is an important task of the EGE. 

To be relevant, such debates need to address and clarify the challenges of new scientific and technological 

developments,  given  these  values.  Then  the  views  of  different  stakeholders  need  to  be  heard.  To  be 

constructive, such a debate has to be based on some agreement about what the problems are, as well as 

about  the  legal  and  scientific  background.  Then  the  underlying  assumptions  have  to  be  made  explicit, 

knowledge gaps have to be identified, and principles of procedure have to be agreed. 

A  pragmatic  approach  begins  by  identifying  points  on  which  there  is  consensus,  uses  these  points  as  a 

platform,  and  then  moves  on  from  there  to  more  difficult  points  which  need  to  be  further  discussed  and 

illuminated, not only by clarifying the terminology and the scientific and legal background but also by making 

unspoken assumptions and convictions explicit, before any conclusions can be arrived at.  

The EGE considers that one of its important missions is to contribute to European integration. This is done 

by discussing and applying a number of the fundamental values enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental 

Rights  of  European  citizens  to  specific  issues,  to  problems  as  diverse  as  clinical  trials  in  developing 

countries, tissue banking and patents on inventions involving stem cells and stem cell lines. In the opinions 

we  produce,  roughly  two  every  year,  these  values  or principles  are  applied  to  a  variety  of  topics  ranging 

from genetic testing in the workplace to stem cell research and use and to ICT implants in the human brain. 

New  information  technologies,  new  technologies  in  farming  and  in  food  preparation  (genetic  engineering 

etc) can be tested against what we want to promote (positive goals and values) as well as against what we 

want to avoid (negative goals and values), such as bioterrorism, a surveillance society, commercialization of 

4

 
the  human  body,  medical  tourism  or  an  increasing  gap  between  the  health  and  quality  of  life  of  rich  and 

poor people (and nations) that may follow in the wake of increased patient co-payment, private clinics and 

more widespread use of private health care and health care insurance. 

Facing new scientific and technological developments, we need to explore the consequences of promoting 

certain values, as well as of limiting them, both in the short term and in the long term perspective. This is a 

difficult  task  and  there  is  a  delicate  balance  to  strike  between  conflicting  demands.  There  is  always  the 

temptation to try to achieve consensus by being sufficiently vague. 

Sometimes there is a price to pay for consensus in terms of vagueness. Often the price is worth it, because 

an agreement has been achieved on a document that can serve as a basis for future discussions and co-

operation. Furthermore, these discussions can promote a deeper understanding of the parties involved and 

improve future collaboration. However, sometimes the price is too high - particularly if the text is so vague 

that it does not exclude or forbid anything. 

The values have to be ethically justified. The decision-making procedure should not only be transparent and 

legitimate  but  it  must  also  be  perceived  to  be  so.  Not  only  participation  but  also  transparency  and 

accountability are important democratic values.  

Future challenges 

The traditional European values – whatever they are and we have seen that they can be described in many 

ways – can be challenged both from within and without. 

Many health care systems in Europe are based on a long tradition of social solidarity. Its roots can be traced 

back to the Stoic and Judeo-Christian traditions of antiquity and to a basic instinct of helping the members 

of one’s tribe. However, there are now many signs that this tradition is being undermined.  

Today, there is much debate on the existence and possible end of the welfare state. Many people seem to 

be tempted to turn their eyes to the US and to think of consumer sovereignty as a priority tool. This means, 

as I understand it, to let the market forces decide. People should get what they are willing and able to pay 

for. What nobody is willing (or able) to pay for, should not be provided. The temptation is understandable, 

perhaps irresistible.  

In  the  discussion  of  these  new  challenges,  we  may  get  some  help  from  European  declarations  and 

conventions,  which  can  serve  as  a  basis  for  dialogue.  They  are  not  meant  to  replace  thinking,  but  to 

stimulate thinking. They are not meant to replace values, but to remind us of important values that need to 

be taken into account.  

The Charter of Fundamental Rights, to which the EGE also contributed, is one such instrument. The various 

directives and treatises represent other obvious starting points for our discussions. Another important text, 

of course, was the proposed new Constitution of Europe, as well as the Council of Europe Convention on 

Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine  –  all  of  these  texts  can  provide  starting  points  for  a  dialogue,  for 

5

 
discussions of interpretations, for setting limits, for suggestions concerning ranking orders and applications 

of the general values these documents refer to. 

Dialogue  on  difficult  questions,  such  as  those  raised  by  pharmacogenomics  or  nanotechnologies,  to 

mention only two areas which the EGE during its next mandate may examine, is important for the future of 

Europe. 

Göran Hermerén 

President of the EGE 

6

 
 
 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 

This  second  General  Report  on  the  Activities  of  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New 

Technologies  (EGE)1  covers  the  period  April  2001  —  March  2005.  The  beginning  of  the  21st  century 

continues to be a period of remarkable change in Europe in virtually every field and not least in the fields of 

science and technology. Not surprisingly, the advice of the EGE has been in great demand and its standing 

in the world of ethics has grown correspondingly. 

The current report, corresponding to the second Mandate of the EGE, is both retrospective and prospective 

in  nature.  It  produces  a  review  of  the  work  of  the  EGE  during  the  mandate  period  and  presents  the 

reflections of the Members looking forward to future activities. 

The Report has three main parts. This first part gives a general overview of the role of the EGE and its work 

during the mandate. It also provides some information on the way in which this information has been made 

accessible to the general public. 

Part II presents the individual reflections of some of the EGE Members. These reflections are essentially 

prospective in nature and explore some of the wider aspects of the ethics of science and technology. 

The following section provides an outline (in list form) of the main international activities of the Members and 

the final substantive section gives the texts of the EGE’s Opinions and Statements. 

1.1. THE ROLE OF THE EGE 

In November 1991, the European Commission under its then President, Jacques Delors, took the innovative 

step  of  incorporating  ethics  into  the  decision-making  process  for  Community  research  and  technological 

development  policies  by  setting  up  the  Group  of  Advisers  on  the  Ethical  Implications  of  Biotechnology 

(GAEIB2). 

Following  this  initiative,  the  Commission  Decision  of  16 December 1997  set  up  the  European  Group  on 

Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE), which replaced the GAEIB. The remit of the new Group 

was established as “Science and New Technologies”, as opposed to the original Group’s more restrictive 

remit  of  “Modern  Biotechnology”.  At  the  same  time,  the  membership  was  increased  to  12  and  new 

disciplines were added - notably, a broadening of the science base to include for example informatics. The 

1997  Decision  also  provided  that  the  EGE  could  examine  subjects  suggested  to  the  Commission  by  the 

European Parliament or the Council. 

1  The first EGE Activities Report was issued in 2001: “General Report on the activities of the European Group on 
Ethics in Science and New Technologies to the European Commission 1998-2000”, Office for Official Publications of 
the European Communities, Luxembourg, 2001, ISBN 92-894-0924-X.  It is available on the EGE website: 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/publications_en.htm 
2 Chaired during its second term by the eminent French lawyer human rights Mrs Noëlle Lenoir, at that time a Member 
of the French Conseil d'État and Chair of IBC (UNESCO) 

7

 
 
                                                 
The  EGE  is  and  remains  independent  in  its  advisory  function.  The  members  are  appointed  by  the 

Commission purely on the basis of their professional  competence. They are drawn from the EU Member 

States but do not represent the Member States. The EGE reports to the President of the Commission and 

responds to requests for advice from the President. However, it has the right of self-initiative if it feels that 

the Commission should be made aware of ethical concerns in particular fields of science and technology. 

Furthermore, once the advice has been rendered to the Commission the EGE advice is widely distributed 

through the internet, the press and by direct mailing. 

The  EGE  is  also  a  pluralist  and  multidisciplinary  body,  similar  in  some  respects  to  the  national  ethics 

committees which exist in most EU Member States. 

The three-year mandate of the members appointed to the EGE in 1997 came to an end in December 2000. 

A new mandate was adopted on 26 March 2001 for the period 2001-2005. Only minor changes were made 

at  that  time,  mainly  with  the  aim  of  improving  the  Group’s  working  methods.  The  EGE  mandate  will  be 

renewed again in 2005 (see Section 1.4.2). 

The essential objective of the Group is to advise the Commission on all ethical questions relating to Science 

and  New  Technologies,  either  at  the  request  of  the  Commission  or  on  its  own  initiative3.  This  advice  is 

usually  provided  as  an  EGE  Opinion  (see  Section  1.2.)  but  the  EGE  can  also  issue  their  advice  in  other 

formats.  The  Opinions  are  designed  to  clarify  the  underlying  issues  associated  with  specific  fields  of 

Science and Technology and thus supply an ethical input to the EU legislative process. This role of adviser 

to the Commission remains the EGE’s primary function. However, as stated earlier, the Group’s mandate 

allows  it  to  respond  to  ethical  questions  concerning  science  and  technology  from  the  Parliament  and  the 

Council  and  the  EGE  has  been  active  in  networking  with  these  Institutions  and  the  National  Ethics 

Committees in the Member States. 

The high standing of the membership, the EGE’s wide range of professional competences, the international 

recognition that has been established over the years, and  the quality of its ethical advice, all combine to 

make  its  advice  of  importance  to  the  Community  legislative  process.  It  is  increasingly  recognised  in  the 

legislative  acts  themselves.  For  example,  Article  7  of  Directive  98/44  on  the  legal  protection  of 

biotechnology  inventions  states  “the  Commission’s  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New 

Technologies  evaluates  all  ethical  aspects  of  biotechnology”.  A  second  example  is  provided  by  Directive 

2001/18 on the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms. Recital 57 of the Preamble states that: 

“The Commission’s European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies should be consulted with 

a view to obtaining advice on ethical issues of a general nature regarding the deliberate release or placing 

on  the  market  of  GMOs”.  In  the  body  of  this  Directive,  Article  29.1  states:  “Without  prejudice  to  the 

competence of Member States as regards ethical issues, the Commission shall, on its own initiative or at 

the request of the European Parliament or the Council, consult any committee it has created with a view to 

3 Mandate of the EGE (2000-2004) available on the EGE website at 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/gee_en.htm 

8

 
                                                 
obtaining its advice on the ethical implications of biotechnology, such as the European Group on Ethics in 

Science and New Technologies, on ethical issues of a general nature”. 

1.2. OPINIONS and REPORTS ISSUED BY THE EGE 

The EGE issued the following Opinions and reports during this mandate period. 

OPINIONS 

SUPPORTING AND OTHER REPORTS 

N¨16 

Ethical  Aspects  of  Patenting  Inventions 
Involving Human Stem Cells 

N°17 

Ethical  Aspects  of  Clinical  Research  in 
Developing Countries 

N°18 

Ethical Aspects of Genetic Testing in the 
Workplace 

"A History of patenting life in the United States with 
to  Canada  and  Europe" 
comparative  attention 
(expert report) 
"Study  on  the  patenting  of  inventions  related  to 
human stem cells"  (expert report) 

"The  Ethical  aspects  of  biomedical  research  in 
developing 
the 
countries",  Proceedings 
Roundtable  Debate  held  in  Brussels  on  1  October 
2002. 

of 

"Genetic  testing  in  the  workplace",  Proceedings  of 
the Roundtable Debate held in Brussels on 6 March 
2000. 

N°19 

N°20 

Ethical  Aspects  of  Umbilical  Cord  Blood 
Banking 

"A Worldwide Study of Umbilical Cord Cell Banking" 
(expert report) 

Ethical  Aspects  of  ICT  Implants  in  the 
Human Body 

"The Ethical aspects of ICT Implants in the Human 
Body", Proceedings of the Roundtable Debate held 
in Amsterdam on 21 December 2004. 

"ICT  Implants  in  the  Human  Body  –  A  Review" 
(expert report) 

"Report  of  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  on  the 
Ethical  Aspects  of  Human  Tissue  Engineered 
Products" 

The Group also issued a revised version of the earlier Opinion N°15 on the Ethical Aspects of Human Stem 

Cell Research and Use (dated September 2002) and a background report for this revision entitled “Survey 

of the National Regulations in the European Union Regarding Research on Human Embryos”.  

In  the  light  of  the  EU  Enlargement,  the  EGE  Chairman  invited  representatives  of  the  National  Ethics 

Committees in the new Member States to meet the EGE. The ensuing series of meetings resulted in the 

publication of a report entitled “Ethics in the New Member States”. 

During this mandate the EGE launched a newsletter entitled “Ethically Speaking”, which reports on ethical 

analyses  in  the  Member  States  and  facilitates  exchanges  of  experience  and  information  and  acts  as  a 

bridge between activities in this field at EU and Member State level. The next issue (July 2005) will be the 

fifth in the series. 

9

 
 
 
This output is published by the EU’s Publications Office and over 1500 printed copies of each publication 

are  mailed  to  individuals  and  organisations.  Electronic  versions  are  also  available  on  the  EGE’s  website 

(see Section1.3.)  

The formal Opinions of the Group follow a standard pattern. The first part consists of a recital of the many 

reference  texts  which  form  the  starting  point  for  the  Opinion  (the  origin  of  the  ethical  analysis  [usually  a 

request  from  the  President  of  the  Commission],  the  relevant  EU  primary  and  secondary  legislation,  the 

relevant international laws, treaties and conventions, the primary scientific texts, the relevant previous EGE 

Opinions,  the  expert  reports  and  roundtable  hearings).  The  second  part  consists  of  three  sections  which 

provide  the  scientific,  legal  and  ethical  backgrounds  to  the  Opinion.  The  third  part  presents  the  Group 

Opinion  proper  (which  may  include  a  minority  view  should  this  prove  necessary).  Some  of  the  main 

conclusions in these Opinions are highlighted below. 

Opinion N°16 (7.05.2002) on the patenting of inventions involving stem cells was requested by the 

Commission. The Group provided advice on what could (stem cells modified by a technical process) and 

what could not be patented (unmodified stem cells) and stressed the principle of the non-commercialisation 

of the human body. The EGE also called for donors to be kept fully informed about patent applications and 

highlighted  the  importance  of  fair  access  to  health  care  procedures  that  depend  on  such  patents.  This 

Opinion included a minority view concerning the status of the embryo. In the view of one member, allowing 

the patenting of human embryonic stem cells (HESC) would encourage HESC research  with serious ethical 

consequences and this would undermine the priority of research using non-embryonic stem cells. 

Opinion  N°17  (4.02.2003)  on  the  ethical  aspects  of  clinical  research  in  developing  countries  was 

requested  by  the  Commission.  In  the  EGE’s  Opinion  free  and  informed  consent  was  of  paramount 

importance  and  could  not  be  compromised  because  of  difficulties  due  to  local  conditions  or  traditions. 

Where necessary representatives might be appropriate in this process but free and informed consent must 

be  obtained  for  each  individual  involved  in  the  trial.  Furthermore,  the  ethical  evaluation  of  the  research 

protocol should be carried out by ethical committees in all the countries involved. The question of placebos 

in trials in developing countries was addressed by the Group, which stressed that any exception from the 

rules used in European trials should be justified. 

With regard to patient care, supply of treatment during and after the trial, and communicating the results of 

the trial, the EGE insisted that the same general rules as those mandated in the EU should apply wherever 

the trial took place. 

Opinion N°18 (28.07.2003) on the ethical aspects of genetic testing in the workplace was issued on 

the  initiative  of  the  Group.  The  EGE  decided  to  issue  this  Opinion  because  of  the  increasing  use  of 

genetic testing in the workplace in the USA and the wish to pre-empt its introduction in Europe. The Group 

concluded that employers “should not in general perform genetic screening nor ask employees to undergo 

tests”. Furthermore, medical examinations in general should not be a criterion for the selection of potential 

employees.  Genetic  testing  may  be  permitted  in  exceptional  cases.  However,  such  exceptional  cases 

10

 
should be regulated by law and taking part in genetic testing must be based on full and informed consent. 

The  results  must  remain  confidential  and  not  be  disclosed  without  consent  to  third  parties  including  the 

employer and insurance companies. 

Opinion N°19 (16.03.2004) on the ethical aspects of umbilical cord blood banking was requested by 

the Commission. The Group was of the opinion that it is unlikely that cord blood cells kept for autologous 

use  (i.e.  use  by  the  donor  at  a  later  stage)  will  be  of  value  in  the  future.  Therefore,  they  stated  that  the 

legitimacy of commercial cord blood banks for autologous use should be questioned as they sell a service 

which  has  presently  no  real  use  regarding  therapeutic  options.  Some  members  thought  that  this  activity 

should  be  banned  but  the  majority  considered  that  the  activities  of  these  banks  should  be  simply 

discouraged and that a strict ban would represent an undue restriction on the freedom of enterprise and the 

freedom  of  choice  of  individuals/couples.  As  a  consequence,  the  EGE’s  advice  was  mainly  focusing  on 

providing  appropriate  information  to  consumers.  However,  the  Group  did  emphasise  the  importance  of 

public cord blood banks, which are already being used for treating children. Nevertheless, the EGE stressed 

that the “collection of cord blood must not disturb the process of delivery and should not present any risks 

for the mother and child”. 

Opinion N°20 (16.03.2005) on the ethical aspects of ICT implants in the human body was issued on 

the initiative of the EGE. The field of ICT implants is in its infancy and rapid developments are in train. 

Consequently, this Opinion is very prospective in nature and will need reviewing in the future. The Group 

divided its Opinion between implants for health and implants for non-medical purposes. On the former the 

EGE emphasised the importance of a clear understanding of the benefits and risks of implants and of the 

need for full and informed consent, particularly when the ICT implant may be irreversible and also when the 

implant  may  form  part  of  a  network.  This  field  involves  specialised  surgical  techniques  and  is  expensive. 

Consequently,  the  Group  insisted  that  access  to  such  treatments  should  be  based  on  health  care  needs 

and not on the individual’s economic position. 

The  key  issue  concerning  non-medical  applications  concerned  surveillance.  Here  the  EGE  insisted  that 

surveillance applications of ICT implants may only be permitted if the legislator considers that there is an 

urgent  and  justified  necessity.  However,  the  Group  does  not  favour  such  uses  and  considers  that  in  all 

circumstances  they  should  be  specified  in  legislation.  Furthermore,  surveillance  procedures  in  individual 

cases should be approved and monitored by an independent court.  

The Report on the ethical aspects of human tissue engineered products (29.06.2004) was prepared 

at  the  request  of  the  Commission.  This  report  has  been  integrated  into  the  impact  assessment  study 

which was performed in view of the preparation of new legislation regulating the placing on the market of 

tissue engineered products fulfilling appropriate criteria in terms of quality, safety and efficacy. The Group 

examined a wide range of issues, including information and consent, donation, privacy and data protection, 

traceability, safety, access, research and clinical trials and commented on each area. Amongst these wide 

11

 
ranging  comments,  the  EGE  insisted  that  the  donor  should  be  provided  with  information  on  the  possible 

future uses as well as on potential conflicting interests between data protection and traceability. 

The  EGE’s  ethical  advice  to  the  European  Commission  is  firmly  based  on  ethical  principles.  These  are 

enunciated  in  each  Opinion.  The  most  basic  principle,  which  is  the  basis  for  the  EU’s  Charter  of 

Fundamental Rights, is the dignity principle. This principle forms the essential basis for fundamental human 

rights  and  from  it  are  derived  a  range  of  subordinate  ethical  principles  which  provide  the  basis  for  the 

Group’s  ethical  advice.  Such  principles  as  non-instrumentalisation,  privacy,  non-discrimination, 

informed consent and equity, occur in most of the Opinions. The EGE has emphasised precaution as an 

ethical  principle  in  many  of  its  earlier  Opinions.  However,  in  its  most  recent  Opinion,  it  used  the 

precautionary principle (PP) in its analysis. This reflects two aspects. The first aspect is that the PP is 

gaining  greater  recognition  both  within  the  EU  and  internationally.  It  now  appears  in  EU  primary  and 

secondary legislation and in EU case law. The second relates to Opinion N°20 itself, which is concerned 

with  a  rapidly  advancing  field  of  science  and  technology  in  the  ICT  implant  field  and  this  makes  the  PP 

highly  relevant  to  ethical  analyses.  As  the  work  of  the  EGE  becomes  more  forward  looking  the  PP  is 

expected to become more prominent in its ethical analyses. 

1.3. THE EGE AND THE PUBLIC 

1.3.1. The EGE website 

The EGE website4 has become an efficient, major dissemination-tool for the EGE reports and an important 

point of reference for the general public since its creation in 2001. This statement is no exaggeration as the 

website statistics demonstrate. In 2004 there were 104,523 visits to the EGE website from citizens in the 

“EU-15” Member States and 18,276 visits from the 10 new Members States (plus Bulgaria, Romania and 

Turkey)  making  about  123  thousand  visits  in  total.  Added  to  this,  there  were  around  28,100  visits  to  the 

EGE website from about 100 other countries (ranging from 7,446 visits by Canadian individuals to one visit 

from Kyrgyzstan) – see the following pie charts. 

In February 2004, the EGE Secretariat conducted an opinion survey among the visitors to its website and 

nearly all the respondents indicated that they visited the site regularly (about once a month). They used the 

website as a source of information (81 % of respondents) for example accessing past Opinions, etc., and 

obtaining links to other ethics sites (27 % of respondents). 

The EGE published its Opinion N°19 (Umbilical Cord Banking) in 2004 and some 24 thousand of the EGE 

website  visitors  accessed  this  report  alone.  However,  many  of  the  2004  visitors  also  accessed  earlier 

Opinions  (N°15  –  Stem  Cells  –  revised  version  published  in  2002  had  8,241  visits;  N°16  –  Patenting  – 

published in 2002 had 5,185 visits; N°17 – Clinical Research – published in 2003 had 6,458 visits); N°18 – 

Genetic Testing – published in 2003 had 11,502 visits). 

4 http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm 

12

 
                                                 
The statistics for the Group’s final Opinion (ICT Implants) are still accumulating but overall one can see a 

large and continuing interest in all of the EGE’s publications. 

104,523 Visits to the EGE website from the “EU-15” Member States (year 2004) 

Luxembourg 1%

Ireland 1%

Denmark 2%

Finland 2%

Portugal 2%

Austria 3%

Greece 3%

Spain 4%

Sweden 4%

Netherlands 8%

Italy 8%

France 25%

UK 14%

Germany 11%

Belgium 12%

28,100 visits to the EGE website from non-EU countries (year 2004)  

only the top 20 countries are shown 

INDONESIA 1%

COLUMBIA 1%

URUGUAY 1%

ISRAEL 2%

SOUTH AFRICA 2%

BRAZIL 2%

SINGAPORE 2%

RUSSIA 2%

USA 2%

MOROCCO 2%

CROATIA 2%

TAIWAN 3%

ARGENTINA 3%

NORWAY 4%

NEW ZEALAND 5%

CANADA 29%

MEXICO 5%

JAPAN 7%

AUSTRALIA 11%

SWITZERLAND 15%

13

 
 
 
During the next mandate the EGE Secretariat will further improve the EGE website taking account of some 

of the suggestions made by site users which have included the following: 

(cid:131)  To include a greater a variety of links on the “Useful links” page (and: “to convince as many as 

possible  of  other  widely  accessed  internet  ethics  information  distributors  to  link  to  the  EGE 

website”,  and “to make the EGE website better known among the scientific community”); 

(cid:131)  Make direct links to the relevant EU legislation and instruments that are explicitly referred to in 

the  EGE’s  Opinions  (such  as:  the  European  Charter  on  Fundamental  Rights,  the  European 

Patent Convention, the Legal Protection of Biotechnological Inventions Directive 98/44/EC, the 

Council of Europe Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, etc.); 

(cid:131)  To extend the provision of information in French for all documents. 

1.3.2. Roundtable Meetings 

Of  course,  the  Group  recognises  that  the  open  and  transparent  communication  of  the  results  of  its 

deliberations through the publication of its Opinions in paper versions and on the website is not sufficient. It 

is also necessary to engage the public in an open dialogue before finalising its Opinions. One of the main 

vehicles  for  such  dialogues  is  the  organisation  of  EGE  Roundtable  meetings  in  advance  of  tendering  its 

Opinion  to  the  Commission.  During  this  mandate  five  full  Opinions  were  published  and  four  of  these 

involved  a  Roundtable  meeting  (N°16,  17,  18  and  20).  Accounts  of  the  Roundtable  meetings  are  also 

published  (either  separately  or  together  with  the  Opinion  itself).  In  principle  anyone  can  attend  these 

meetings although in practice the majority of participants come from representative organisations, EU and 

international  organisations  and  the  media.  During  a  typical  Roundtable  meeting,  invited  experts  make  a 

series  of  background  presentations  following  which  there  is  a  general  debate.  For  example,  some  86 

participants took part in the Roundtable before Opinion N°18 (Genetic Testing in the Workplace) and there 

was  a  very  lively  and  valuable  debate.  The  Report  of  the  Roundtable  meeting  is  prepared  by  the  EGE 

Secretariat and it is worth noting that under the new mandate (2005-2009) holding a Roundtable meeting 

will be mandatory for each Opinion. 

1.3.3. Press coverage and correspondence with the Public 

Finally it is important to note that for each Opinion a Press Release is produced and in some cases a full 

press  conference  is  held.  Furthermore,  the  Opinions  are  mailed  to  a  wide  range  of  press  contacts  and 

NGOs (such as consumer, patients and medical organisations). Copies are also distributed to appropriate 

academic  governmental  and  international  organisations  and  to  industry.  This  publicity  leads  in  turn  to 

members  of  the  public  writing  to  the  EGE  Secretariat.  These  letters  often  raise  interesting  points  for  the 

EGE  (for  example,  a  retired  midwife  wrote  about  her  concerns  for  the  baby’s  welfare  in  connection  with 

umbilical cord blood banking) which might be addressed in future deliberations of the Group. 

14

 
1.4. PROSPECTS FOR THE FUTURE 

1.4.1. New Fields of Science and Technology – New Challenges 

An analysis of the various contributions from EGE members in this Activity Report highlights the range of 

challenges that will face the next EGE (from stem cells to advanced digital technologies). However, rapid 

advances  in  science  and  technology  in  every  year  means  that  in  most  cases  the  challenge  is  renewed 

rather than new. Think only about recent developments in somatic cell nuclear transfer stem cells or in the 

production  of  chimeric  stem  cells.  Both  of  these  areas  merit  examination  by  the  EGE  even  though  the 

Group  has  already  issued  three  Opinions  on  stem  cell  research  (N°9,  N°12,  and  N°15).  Convergence 

between fields of science and technology, such as the development of silicon chip technology supporting 

animal cells which might be used for drug testing, will result in wide ranging applications from toxicology to 

neural-silicon  hybrid  chips.  Similar  rapid  developments  are  occurring  at  the  interface  between  nano-  and 

biotechnology and in all these fields the ethical issues are pervasive. 

The real challenge for the EGE and the Commission will be to decide which of these many areas require a 

full ethical analysis leading to a formal Opinion and which of them only need a simpler update to a previous 

Opinion.  Clearly,  the  key  to  an  effective  EGE  work  programme  will  be  a  wide  consultation  with  all  the 

players in this field and this has already been started by the EGE Secretariat. 

1.4.2. Strengthening the EGE’s status and role under the next mandate 

The  end  of  the  current  mandate  provides  the  opportunity  to  strengthen  further  the  status  and  role  of  the 

EGE. The new mandate will increase the EGE membership from 12 to a maximum of 15 in order to include 

members  from  the  new  Member  States  and  to  bring  in  new  competences.  The  increasingly  rapid 

developments in S & T referred to above, coupled with the Commission’s operational needs, may require 

the EGE from time to time to deliver preliminary ethical advice to the Commission in a shorter time than is 

required for a full Opinion. The new mandate makes provision for such shorter (timely) ethical analyses. In 

order to rationalise the functioning of the EGE and to facilitate meeting participation for the members, two-

day  meetings  will  be  organised.  Finally,  in  order  to  formalize  and  increase  the  transparency  of  the 

nomination procedure of future EGE members a call for expressions of interest has been launched on the 

internet from which a short list of candidates will be proposed to the President of the European Commission 

for appointment. 

15

 
 
 
 
2. REFLECTIONS ON ETHICS, SCIENCE AND LAW 

By Members of the EGE 

 
 
 
2.1. ETHICS AND PUBLIC POLICY WITHIN A DIGITAL ENVIRONMENT5 

Rafael Capurro 

Introduction 

Questioning  the  relation  between  ethics  and  public  policy  has  a  long  tradition  in  Western 

philosophy. In the first part of this paper I will briefly refer to the classic (Aristotle) as well as the 

modern traditions (Hobbes, Kant). In the second part I address the issue of the role of public ethics 

committees. The establishment of ethics committees as part of the political system in conjunction 

with  the  possibilities  offered  by  mass-media  and  the  Internet  allows  ethics  to  be  in  between  the 

political sphere and the civil society.  

Today's digital networked environment – including individual media, mass media and the Internet – 

changes the production, distribution, and use of ethical discourse not only with regard to ancient 

oral  societies  but  also  with  regard  to  Modernity  as  based  on  printing  technology.  Political  ethics 

conceived  as  a  discourse  in  between  public  policy  and  society  opens  the  possibility  not  only  to 

reflect publicly on the foundations of morality including its legal fixation, but also to give politicians 

a space of reflection beyond the constraints of political parties. 

Ethics and Public Policy in the Western Tradition 

Aristotle  situated  ethics  within  practical  philosophy  as  related  to  politics,  opposing  it  to  Plato's 

identity between both fields [Bien 1983]. In the first book of the "Politics" he deals with economics, 

i.e., with questions concerning the administration  of the house and the family and he denies the 

Platonic conception of speaking synonymously about community with regard to the city as well as 

to  the  family.  Later  on  it  became  a  scholarly  approach  to  conceive  practical  philosophy  as 

consisting  of  three  sub-disciplines,  namely  ethics,  economics  and  politics,  although  Aristotle 

himself is not primarily concerned with the creation of such a triadic system. He distinguishes the 

private  from  the  public  sphere  in  contrast  to  the  Platonic  view  that  in  a  well-organised  city 

everything  should  be  common  to  everybody.  The  unity  of  the  city  is,  in  other  words,  not  of  the 

same kind as the unity of the house or the unity of a single person [Pol. II, 2, 1261 a 18-22]. This 

pertains,  mutatis  mutandis,  also  to  the  question  of  happiness.  According  to  Aristotle  it  is  not 

possible to conceive the happiness of the state as a whole without considering at the same time 

that everybody or the majority or, at least, some people may become happy [Pol. II, 2, 1264 b 15-

5 A longer version of this paper was first published in: I. Alvarez, T. W. Bynum, J.A. de Assis Lopes, S. Rogerson 
(Eds.): Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference: The Transformation of Organisations in the Information Age: 
Social and Ethical Implications, ETHICOMP 2002, Lissabon 13-15 November 2002. Lisboa: Universidade Lusíada 
2002, 319-327. 

19

 
                                                 
 19]. Plato's polis is a big family based on love and friendship while Aristotle treats friendship as an 

ethical virtue in the "Nichomachean Ethics," i.e., he distinguishes the spheres of the individual and 

the polis without separating them completely. The medium that allows the passage between the 

spheres is language.  

In  the  first  book  of  the  "Politics"  Aristotle  states  that  human  beings  are  the  only  living  beings 

"bearing  language"  which  means  that  we  can  communicate  with  or  "disclose"  to  each  other  not 

only  what  is  useful  or  damaging  but  also  what  is  just  or  unjust.  He  concludes  saying  that  "the 

commonality in these affairs creates the house and the state" [Pol. I, 2, 1253 a 18]. Only gods or 

wild  animals  can  live  alone  [Pol.  I,  2,  1253  a  9-30].  We  can  become  good  citizens  and  good 

persons through critical thinking and virtue within the legal framework of the state. However, the 

virtues of civic life are not the same as the virtues of good life. Everybody should strive to become 

a good citizen but this does not necessarily imply that one would become a good person and vice 

versa, becoming a good person is not identical with becoming a good citizen within a given state 

constitution [Pol. III, 4, 1276 b 16 - 1277 a 5]. In some states the virtues necessary to become a 

good person are the same as the ones to become a good citizen, but in other states they are not. 

Even in an ideal state the virtues of a person and the ones of a citizen coincide only in the case of 

the state leader or the community of state leaders "taking care of the common affairs" [Pol. III, 5, 

1278 b 1-3]. The polis is indeed not only based on law but also on the ethical virtue of friendship 

"which has to do with the same kind of things and persons as the law" [NE VIII, 11, 1159 b 26-27] 

but  friendship  is  of  different  kind  within  various  political  systems  and  social  relations.  Political 

friendship  does  not  presuppose  that  everything  should  be  common  to  everybody,  and  for  this 

reason Aristotle criticises Plato's state [Pol. II, 5]. In other words, the polis is conceived as a legal 

as well as a moral community of free and equal citizens which means, for instance, the exclusion 

of slaves [Pol. III, 9, 1280 a 31]. Its final aim is not just living but good living [Pol. III, 9, 1280 b 33].  

The Aristotelian conception of the relation between ethics and public policy stresses the idea that 

the passage between moral and the political sphere is done through language as the constitutive 

medium of the polis. We are naturally a political being, i.e., we create a moral and legal state on 

the basis of language in contrast to other living beings [Pol. I, 2, 1253 a 1-10]. Aristotle points in 

this context to oral speech. The polis is indeed primarily an oral and moral society based on written 

laws. What is written is only the general. Then, according to Aristotle, it is impossible to determine 

every specific action in detail. The political order concerns the general and the particular. Through 

oral  and  written  deliberation  as  discussed  by  Aristotle  in  his  "Rhetoric",  we  may  "cautiously" 

change written laws in order not to suggest that they should not be taken seriously but to indicate 

20

 
that in fact it takes a lot of time until they become customary [Pol. II, 1269 a 22 ff]. Written laws are 

based on political morality or ethos and could be changed through ethical deliberation.  

The relation between the citizen and the person changes dramatically with the arrival of Modernity. 

Hobbes' "Leviathan" (originally published in 1651), for example, is a rational and artificial institution 

in contrast to the ancient polis which has a natural and moral form of living. He writes: "NATURE 

(the Art whereby God hath made and governs the World) is by the Art of man, as in many other 

things, so in this also imitated, that I can make an Artificial Animal (...) For by Art is created that 

great  LEVIATHAN  called  a  COMMON-WEALTH,  or  STATE,  (in  Latin  CIVITAS)  which  is  but  an 

Artificiall Man" [Hobbes 1651, 81]. The political body is defined as "the Unity of the Representer, 

not the Unity of the Represented" [Hobbes 1651, 220]. The "final Cause, End, or Designe of men, 

who  naturally  love  Liberty,  and  Dominion  over  other)"  is  not  "good  life"  but  the  institution  by 

"covenant"  of  a  "Common-Wealth"  through  which  the  original  "condition  of  Warre"  may  be 

overcome  [Hobbes  1985,  223].  Hobbes  postulates  a  fundamental  difference  between  the 

individuals under the "Lawes of Nature" and their life under the commands of the Leviathan. The 

moral  substance  of  the  polis  is  usurped  by  the  Sovereign  who  represents  by  his  own  unity  the 

"Multitude".  Ethos  and,  correspondingly,  ethical  deliberation  disappear.  As  Rüdiger  Bubner 

remarks, the modern contractual theory becomes dominant in modern Western political thought up 

to the present [Rawls 1971, Habermas 1998], with major exceptions such as Hegel [Bubner 2002, 

167].  

Furthermore  Kant's  conception  of  morality  as  opposed  to  legality  differs  basically  from  the 

Aristotelian conception of ethos and its intimate relation with the written laws of the polis and (oral) 

ethical deliberation. For Kant there is a fundamental difference between the law in its relation with 

an external action (legality), and with the internal motivations of such actions (morality) [Kant 1977, 

15].  However,  this  dichotomy  should  not  be  seen  as  an  absolute  disconnection  between  the 

objective sphere of the citizen and the subjective sphere of the person or between political action 

and theoretical thinking. Kant conceives the task of enlightenment as the possibility of using our 

own reason in order to criticise a given state of affairs in the scientific, religious, moral, and political 

fields. At the core of his political philosophy, as developed for instance in his famous "Answer to 

the Question: What is Enlightenment?" [Kant 1964], he points to the possibility of influencing the 

"moral condition of the people" as well as the "principles of government" through "free thinking". In 

order to achieve this, he is less concerned with the enlargement of "civil liberty" than with having 

no  censorship  in  the  field  of  the  diffusion  of  scientific  ideas  on  the  basis  of  written  or,  more 

precisely, of printed works. This kind of liberty is called "liberty of mind of the people" [Kant 1964, A 

61]. In another essay Kant stresses the social nature of knowledge in contrast to a solipsistic and 

21

 
idealistic  conception.  He  states  that  we  can  only  think  if  we  can  communicate  our  thoughts  to 

others and vice versa [Kant 1958, A 325]. In other words, the mediation between ethics and public 

policy is conceived as mainly a theoretical task to be achieved on the basis of censorship-free and 

printed diffusion of critical scientific thinking.  

Hegel  criticises  Kant's  dichotomy  between  legality  and  morality.  He  conceives  the  traditional 

concept of ethos as the moral substance of the state in the sense of a process of liberty mediated 

not just through censorship-free distribution of critical knowledge but through the historical shaping 

of  political  institutions  [Hegel  1976].  According  to  Marx  and  Engels  the  working  class  is  the  real 

historical mediation of ethical ideas and moral ideals [Marx/Engels 1970].  

Present societies, at least in Western democracies, are basically influenced by contractual, moral 

and  historical  paradigms.  Moral  traditions  build  the  basis  of  the  "pacts  and  covenants"  of 

democratic constitutions. This is particularly obvious, for instance, with regard to such concepts as 

human  dignity  or  pursuit  of  happiness.  Both,  moral  traditions  and  legal  systems  are  subject  to 

historical  changes.  But  modern  democracies,  including  supranational  political  structures,  are,  of 

course, neither the "Leviathan" nor the ancient polis.  

From the beginning of Modernity ethical reflection takes place within academic institutions as well 

as  within  political  bodies,  mainly  parliaments.  These  two  places  correspond  to  the  modern 

distinction between theory and practice. Mass-media, particularly the press, play a key role in the 

mediation between public policy and the civil society. Freedom of the press is a conditio sine qua 

non of modern democracies which become increasingly influenced by broadcasting media (radio 

and TV). Democracy is more and more a matter of mediocracy.  

Ethics and Public Policy within a Digital Networked Environment  

In the late 20th Century the Internet emerges as a decentralised digital and global medium. Users, 

individuals  and  groups,  can  become  not  only  receivers  of  a  hierarchical  one-to-many  sender 

structure as in the case of mass-media but can be at the same time senders and receivers with 

several  options:  one-to-many,  many-to-one,  many-to-many,  some-to-many,  one-to-one  etc.  This 

digital networked environment creates new opportunities for ethical, legal, and political discourse 

as well as for individual and social political action. Beyond the principles of freedom of speech and 

freedom  of  the  press  the  question  of  freedom  of  access  becomes  a  key  ethical  issue  of  the  so-

called information society in the 21st Century [Capurro 2000].  

Modern  society  is  also  influenced  by  revolutionary  and  accelerated  changes  in  science  and 

technology that challenge in different ways some basic implicit and explicit moral assumptions and 

legal norms. This is one main reason why there is a growing need for ethical reflection on morality 

22

 
and  law  particularly  in  the  field  of  biotechnology.  In  the  last  ten  years  or  so  public  ethics 

committees have been created within the political system in order to give advice to the parliament 

as  well  as  to  the  executive  branches  particularly  in  the  fields  of  biotechnology  and  information 

technology. Ethics is no longer restricted to academic institutions but becomes part of the political, 

legal,  and  the  social  debate  as  carried  out  until  now  mainly  through  mass-media  and  in  the 

academic  sphere.  Instead  of  ethics  and  public  policy  we  find  ethics  in  public  policy.  In  modern 

democracies ethics is carried out in such contexts as:  

(cid:131) 

the parliament  

(cid:131)  academic institutions  

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

the mass-media  

the Internet  

(cid:131)  public ethics committees. 

Ethics committees are set up not only in the political sphere but also in civil society. In particular 

biotechnology  firms  often  have  their  own  consulting  groups.  What  are  the  functions  of  such 

committees? What is their relation to political and legal institutions as well as to the public sphere? 

Furthermore, how does this discourse take place within a digital environment? These are complex 

questions  that  should  be  carefully  studied,  not  only  with  regard  to  the  differences  between  the 

contexts but also with regard to their mutual interactions. In the following I will only consider the 

role of ethics bodies within public policy.  

As modern science and technology often challenge basic moral assumptions they provoke directly 

or  indirectly  a  crisis  or  at  least  a  basic  insecurity  with  regard  to  moral  standards  that  are  either 

sanctioned  by  law  or  remain  tacit  presuppositions.  In  secularised  societies  these  conflicts  no 

longer find a solution based on religious authority, although religion plays an important role in the 

shaping of morality. The rise of ethics as a public discourse may be thus interpreted as a symptom 

of the moral crisis arising in complex modern societies that can neither be solved by an implicit or 

explicit moral tradition nor by a state policy alone. Of course, a common ethos is based not just on 

rational discourse. What is new in the present situation is that ethics is considered to belong to the 

public debate at an institutional political level.  

Public ethics committees are a place in which critical reflection on moral presuppositions of legal 

and political options can take place. The committee’s deliberation objective concerning options and 

their  moral  presuppositions  arise  particularly,  but  not  exclusively,  out  of  new  discoveries  and 

inventions in the fields of biology and biotechnology. Their perspective is a scientific not a political 

one. Public ethics committees have a deliberative character, i.e., they do not intend to just sanction 

a given morality and should not be used as political instruments for moral control of society. They 

23

 
are supposed to provide a sound and independent argumentation and to facilitate judgement that 

should  help  politicians  and  society  to  get  a  more  transparent  view  of  the  intricacies  of  scientific, 

technical, and legal issues as seen from an ethical viewpoint. This kind of ethics council should not 

predetermine  or  even  substitute  the  political  decision-making  that  should  be  carried  out  in 

parliaments. Public ethics committees also do not substitute the social debate that takes place, for 

instance,  in  civic  face-to-face  meetings  or  in  the  mass-media  [Düwell  2002].  They  are,  in  other 

words, instruments for public awareness. They do not owe per se a specific moral authority. Their 

members  should  be  qualified  by  their  ethical  and  not  only  by  their  scientific  or  legal  expertise. 

Being  in  between  society  and  public  policy  within  a  digital  networked  environment,  public  ethics 

committees  should  use  not  only  the  digital  tools  offered  by  the  information  society  for  their  own 

work but they should also be present in the mass-media arena including the Internet.  

Conclusion 

Modern  science  and  technology  challenges  basic  philosophic  assumptions  and  thus  provoke, 

directly or indirectly, a crisis or at least a basic insecurity with regard to moral standards that were 

either  sanctioned  by  law  or  remained  tacit  moral  presuppositions.  The  rise  of  ethics  within  the 

political arena may be interpreted as a symptom of a moral crisis within modern societies. The role 

of  public  ethics  committees  should  be  one  way  of  strengthening  the  capacity  for  reflection 

traditionally carried out in such places as parliament, academia and the mass-media.  

It would be a moralistic fallacy to conceive this activity as a kind of control of ethics on politics or 

even on society [Vollrath 1996]. Ethics, public policy and society should be regarded as relatively 

independent  and  interactive  spheres.  Otherwise  ethics  committees  may  become  less  of  a 

challenge and more of a danger for responsible autonomous political decision-making. Ambitious 

ethical  universality  may  also  forget  the  difficult  historical  process  of  creating  a  common  ethos 

where differences are not just tolerated but respected as an essential characteristic of humanity. 

24

 
References 

Aristotle (1950), The Politics of Aristotle, Ed. W. L. Newman. Oxford University Press.  

Aristotle (1962), Ethica Nicomachea, Ed. I. Bywater. Oxford University Press.  

Bien, G. (1985), Die Grundlegung der politischen Philosophie bei Aristoteles. Karl Alber Verlag.  

Bubner, R. (2002), Polis und Staat. Grundlinien der Politischen Philosophie. Suhrkamp Verlag. 

Capurro, R. (2000), Ethical Challenges of the Information Society in the 21st Century. International 

Information & Library Review 32, 257-276.  

Capurro, R. (2000a), Strukturwandel der medialen Öffentlichkeit (in: 

http://www.capurro.de/zkmforum.htm). 

Düwell, M. (2002), Medizinethik in gesellschaftlicher und politischer Diskussion. Ethik in der 

Medizin 14, 1-2.  

Habermas, J. (1998), Faktizität und Geltung. Beiträge zur Diskurstheorie des Rechts und des 

demokratischen Rechtsstats. Suhrkamp Verlag.  

Hegel, G. W. F. (1976), Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts, Suhrkamp Verlag.  

Hobbes, Th. (1651), Leviathan, Ed. C. B. Macpherson, Penguin Books edition published 1985.  

Kant, I. (1975), Metaphysik der Sitten. Suhrkamp Verlag.  

Kant, I. (1964), Beantwortung der Frage: Was ist Aufklärung?. In: Kant Werke, Vol. 9, Suhrkamp 

Verlag.  

Kant, I. (1954), Was heißt: sich im Denken orientieren?. In: Kant Werke, Vol. 5, Suhrkamp Verlag.  

Marx, K., Engels, F. (1970), Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei. Hist.-kritische Gesamtausgabe: 

Werke, Schriften, Briefe, Abt. 1, Bd. VI, Berlin.  

Rawls, J. (1971), A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, Mass.  

Vollrath, E. (1996), Der reflexionsmoralische Fehlschluß. In: Kurt Bayertz Ed.: Politik und Ethik. 

Reclam. 

25

 
 
2.2. POSSIBLE FUTURE MEDIA STORIES INVOLVING ETHICS 

Inez de Beaufort 

Introduction 

Foresight  exercises  involve  projecting  from  current  knowledge  and  experience  to  a  range  of 

possible  future  scenarios.  There  are  no  crystal  balls  to  predict  the  subjects  of  Europe’s  future 

ethical  debates.  New  technologies  may  surprise  us.  Old  ones  may  still  occupy  our  minds. 

However, I think that one thing is certain, namely that the EU will continue to face ethical issues 

and  that  the  EGE  will  often  be  baffled  but  never  bored!  In  order  to  be  prospective  rather  than 

retrospective  (although  one  needs  to  carry  out  retrospective  analyses  in  order  to  develop 

prospective scenarios), I have imagined some media stories that could appear in the future. They 

are  not  all  situated  in  the  near  or  far  future.  In  fact,  some  of  these  stories  could  appear  in 

tomorrow’s newspapers. Indeed, I hope that some of them will feature in the news but others not! 

However, the reader will have his or her own ideas about that. 

Vaccination of children against smoking: mandatory for all EU children 

What  to  do  if  parents  refuse?  Action  groups  protest:  “we  will  not  have  our 

children immunized because the EU says so.” Will non-immunized children be 

the pariahs of the future? 

The human Dolly born: it is a boy 

The birth of a cloned boy now verified. The birth of the first human clone, somewhere 

in the far-east shocks EU citizens. Doctor-researcher claims the boy is his own clone. 

Others deny that and say he is from a royal family. Will human cloning be inevitable in 

Europe? 

Feminists: apart from our anger about the cloning itself, why did it have to be a boy? 

Soft drink industry looses legal battle on publicity. 

Soft drinks are a major threat to health because they contain too much sugar. Every 

bottle should say: ‘Soft drinks can endanger your health.’ French cheese producers 

very worried. Belgian chocolates already have a warning on their boxes. 

26

 
 
 
 
 
Fat, fatter, fattest 

Obesity  and  overweight  now  bigger  threat  for  European  public  health  than 

smoking. This now tops the list of risks to health and early death. Why is it so 

hard to change dietary habits? 

Mediterranean diet for the whole of Europe? 

No more Rubens 

Pill  developed  against  obesity.  Researchers  claim  they  have  developed  a  pill 

that influences the uptake of fats in the body in such a manner that ‘overweight 

will soon be a problem of the past’. Restaurant owners say they are very happy 

with this development. 

French cheese producers relieved. Belgian Chocolate producers relieved. 

Brussels hosts conference of International Association of Bioethics 

European  agenda  for  globalisation  of  ethics  set  in  Brussels.  In  his  welcoming 

speech  the  Commissioner  stressed  the  fact  that  the  Association  was  founded  in 

Europe and that Europe has a special task with regard to promoting ethics. 

Cynical  comments  from  European  ethicists:  The  Commissioner  is  very  right  but 

where is the money to do research in this area? 

The price of a kidney on the free market now around 25 thousand euros 

Organ selling: not a taboo anymore for kidneys? Kidneys can now be bought 

in different European countries. “We have to rethink the idea that selling is ‘not 

done’”,  says  well  known  Swedish  nephrologist,  “this  is  what  scarcity  does  to 

morality. But we will not let people die for an outmoded ideology.” 

Who is next? 

SARS danger raises new questions about freedom of movement and risks to others. 

Strong measures have caused heated debates. Recent outbreak of SARS in the EU 

has been contained but left us with many questions. Health authorities argue in favour 

of  strong  measures  of  quarantine,  enforced  treatment  and  legal  measures  for  those 

who suspect they may be infected. 

27

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New developments in palliative care 

New  pain  relief  drugs  have  been  developed  for  the  end  of  life  market.  The  pills  are 

supposed to have little influence on consciousness and awareness. 

‘The  Dutch  euthanasia 

law  now  obsolete’,  so  argue  proponents  of 

the  new 

developments.  ‘No’,  say  the  Belgians  in  defence  of  their  neighbours  (and  of  course  in 

defence of their own law). Euthanasia is not only about pain relief. It also has to do with 

dependence, comfort, dignity and other complex notions. We still think people ought to 

be enabled to choose. 

Do not drink alcohol 

Alcohol use causes many more health problems than previously known. It seems as if 

each year more relations between diseases and the (ab)use of alcohol are found. The 

warning on the bottles is not enough. We need to make it so expensive that people will 

not buy it. 

French wine producers outraged. ‘What do they think, that we will produce grape juice 

for children?’ 

Children victims of barriers to research! 

“Voxiferara”  is  taken  off  the  market  for  use  by  children  because  of 

unexpected side-effects. Yet again the problem of not testing new drugs on 

children. 

More trustworthy than your wife? 

Do it yourself paternity tests show huge sale figures. “She won’t tell you, our test will” 

so runs the slogan promoting the do it yourself paternity test that requires no technical 

expertise at all. Wide use shocks European mothers. 

‘What  happens  to  children  who  suddenly  find  out  that  their  father  is  not  their  father 

after all. Does anyone worry about that,’ asks well-known Italian child psychiatrist. 

28

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lamb born from artificial womb 

The  birth  of  Tamaki,  the  first  little  lamb  born  as  the  result  of  exogenesis 

experiments in Japan, has raised questions on the application of the technique for 

humans.  The  perfect  answer  to  female  emancipation  or  the  end  of  mother  – 

unborn  bonding?  ‘This  will  finally  break  the  glass  ceiling’  say  some.  ‘I  would  not 

have  missed  pregnancy’  say  others,  ‘given  the  reasonably  rate  of  surrogate 

mothers nowadays, being pregnant is a choice anyway’. 

Epidemic of deafness among European youngsters 

Too much noise ruins hearing abilities. ‘Why weren’t we warned on time’ say victims. 

‘You didn’t listen when you still could’, say physicians. 

Not only for Cher: Cosmetic surgery now within reach of everyone 

Research  shows  that  over  75  %  of  European  women  have  undergone  cosmetic 

surgery  varying  from  simple  corrections  to  total  make-overs.  Compared  to  the 

27 % of men who have had cosmetic surgery, women still seem to be more willing 

to  suffer  for  changing  their  appearance  than  men.  However,  apparently  the 

number  of  men  undergoing  plastic  surgery  is  steadily  growing  and  it  is  very 

popular among young men (20 – 30). 

Critics of ‘dominant’ ethics movement plea for old-fashioned values: 

Respect for the elderly will solve more problems than all debates on longevity. 

Elderly say that loneliness causes more suffering than physical problems related 

to old age. ‘The pace of modern life is so high that my children cannot come and 

visit me anymore. I cannot keep up with the pace, but what worries me most is: 

can they?’ 

29

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Important  successes  of  stem  cell  therapies  for  many  different  diseases 

Success stories gradually change ethical views on the use of human embryos. 

‘For medical purposes, and for serious medical purposes only, we think the use 

of embryonic stem cells is acceptable,’ say some former opponents. 

What is your life worth? 

The price of a European life per year: what are we willing to pay for saving lives? The 

costs of health care are rising and so is the age of the population. How to divide the 

scarce resources is an issue all national governments face. Very different solutions are 

chosen varying from asking patients to pay for a part of their treatment (up to 45 % in 

some countries) to not providing life lengthening treatment to persons over 75. 

Robots instead of daughters? 

Robotic help enables people to stay at home with serious diseases. ‘My children have no 

time to take care of me’, says 85 year old woman, ‘but I with the help of my robot I can 

manage to live my own life. The beeps were scary in the beginning, but now I feel safe. 

In case of emergency he will warn the nurse.’ 

The end of aggression? 

‘Preventive  suppression  of  aggression  through  pharmacological  means  seems  very 

effective’ say researchers who have carried out a randomized trial with families with a 

genetic inclination to aggressive behaviour. 

Bank your cells for the future 

‘Store your own bone marrow, just in case,’ commercial blood banks report increases 

in individuals who store their blood after campaign on television. ‘Anticipate on future 

treatment! Security for only 1000 euros.’ 

30

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Empirical ethics 

Can we measure values? ‘Yes’ say some. ‘No’ say others. A heated debate took place at 

the conference in Greece, a venue chosen as the origin of Western philosophy, on the 

place of so called morality polls. ‘Ethics is about arguments, not about counting opinions’ 

argue some old fashioned philosophers.’ ‘No say the modernists: you cannot disregard 

the  polls.  They  count.’  ‘Polls  are  for  politicians’  answer  others  ‘Plato  did  not  ask  for  a 

vote. He asked for arguments.’ 

Health care for all, but not in Europe… 

Social economic status still crucial in level of available health care for European citizens. 

Justice and health still a problem. 

We need to return to our moral roots and say goodbye to this crypto-utilitarian approach to 

issues in health care, says French lawyer in speech. 

Duties for the sick? 

Patients not only have rights but also duties, says EU high level working group. The other 

side of autonomy is obligation towards your own health and the interests of society. 

Survival of the fit 

A spectacular decrease in cardiovascular diseases after mandatory physical exercise. All 

workers  at  the  companies  of  xxx  have  to  start  their  working  day  with  30  minutes  of 

physical  exercise.  ‘At  first  we  were  against  it’,  say  the  employees,  ‘but  now  we  are 

grateful; we have never felt so fit. Even our CEO’s participate.’ 

Big Brother keeps watching 

‘Privacy  is  a  thing  from  the  past,  a  luxury  we  cannot  afford  anymore’,  say  safety 

experts in Brussels. Electronic monitoring and camera surveillance are now standard 

tools of authorities in all European states. 

31

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Brain drain 

Researchers  complain  that  there  are  too  many  regulations  and  regulatory  ethical 

bodies in Europe. We cannot keep up with our colleagues from China and the USA. 

‘Protection is good. Ethical overkill is bad.’ 

His Own Eggs 

Gay couples can now create their own offspring with their own genes! 

A cell containing all the genetic information can be turned into a gamete and used 

for  reproduction.  Of  course  male  homosexuals  need  a  surrogate  mother.  This 

technique  also  has  consequences  for  heterosexual  couples  that  until  now  have 

depended on sperm or egg donation. Many couples are willing to undergo the IVF 

treatment  to  have  their  own  child  with  their  own  genes.  “Having  your  own  child” 

matters! 

Concluding Comments 

Ethicists are often blamed for chasing after technological developments and hence for being ‘too 

late’ with their ethical analyses. Once the genie is ‘out of the bottle’ it is impossible to put it back. I 

do not think that the sort of thought experiments that I have attempted here can prevent particular 

technological developments. I do not even think that they should necessarily be stopped. However, 

I’m  convinced  that  we  have  to  prepare  ourselves  by  thinking  about  them  prospectively  and 

considering whether and how we should influence developments for moral reasons. Surprise and 

fear will usually not help to produce thorough analyses. Preparation and precaution are necessary. 

That requires foresight and I hope that this small exercise will stimulate other more comprehensive 

prospective exercises in the field of ethical analyses. 

32

 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3. DO PEOPLE’S VIEWS COUNT? 

Anne McLaren 

In a multicultural and increasingly multiethnic community such as we enjoy in Europe, it is hard to 

imagine  that  there  could  ever  be  total  harmonisation  of  ethical  views,  a  real  “European  ethics”. 

Nonetheless, there are certain values that the governments of all European countries adhere to. 

For  example,  capital  punishment  is  prohibited  across  Europe,  as  also  is  religious  or  racial 

discrimination. Yet it may be that in any one country, only a minority of the citizens support these 

policies,  hence  the  problem  of  using  referenda  to  decide  all  ethical  issues.  Human  dignity  may 

outweigh democracy. 

The  rapid  advance  of  science  and  technology  throws  up  many  instances  of  conflict  between 

different ethical principles, individual autonomy versus the good of the community, risk to people 

today  versus  benefit  to  people  in  the  future.  It  is  typically  problems  of  this  nature  that  the  EGE 

addresses. In all such cases, ethical advice requires a good understanding of the scientific basis of 

the  relevant  technology.  Before  formulating  any  Opinion,  the  EGE  takes  both  written  and  oral 

evidence from experts in the field, and attempts to summarize the scientific and if necessary the 

legal background in addition to the ethical issues. 

Public opinion is affected by the availability of information, the existence of at least some honest 

and  intelligent  media,  and  the  level  of  public  discussion.  The  UK  has  a  long  tradition  of  public 

debate. Sometimes public opinion ends up supporting new scientific proposals, as has been the 

case with reproductive technology and stem cell research; on the other hand, the growing of GM 

crops in the UK has been opposed by the public, on environmental grounds. 

In years to come, the EGE or some successor group will be looking at new issues, or looking again 

at  topics  previously  considered,  in  the  light  of  new  knowledge.  For  example,  foetal  surgery, 

including prenatal therapy for gene therapy, will become more common. There will be risks both to 

the baby and to the mother. Whose consent for the operation should be required, just the mother’s 

or also the father’s? If implants to stimulate specific regions of the brain are shown to safely and 

effectively increase cognitive abilities including memory, should they be made available to anyone 

who can pay for the high cost of treatment, or only to those who need them on medical grounds? If 

stem cell technology in the future makes it possible to derive either eggs or sperm from any man or 

woman,  would  there  be  any  ethical  objection  to  same-sex  couples  producing  babies  that  were 

biologically  their  own?  Some  of  these  ideas  may  seem  fanciful,  but  so  at  one  time  did  heavier-

than-air flight, and long-distance communication. 

33

 
The  Opinions  of  the  EGE,  together  with  the  underlying  documentation,  are  all  available  on  the 

Web.  Many  of  the  Opinions  end  by  stressing  the  need  for  continuing  programmes  of  education, 

information  and  dialogue  at  European  level  to  enable  the  participation  of  citizens  in  the  social 

choices created by new scientific developments – but how often does this happen? Now that the 

EGE is working more closely with National Ethics Committees in the Forum, there should be an 

opportunity  for  each  topic  to  be  debated  across  the  Community,  in  the  native  language  of  each 

country.  People  would  get  to  know  what  other  people  were  thinking,  and  the  EC  would  have  a 

better idea of the views of Europe’s citizens. Of course public opinion is only one of many factors 

affecting decision-making, but it is an important one. Ethics is too important to be left entirely to the 

ethicists, even with input from experts. 

34

 
2.4. FOOD, GENOMICS AND ETHICS 

Pere Puigdomènech 

In recent years the EGE has produced a number of Opinions essentially directed towards multiple 

aspects  of  the  applications  of  biotechnologies  in  different  fields  but  mainly  related  to  medicine. 

Although  earlier  Opinions,  N°1  and  N°7  for  example,  did  address  wider  applications  of 

biotechnology.  This  is  something  that  may  be  understood  given  the  quantity  and  quality  of 

research  carried  out  in  these  fields,  the  big  industrial  interest  towards  a  large  variety  of  new 

applications  and  the  complexity  of  the  questions  involving  human  individuals  in  medical 

applications that have ethical implications. Our final Opinion under this mandate, N°20, concerns 

the interface between electronics and the human body and in this manner it opens the way to other 

Opinions  on  the  ethical  implications  of  information  and  communication  technologies.  However, 

during the last four years of the current mandate the EGE has not produced an Opinion related to 

food.  One  might  suspect  that  either  there  was  no  interest  in  Europe  in  this  subject  or  that  there 

were  no  ethical  issues  involved  around  the  new  technologies  regarding  food.  A  simple  search 

using Google shows that this is not the case. To increase the specificity of the internet search, the 

term  “Food”  may  be  coupled  with  “Ethics”  and  “Genomics”.  This  search  produces  76800 

documents in English, 4520 in French, 336 in Spanish and even 5 in Catalan. At first sight, it might 

appear surprising that any document exists on this composite subject given that Genomics is such 

a new discipline. However, the surprise disappears when one notices that most of the documents 

deal with GMOs, one of the main sources of conflict around biotechnology. In view of this conflict 

and  given  the  present  developments  in  Genomics,  it  could  be  asked  whether  this  scientific  field 

might be the subject for ethical analysis by the EGE in the future. 

Looking at a sample of the pages that were found in the above Google search, the main sources of 

conflicts involving biotechnology and food seem to arise from a number of questions that can be 

summarized  by  keywords  such  as:  Food  security,  Food  safety,  Environmental  safety,  Animal 

rights,  Biodiversity,  Intellectual  property,  Farmers  rights,  Consumers  rights,  Trade  issues  and 

Bioprospecting. Looking through these issues, that in many cases overlap, interact and collide, one 

can attempt to examine the kind of conflicts of values that arise in the food area and how the new 

developments in Genomics may alter the situation in the coming years.  

To  start  from  a  general  point  of  reference,  we  can  examine  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights 

approved by the European Institutions and observe that it commences with a reference to human 

dignity  and  the  right  to  life.  This,  although  not  mentioned  in  the  Charter,  must  obviously  include 

access to adequate nutrition, which is an essential basis for a life with dignity. In fact, in 1986 a 

35

 
World  Summit  on  Food  was  held  in  Rome,  following  a  call  by  FAO  and  WHO,  and  in  the  final 

Summit Declaration it is stated: “the right of everyone to have access to safe and nutritious food, 

consistent with the right to adequate food and the fundamental right of everyone to be free from 

hunger” recognising this as a fundamental right. There are other articles of the European Charter 

that relate to the questions discussed here such as, scientific research has to be free of constraint, 

the  freedom  to  conduct  business  or  the  right  to  property  including  intellectual  property.  The 

principles of equality and non-discrimination are recognised as well as the right to health care, to 

environmental protection and to consumer protection. We may add that the Universal Declaration 

of  Human  Rights  includes  the  statement  that  “Everyone  has  the  right  to  a  standard  of  living 

adequate  for  the  health  and  well-being  of  himself  and  of  his  family,  including  food,  clothing, 

housing and medical care and necessary social services”. Of course there are other values that 

are not included in these general declarations such as respect for animals, respect for the integrity 

of  the  environment  and  biodiversity  or  the  protection  of  vulnerable  minorities  which  may  be 

especially  important  in  a  global  perspective.  How  one  balances  the  values  that  are  included  in 

these  general  declarations  in  matters  related  to  food  and  how  to  implement  them  is  a  matter  of 

general concern and this is where ethical analysis may be important. 

Another point of discussion is whether future developments in Genomics may alter the present day 

situation. In relation to our dealings with food, Genomics may introduce new data in at least two 

directions.  One  of  these  directions  is  the  search  for  knowledge  on  how  our  genetic  background 

determines  our  relation  to  food  both  as  a  species  and  as  individuals.  From  the  earliest  times 

humans  being  members  of  an  omnivore  species,  have  asked  themselves,  when  there  was  the 

possibility of choosing or when there was a question of safety, what has to be eaten or what can 

be eaten and what not. At this critical beginning of the XXIst century the questions about nutrition 

are  among  the  most  frequently  asked  in  our  opulent  northern  societies.  We  have  only  to  walk 

through  any  bookshop  to  observe  the  enormous  variety  of  books  on  food  and  on  specific  and 

sometimes wonderful diets. Many countries try to disseminate information on what is the type of 

average  diet  that  is  recommended.  However,  from  our  own  experience  we  know  that  different 

people react differently to specific foods. There are examples such as the genetic condition known 

as phenylketonuria (inability to utilise the essential amine acid phenylanaline) where a change in a 

single  gene  coding  for  an  enzyme  of  human  metabolism  means  that  some  people,  especially 

newborns, have to carefully watch their food to avoid important malformations. The celiac (gluten 

intolerance) condition and some allergies have a more complex genetic background but they also 

have important effects on the nutrition of a significant proportion of our populations. In the case of 

propensity to obesity or other conditions that relate our health with our nutrition the genetic basis 

36

 
may also be complex and these are coupled with the individual experiences of people. In any case 

we  know  that  we  respond  differently  to  food  and  we  suspect  that  knowing  these  differences  will 

help  us  in  modulating  our  nutrition  and  that  this  will  allow  us  to  circumvent  important  health 

problems throughout our life. 

Secondly, Genomics is already greatly increasing our knowledge of the molecular constitution of 

the species which form the basis of our nutrition, and, that, since agriculture appeared, constitute 

the animals and plants that have been selected to better fit the needs of human society. From the 

XIXth century onwards agriculture has been one of the main focuses of genetics giving rise to a 

new discipline that we call plant and animal breeding. Molecular genetics since its start 35 years 

ago has allowed us to understand the molecular basis of our metabolism and has provided tools 

for making breeding more efficient. It has opened the possibility to modify plants and animals with 

genes  that  were  previously  isolated  and  modified  if  necessary  in  the  laboratory.  In  this  way 

genetically  modified  organisms  have  arrived,  not  without  problems,  in  the  fields  of  different 

countries. 

During  the  last  10  years,  a  number  of  different  genome  programmes  launched  worldwide  have 

produced  an  enormous  quantity  of  genomic  data.  The  genome  projects  started  with  yeast  and 

bacteria, continued with animal and plant models such as C. elegans, Drosophila and Arabidopsis, 

and  then  were  followed  by  mammals,  cereals,  insects,  fishes,  birds  and  of  course  the  human 

genome. This information has an interest in itself but a whole new discipline of Bioinformatics has 

developed  to  analyze  and  use  it.  At  the  same  time  a  number  of  new  methods  have  been 

developed to observe how large collections of genes are expressed in defined tissues. All these 

new approaches allow us to analyze whole genomes, to compare them and propose hypotheses of 

evolution, to study how and when large collections of genes are expressed and to integrate these 

data with functional data of the organism, including pathologies.  

For  humans,  Genomics  already  allows  us  to  search  for  genes  that  are  important  in  pathologies 

with the aim of looking for targets for new drugs and this explains the interest of pharmaceutical 

companies in this new discipline. However, it also permits the diagnosis of an increasing number of 

pathologies  that  are  produced  by  variants  or  mutations  of  specific  genes.  In  the  case  of  our 

relationship  with  food  we  have  already  mentioned  that  in  defined  cases  we  know  that  individual 

carriers  of  specific  genes  react  differently  towards  food.  Genomics  allows  us  to  explore  more 

complex  traits  and  will  probably  provide  information  about  the  probability  that  a  given  diet  has 

health  consequences  specific  for  a  group  of  individuals.  This  information  may  be  useful  in  the 

future  to  modulate  our  nutrition  habits  to  an  extent  that  is  unknown  but  we  suspect  will  be 

important. A new discipline called Nutrigenomics has been born that already has nearly 20000 hits 

37

 
in a simple Google search. The use of this information creates similar problems to those raised by 

other types of genetic tests (see EGE Opinion N°18). 

For  plants,  the  new  tools  of  Genomics  are  already  providing  a  great  deal  of  information  on  the 

function  of  genes  in  a  number  of  species  and  their  interactions  among  themselves  and  with  the 

environment.  We  are  starting  to  obtain  a  “holistic”  view  of  plant  physiology,  development  and 

genetics that is having a profound effect on our knowledge of model species and the species we 

use in agriculture. The possible effects of this knowledge may include applying Genetics to species 

that  until  now  was  difficult  because  the  traits  that  are  important  for  cultivation  have  a  complex 

genetic  basis.  It  may  also  allow  us  to  search  for  variability  in  interesting  traits  within  complex 

populations that may already exist spontaneously in natural habitats or that we may increase in the 

laboratory  by  mutagenesis.  These  approaches  appear  to  some  people  as  alternatives  to 

transformation techniques, although it is difficult to predict that in the near future the opportunities 

offered by genetic modification of plants will not be applied in some cases after they have passed 

the  strict  regulatory  framework  existing  in  most  countries  and  that  tries  to  ensure  the  safety  of 

these new varieties. 

These new possibilities appear as a backdrop to the discussion about what will be the needs for 

research in food production in the coming years. In general terms the data is known. Although the 

relative and absolute figures show that the increase in food production has decreased malnutrition 

in  global  terms  during  recent  years,  the  number  of  people  suffering  from  malnutrition  is  still 

unacceptable for humanity as a whole. At the same time the increase in problems linked to obesity, 

and not only in developed countries, produces one of the worst paradoxes of our present global 

society.  In  general  terms  the  demand  for  food  both  in  quantity  and  quality  will  most  probably 

increase during this century. This increase in demand has to be matched by production increases, 

while we try to lower the huge impact that food production has on the environment. Many people 

think that the proportion of land used for agriculture and animal farming should decrease if we are 

to maintain a sustainable ecological equilibrium while we know that some agronomic practices are 

too aggressive towards the cultivated soil. We have also to remember that plants have also been 

our traditional sources of materials for clothing, for heating and for medicinal products and that if 

we  have  to  reduce  the  use  of  fossil  resources  we  will  probably  have  to  come  back  to  our 

renewable resources for these products and thus increase the pressure on new arable land. We 

are trying to limit the inputs of fertilizers and pesticides in most countries due to their impact on the 

environment  and  in  many  countries  the  largest  proportion  of  available  fresh  water  is  used  for 

irrigation. We can see that we have a complex equation to solve in the coming years and there is 

most probably not a simple and magic solution to it. 

38

 
In this situation it seems that our research efforts concerning agronomic practices, water use, the 

more  rational  use  of  fertilizers  and  pesticides  and  appropriate  crops  and  varieties  that  efficiently 

produce the food that we need will continue to be necessary. Of course the question of hunger and 

malnutrition will not be solved if the social and political problems present in many countries are not 

solved. Military conflicts have been shown to be one of the main drivers of hunger in the world but 

other crucial factors include the structure of land ownership, the constraints of trade at local and 

global levels and the state of education and infrastructures. In this context we should start from a 

retrospective analysis and we know that one of the factors for an efficient agriculture, which may 

be  not  the  most  important  but  is  certainly  not  negligible,  has  been  the  use  of  the  best  possible 

seeds  adapted  to  the  physical  and  social  environment  of  local  agriculture.  We  know  that  the 

Neolithic revolution started with the identification of the appropriate plant and animal species that 

underwent domestication. That means also to identify the best varieties, usually involving specific 

mutations,  which  were  accumulated  during  the  centuries  and  transported  worldwide  in  an  effort 

that  molecular  techniques  have  been  recently  highlighting.  This  effort  was  continued  after  the 

Renaissance  when  the  last  wave  of  transport  of  species  occurred  across  the  Atlantic.  However, 

after  Gregor  Mendel  discovered  the  laws  of  genetics  in  peas  a  more  directed  approach  was 

possible and during the XXth century plant breeding has allowed us to increase the yields of the 

main crop plants several fold. Plants which are resistant to viruses, bacteria, fungi and insects and 

that have a more efficient photosynthetic apparatus or make a more efficient use of the inputs they 

receive are the basis of our present levels of food production. A similar thing can be said on the 

animal (poultry, cattle, pigs, etc.) races that are farmed in most countries producing meat, eggs or 

milk at very efficient levels. 

For these reasons many voices have been raised  recommending that the research effort on the 

species,  both  plant  and  animals,  that  we  use  for  our  food  should  not  be  lowered.  However,  in 

Europe, for instance, the funding of research in Plant Biology has significantly decreased during 

recent years. As a result a number of documents have been issued emphasising the need for a 

renewal of the European effort on research on plant systems such “Plant for the future” recently 

published. Another related trend, that some people think may be the source of disequilibria in the 

future, is the decrease in the research that is being carried out in the public domain as most of the 

current research effort occurs within private companies. The consequence in the medium and long 

term may be that the knowledge in the public domain, including universities, may lose quality and 

also  that  the  priorities  for  research  in  food  production  area  might  essentially  be  dictated  by  the 

interests of companies. A similar trend has often occurred in research devoted to the development 

of drugs and action has been taken to correct the situation to avoid that drugs that are important 

39

 
for small groups or for poorer people are forgotten. Something similar may happen with research 

on agriculture if the trend continues. Health and food are matters so important for people that they 

cannot be left exclusively for market laws to dictate the priorities. Furthermore, to slow down the 

efforts for research in food production may be a serious mistake in the long term in the light of the 

situation that exists today and may exist in the near future. 

Consequently,  it  may  be  concluded  that  developments  in  Genomics  will  probably  provide  new 

opportunities  to  face  the  questions  that  the  need  for  production  and  for  access  to  sufficient  and 

nutritious food will raise during this century. These questions are both on the ways we decide what 

is the best food for us and also what is the food we produce, where and how. Recent experience 

has shown that these decisions create a large number of questions, some are scientific but many 

are social, economic and political. Therefore these developments point towards ethical questions 

that should be the object of Opinions by the EGE at some stage. Some examples of the conflicts 

that may arise or may continue during the coming years can be predicted.  

The  conflicts  around  intellectual  property  will  most  probably  be  present  in  the  coming  years  as 

many industries have invested in genomic research both in animal and plant species. If Genomics 

allows  us  to  study  new  species  or  to  extract  variability  from  the  existing  natural  populations  it  is 

possible that new conflicts about the control of biodiversity may appear. In this field, for instance, 

the  application  of  the  Convention  on  Biodiversity  has  been  blamed  of  obstructing  any  use  of 

traditional knowledge or wild biodiversity but of course this is an open question that is the subject 

of current discussion. Furthermore a number of poorer countries accuse richer countries, both in 

the United States and Europe, of creating artificial barriers for food trade that are claimed to be one 

of the causes for lack of food production in developing countries. Conflicts around the coexistence 

of  different  types  of  agriculture  have  already  arisen  especially  in  Europe  particularly  between 

organic  and  GMO  farming.  The  use  of  genetically  modified  domestic  animals  both  for  food  and 

non-food use will open a complex discussion as soon as they become a reality. At the same time it 

may be important to discuss what values are at stake between the conflicts that may be present 

between  the  need  for  global  food  security  and  the  trends  in  more  developed  countries  for  an 

agriculture  that  uses  less  inputs,  responds  to  the  increasing  claims  for  safety,  produces  more 

quality and avoids GMOs. Furthermore, the relation between individual genetic and physiological 

information and specific food and how claims for nutritional properties of food are questions that 

may produce conflicts between different values in the near future. How to balance all these values 

in a question of such importance as food use and production that in the light of new technologies 

may interact with environmental, medical and different aspects of social and economic questions 

will certainly become objects of discussion in the years to come. 

40

 
2.5. TRANSFORMATIONS OF THE BODY 

Stefano Rodotá 

Physical to Data to Physical! 

The  human  body  is  evolving  continuously.  It  has  long  lost  its  perceived  unity  and  been  broken 

down into its parts and products – organs, tissues, cells, gametes, which can be separated from 

their source body, circulated, and used in other  bodies. Its tangible nature went through a crisis 

when the “electronic” and the “physical” body started being contrasted. However, its physicality re-

gained  its  importance  when  biometric  data  proved  indispensable  for  identity  definition  and 

recognition. 

In  the  Information  Age,  the  body  became  regarded  as  a  data  set  –  indeed,  as  an  information 

system.  The  body  with  its  transformations  and  destiny  has  therefore  become  both  a  great 

metaphor  of  and  a  key  issue  for  the  information  society  and  its  development  towards  virtual 

reality6. This may give rise to all-round revulsion: “on the one hand, the body becomes a prosthetic 

to the media-net; and on the other, the body electronic is data trash struggling to come alive again 

in recombinant form: to quick-learn how to survive the spasms and crashes of (digital) life on the 

virtual  road.  Declining  (into  virtuality)  and  data  trash  (with  a  will?)  –  this  is  the  fate  of  the  body 

electronic in the interminable countdown to the year 2000”7. Furthermore, identity may be equated 

to the many “windows” that open on a screen. “These windows have become a powerful metaphor 

to conceive of the self as a multiple, distributed system.”8 

It has been argued that the narrow, cumbersome boundaries of the physical body have been finally 

overcome  in  cyberspace,  where  the  body  has  become  eventually  the  “body  terminal”  of  an 

individual that has been transformed into an “interactive being, from time to time transmitting and 

receiving”9.  This  final  removal  of  the  body  and  personal  identity  into  cyberspace  results  in  any 

reference to physical data being perceived as a regression – the intolerable falling “into the prison 

of his own flesh” causing so much anguish to the main character of W. Gibson’s Necromancer.10 

Still,  the  interventions  enabled  by  scientific  and  technological  innovation  would  point  to  the 

impossibility of sticking to a concept of the body seen as “non-modifiable incarnation of the self”. In 

6 As remarked by M. Marzano, Straniero nel corpo, Giuffrè, Milan, 2004 (p. 47), “the body has always sort of reflected 
the multifarious influences and transformations of society, providing a repository for the values and beliefs that prevail 
in the individual cultural contexts… The ideal image of the body built up by society represents the aspirations and 
malaises one has to cope with from time to time”. 
7 A. Kroker – M. Weinstein, Data Trash: the Theory of Virtual Class, St. Martin, New York, 1994.  
8 S. Turkle, Life on the Screen. Identity in the Age of the Internet, Simon & Schuster, New York 1995, p. 14. 
9 P. Virilio, La vitesse de libération, Galilée, Paris 1995, p. 23. This concept of « liberation » was especially criticised by 
L. Manovich, Il linguaggio dei nuovi media, Olivares, Milano, 2002. 

41

 
                                                 
fact, the body is becoming “a personal construction, a transient thing that can be manipulated and 

lends itself to a number of metamorphoses depending on individual whims”.11 

Of late, the focus has shifted again to physical components, in particular because de-materialised 

reality as such is often unable to ensure secure identification of the entity at stake. Actually, even 

with the lawful use of ATM or credit cards one can never be totally certain that the relevant holder 

is involved, since the holder may have disclosed his password voluntarily to another person – apart 

from fraud cases. This happens whenever a password consists of a code to be entered in order to 

access  a  service,  document  or  protected  area,  or  even  to  vote.  Furthermore,  once  identity  is 

committed exclusively to data devoid of any relationship with the person to whom they refer, there 

is  an  increased  risk  of  identity  theft  based  simply  on  getting  hold  of  someone’s  digital  code, 

password or algorithm. 

In response to this situation, there is a disquieting drift towards solutions envisaging, in particular, 

the increasingly widespread use of biometric data – especially fingerprints – which allows blanket 

surveillance of all citizens. It is as if, in the face of an “endless” war, the forms of surveillance were 

bound to become endless as well – with a qualitative change in the relationships between State 

and citizens and deep-ranging transformations of the whole social framework. It is no chance that 

the  requirement  imposed  by  US  authorities  to  oblige  several  foreign  visitors  to  leave  their 

fingerprints on entering the USA has been regarded, in a broader perspective, as the token of a 

more  general  re-definition  of  the  “conventional  legal  and  political  status  of  citizens  in  so-called 

democratic countries”. The body is becoming a means to enhance police measures according to a 

stepwise approach whereby the mind itself can fall a prey to the surreptitious invasion of daily life 

by  surveillance  technologies.  Fingerprints  are  actually  only  one  of  the  biometric  data  used  for 

identification and surveillance purposes, and they are not misused exclusively in the USA. All over 

the world they are being applied to control access to certain areas, indeed trivialisation has gone 

so far as to propose that they should be used to control access to classes or canteens by primary 

school pupils. 

Not even one’s most intimate sphere is safe against this invasion. Software is advertised that can 

analyse the smallest voice inflections in order to assess whether you are telling the truth. Thanks 

to  the  computerised  analysis  of  facial  expressions  and  individual  movements  of  facial  muscles 

allowed  by  the  “Facial  Action  Coding  System”,  the  attempt  is  being  made  to  descry  soul’s 

emotions, a person’s most secluded dimension – just as the individual’s memory is being probed in 

search of “brain fingerprints” that can point to the memory of past events and, therefore, be taken 

10 W. Gibson, Neuromancer, Ace Books, New York, 1984, chap. I. 
11 D. Le Breton, Signes d’identité : tatouages, piercing et autres marques corporelles, Métailé, Paris, 2002, p. 7. 

42

 
                                                                                                                                                 
as evidence of participation in such events. As aptly remarked by Alberto Oliverio, “A century ago, 

in  stressing  the  role  played  by  the  subconscious,  Freud  noted  that  the  ego  was  no  longer  in 

control. Nowadays one can safely maintain that the ego’s privacy is being threatened by the new 

computer  programmes  that  can  challenge  the  truthfulness  of  our  words  and  pierce  through  the 

screen hiding our feelings”. 

Thus, the body is growing in its importance once again, albeit in a different fashion. It is becoming 

a source of new information and is exploited by unrelenting data mining activities – it is a veritable 

open-air mine from which data can be extracted uninterruptedly. The body as such is becoming a 

password  –  physicality  is  replacing  abstract  passwords.  Fingerprints,  hand/finger/ear  geometry, 

iris,  retina,  face  scans,  body  odours,  voice,  signature,  keystroke  dynamics,  gait  recognition  and 

DNA  are  increasingly  used  as  biometric  information12  not  only  to  identify  individuals  or  allow 

access  to  several  services,  but  also  to  set  up  permanent  categories  and  perform  additional 

controls  following  identification  or  authentication/verification,  i.e.  confirmation  of  someone’s 

identity. 

However, the revenge of physicality does not entail the separation of body from technology; in fact, 

it is technological innovation that allows the body to be broken down in new ways by giving rise to 

sets of information, in which a person’s identity is downsized to a single detail – such as his or her 

face  contour  or  iris  scan.  This,  in  turn,  gives  rise  to  new,  more  poignant  issues  related  to  the 

circumstance that certain biometric data contain a wealth of information, including highly sensitive 

information,  which  goes  beyond  the  purposes  of  identification  or  authentication  and  relates  to 

several  entities  in  addition  to  the  one  at  stake.  This  applies  to  genetic  data,  which  disclose 

information both on the individual they relate to and on his or her kindred. By means of the genetic 

data  concerning  an  individual,  one  can  thereby  enter  into  possession  of  the  bodies  of  a  whole 

biological group. 

To fully grasp the framework within which these transformations are taking place, one should not 

limit oneself to considering the interaction between physical body and technology. A social change 

has turned the mobile phone into a sort of personal prosthesis – a sturdy, invisible electronic wire 

that allows all our movements to be tracked in any labyrinth, can locate our physical body at any 

time  (the  offer  of  services  related  to  the  possibility  of  locating  an  individual’s  whereabouts  is 

actually on the rise), and has brought about the “re-discovery” of the functions of certain body parts 

such as our thumb. Replacing bar codes by smart tags to mark products, thanks to radio frequency 

identification  (RFID)  technology,  can  allow  new  types  of  surveillance  if  the  tags  are  designed  in 

12 Although the lawfulness of using DNA data as relevant items for identification and/or authentication purposes is 
undisputed, it is being debated whether, strictly speaking, DNA is to be considered in principle as a biometric data. 

43

 
                                                 
such a way as to follow people from the store into their homes and inform on any further use of the 

tagged product(s). Indeed, location technology is being implemented with increasing frequency – 

reference can be made to miniature devices that  can be placed, for instance, in the seams of a 

dress and then transmit signals to be read via GPS (Global Positioning System) technology, or to 

the development of micro-sensors (the so-called “smart dust”).  

The  body  itself  can  be  technologically  altered  and  primed  to  be  followed  and  located  on  a 

permanent  basis.  The  availability  of  under  skin  chips  containing,  for  instance,  medical  data  or 

information  to  allow  kidnapped  individuals  and/or  dangerous  criminals,  or  paroled  convicts  to  be 

located  at  any  time,  or  merely  a  given  person  to  be  identified,  has  led  an  American  company 

(Applied Digital Solutions) to launch the VeriChip service under the motto “Get Chipped”, and the 

use  of  the  VeriChip  for  health  purposes  has  been  authorised  by  the  US  Food  and  Drug 

Administration. The company has also presented the VeriPay service, based on use of an under 

skin chip to replace standard credit cards and enable quicker, more secure payments. This type of 

surveillance is facilitated to an even greater extent by smart tags and RFID technology, which are 

beginning to be deployed on a large scale to tag not only products, but living beings as well. Today 

it may be a herd of cattle, tomorrow it might be humans! 

Social surveillance is committed to a sort of electronic leash; the human body is equated to any 

moving object that can be monitored remotely via satellite and/or RFID technology. If the body can 

become a password, location technologies are giving birth to a networked person. 

We are confronted with changes that have to do with the anthropological essence of individuals. 

There is a stepwise shift in progress – after being “observed” via video surveillance and biometrics, 

individuals are being “modified” via under skin chips and “smart” tags to such an extent that they 

are increasingly turned into “networked persons”. We are always connected and can be configured 

differently  so  that  from  time  to  time  we  can  transmit  and  receive  signals  allowing  movements, 

habits and contacts to be traced and defined. This is bound to modify the meaning and content of 

individual autonomy. 

This trend was confirmed most clearly on 19 July 2004, when the UK Prime Minister announced a 

programme  whereby  the  five  thousand  most  dangerous  UK  criminals  would  be  “tagged  and 

tracked” via satellite. Many have already pointed out the technical difficulties related to this project. 

However, it is the symbolic value of the message that should be taken into account very earnestly. 

Indeed,  there  is  a  dramatic  change  in  the  legal  and  social  status  of  individuals  underlying  this 

approach. Having served a sentence in full will not be enough to regain freedom. If an individual is 

classed  as  “highly  crime-prone”,  he  or  she  will  be  deprived  for  life  of  his  or  her  freedom  of 

44

 
movement and all the attending forms of personal autonomy because he or she will be obliged to 

carry  an  electronic  device  to  allow  being  located  at  any  time.  Furthermore,  this  “tagging”  of 

dangerous  individuals  could  also  be  implemented  by  inserting  under  skin  microchips.  The  very 

nature of our body would thereby end up being modified, because the body would become a “post-

human” body that has undergone technological manipulation. Can this be considered compatible 

with  the  human  dignity  principle,  which  is  solemnly  affirmed  at  the  outset  of  the  Charter  of 

Fundamental Rights of the EU? Should one accept the audacious wording used by Mr. Blair, who 

termed this latest version of the “surveillance society” as the “society of respect”? 

These  are  not  futuristic  whims;  this  is  not  alarmism.  In  fact,  it  appears  that,  in  the  very  days  in 

which Blair’s proposal was being publicised, microchips were “injected” into the arms of Mexico’s 

Public Prosecutor and 160 of the Public Prosecutor’s staff to control their access to an important 

documentation  centre  and  possibly  track  them  in  case  of  kidnapping  –  at  a  cost  of  150  $  per 

implant. The Public Prosecutor only commented that “it hurt a bit”. 

The 

technological  drift 

is 

therefore 

taking  on  disquieting  guises.  Should 

identification, 

authentication,  surveillance,  and  transaction  security  purposes  really  justify  whatever  use  of  the 

human body is made possible by technological innovation? 

The war on terrorism and Data Protection 

Of late, the approach based on the widest possible use of biometric data was given further impulse 

by  the  importance  attached  to  the  fight  against  terrorism,  which  tends  to  prioritise  security 

purposes. However, in this way there is the risk that the issue is addressed inappropriately – it is 

almost as if security and data protection were conflicting values, so much so that protecting one 

value would automatically rule out any consideration for the other. In fact, to correctly deal with this 

issue  it  is  necessary  not  only  to  reconcile  the  different  interests  at  stake,  but  also  to  assess,  in 

doing so, the mechanisms for and the effects produced by a reduction, if any, in data protection. At 

all  events,  no  reduction  in  data  protection  is  to  be  allowed  for  if  it  entails  a  violation  of  human 

dignity,  which  is  by  now  a  fundamental  requirement  –  as  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  Charter  of 

Fundamental  Rights  of  the  EU  begins  with  an  article  stating  that  “Human  dignity  is  inviolable.  It 

must be respected and protected”. Significantly, dignity was already referred to in Section 1 of the 

Italian 1996 data protection Act13, which thereby stressed the importance of data protection as an 

autonomous fundamental human right (art. 8 of the Charter). Any lawful limitation imposed on this 

right should be counterbalanced by additional safeguards that can compensate for the restrictions. 

13 Act no. 675 of 31 December 1996, now replaced by the Personal Data Protection Code (Legislative decree no. 196 
of 30 June 2003). See Section 2 thereof. 

45

 
                                                 
There has not been merely an increase in the  emphasis  put  on  reducing  data  protection  for  the 

sake of fighting terrorism in the past few years. Indeed, there has also been growing awareness of 

the importance of data protection as a fundamental component of personal freedom. It is not by 

chance that habeas data has been long invoked following the habeas corpus model, which can be 

regarded historically as the first recognition of personal freedom. It is the individual in his or her 

entirety that has to be protected, since it appears that individuals are a prey to a new weakness in 

particular with regard to their biometric data – i.e. the possibility of being broken down into so many 

pieces. Though “multiplied”, the body must continue to be perceived as a “unity”14.  

“We shall not lay our hands upon thee”: this was the promise made with Magna Carta, i.e. respect 

for  the  body  in  its  entirety.  This  promise  is  surviving  technological  evolution.  Therefore,  each 

processing operation concerning biometric data should  be  considered  to  relate  to  the  body  as  a 

whole, to an individual who must be respected in her/his physical and mental integrity. This is what 

is expressly provided for in Article 3 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU. Together with 

the  recognition  of  personal  data  protection  as  a  fundamental  right,  which  has  been  referred  to 

above, this provision confirms that we have to do with the “constitutionalisation of the person”. A 

new, integral concept of the person has been created, and its transposition into the physical world 

is correspondingly entitled never to be deprived of the full control over a body that is by now both 

“physical” and “electronic”. 

International  instruments,  supranational  regulations,  national  laws  and  court  decisions,  including 

those  of  constitutional  courts,  have  been  developing  exactly  in  this  direction  and  expanded  the 

conventional  concept  of  privacy  as  the  “right  to  be  left  alone”.  The  instances  related  to  data 

protection are by now mirroring a definitely larger gamut of values and have become essential in 

fighting discrimination and safeguarding fundamental rights such as the right to health, with a view 

to  allowing  the  free  development  of  one’s  personality.  The  word  “privacy”  is  itself  in  danger  of 

becoming inadequate, being no longer capable to appropriately describe the reality it is supposed 

to refer to – if it remains within the boundaries of its original meaning. 

Data protection is nowadays one of the most significant components of personal freedom. It is not 

a  theoretical  concept  of  freedom  that  is  at  stake,  nor  is  the  individual  to  be  safeguarded  a 

disembodied  one.  There  is  little  doubt  that  it  is  both  narrow-minded  and  dangerous  to  conclude 

that “we are our data”, however the link between body, personal data and social control may be 

established in such a poignant manner that respect for human dignity comes immediately to one’s 

mind. This postulates an especially strict application of the data minimisation principle as regards 

14 F. Dagonet, Le corps multiple et un, Les Empecheurs de penser en rond, Le Plessis-Robinson, 1992. 

46

 
                                                 
collection and processing of the data, i.e. data identifying a given individual should only be used for 

purposes that cannot be achieved in any other manner.15 

The same criteria should apply, to an even greater extent, whenever one has to do with veritable 

alterations  of  one’s  body.  If  one  considers,  for  instance,  the  proposed  replacement  of  electronic 

bracelets by RFID devices in order to ensure surveillance of paroled convicts and/or persons under 

house  arrest,  it  is  not  merely  the  shift  from  one  technology  to  another  one  that  is  in  question. 

Hateful  though  it  may  be,  the  electronic  bracelet  does  not  entail  any  alteration  of  one’s  body  – 

which is conversely what happens when you insert an under skin chip or apply a smart tag. Body 

integrity is violated and dignity is thwarted, therefore this type of implantation should be regarded 

as unlawful despite the data subject’s consent. 

It is not to be forgotten that the Italian Constitution set a specific boundary on the measures that 

may be adopted by lawmakers concerning medical treatment – consisting exactly in “respect for 

the person” (Article 32(2)). This boundary is considered to be impassable even if one is seeking to 

protect an individual’s health and life, and should apply to an even greater extent if values are at 

stake that rank qualitatively lower in this context. “Respect” is becoming a key word.16 

What are the limits to this progression 

Thus,  in  assessing  lawfulness  and  mechanisms  for  the  use  biometric  data,  one  should  not  limit 

oneself to a cost-benefit analysis. We are concerned with an area where no approach based on 

prioritising  the  need  for  security  and/or  efficiency  standards  may  be  acceptable  -  in  the  face  of 

values  such  as  personal  freedom,  integrity,  and  dignity.  In  fact,  when  defending  individuals  and 

their  bodies  one  is  defending  fundamental  values  of  democratic  systems,  which  should  not  be 

limited or done away with if one wishes to prevent a dangerous totalitarian drift from starting. 

The  use  of  biometric  data  can  undoubtedly  provide  new  forms  of  security  for  all  and  make 

everyday  activities  simpler.  It  increases  identification  certainty  and  makes  impersonation  or 

duplication  positively  more  difficult,  or  even  impossible.  Thanks  to  genetic  data,  there  is  a 

significant increase in the opportunities for enhanced health care. However, these considerations 

are not enough. It is necessary to consider in detail the various categories of biometric data, the 

purposes they may be used for and the mechanisms of such use. 

Indeed, it is not enough to establish the technical feasibility of using biometric data for identification 

purposes.  It  is  indispensable  to  ensure  that  the  data  are  accurate  because  of  the  risk  of  a  high 

false positive or false negative rate on account of either the technique used or the nature of the 

15 See Section 3 in the Personal Data Protection Code (Legislative decree no. 196/2003). 
16 R. Sennet, Respect in a World of Inequality, Norton, New York, 2003. 

47

 
                                                 
data at stake. This may depend on the as yet experimental features of some techniques, or else on 

the specific circumstances of their use – e.g. as regards lighting or visual angle in connection with 

facial recognition technology. Even the use of DNA data as a final identification tool is questionable 

if one considers that monozygotic twins share the same DNA. Given that there is one monozygotic 

twin for every 250 births, using the information derived from DNA data carries the risk of millions of 

false matches. 

Therefore,  a  technically  cautious  approach  is  mandatory  when  using  biometric  data,  without  the 

enthusiasm and over-assurance that are often flaunted by those having a direct stake in selling the 

multifarious technology related to biometrics. In an OECD document, it is stated that “a review of 

the  publicly  available  performance  data  and  the  media  reports  of  biometric-based  technology 

leaves the reader with the feeling that biometrics are not quite ‘ready for prime time’ yet. That is to 

say,  while  they  appear  to  function  adequately  in  small,  limited  implementations,  their  accuracy, 

reliability  and  convenience  are  not  yet  sufficiently  refined  for  large  population  identification 

systems.”17 

Two main indications can be drawn from this type of analysis. The former is valid in the short-to-

medium term and points to the need for the stringent assessment of the use of biometric data with 

regard to their reliability; this indication is obviously bound to change with the technical refinement 

of  the  relevant  technologies.  The  latter  indication  is  of  a  general  nature  and  relates  to  the 

compatibility test that should be performed on any application of biometric data by having regard to 

freedom and democracy values. Actually, in both cases a basic prerequisite consists in performing 

a prior “Privacy Impact” assessment. 

Whenever biometric data – including DNA data – are used, the first parameter to apply in testing 

compatibility has to do with the lawfulness of such use, resulting from the impossibility of achieving 

the  same  purpose(s)  by  means  of  non-biometric  data.  Greater  importance  should  be  attached, 

however, to the number of entities that undergo the relevant data collection. The blanket collection 

of  information,  especially  if  accounted  for  by  security  reasons,  modifies  the  social  perception  of 

data collection and ends up turning all citizens into potential suspects – putting “one nation under 

suspicion”,  as  has  been  said.  Additionally,  it  increases  social  vulnerability  because  it  is  quite 

difficult to fully do away with the risk of abuse, given the huge amount of collected data, or protect 

major databases against intrusions – which might also be due to terrorist or criminal groups, with a 

dangerous “boomerang effect”. 

17 Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development, Biometric-Based Technologies, March 2004, p. 35. 

48

 
                                                 
The  massive  recourse  to  biometric-based  solutions  may  be  presented  and  perceived  as  a 

technological panacea, so much so that public opinion tends to overestimate their accuracy and 

improperly associate them with all-round protection against terrorism. This false certainty may be 

associated  with 

increasing  social  “mithridatism”,  since 

the  widespread  use  of  biometric 

technologies regardless of their being absolutely indispensable might lead citizens to progressively 

become unaware of the risks to their privacy and the protection of their personal freedom. Society 

is anaesthetised because the perception of the loss of control over one’s body is cancelled little by 

little. Indeed, these considerations concerning biometric data apply to a broader range of issues, 

as they have do to with technologies in general – which are increasingly entrusted with the task of 

solving complex social problems, following the dangerous drift of culture and politics. 

A further key issue from a data protection point of view is that some biometric systems are based 

on information, like fingerprints or DNA samples, that can be collected without the data subject’s 

being aware of it since the relevant traces are left unwittingly in most cases. Fingerprints can be 

collected in any place where an individual has been even for a very short time; genetic data can be 

extracted  from  a  person’s  hair,  cigarette  stubs,  plastic  glasses  with  saliva  on  them,  or  paper 

hankies used for blowing one’s nose. This may lead to excessive, sometimes downright unlawful 

uses, which are accounted for exactly by the “low-level intrusiveness” of collecting such data. 

The  ease  of  collection  gives  rise  to  further  issues,  which  should  be  taken  into  consideration 

especially if the large-scale implementation of these technologies is envisaged. For instance, as for 

fingerprints one primary issue is related to the circumstance that they may be used for purposes 

other 

than 

identification  or  authentication/verification,  since 

the 

traces 

individuals 

leave 

continuously via their fingerprints can allow tracking their movements. In the light of this risk, it is 

not enough to call for adequate security measures in order to prevent inappropriate utilisation of 

fingerprints.  It  would  be  preferable  to  replace  them  for  identification  or  authentication/verification 

purposes by biometric data that in principle leave no permanent record – such as iris scans. 

Extremely serious problems have to do with the “identity theft” issue. The results of studies aimed 

at  allowing  reproduction  of  fingerprints  and  therefore,  their  use  by  entities  other  than  those  they 

relate to have already been published. This situation entails a fundamental qualitative change as 

regards identity theft. Unpleasant or harmful as the effects produced by the theft of one’s password 

may  be,  it  is  always  possible  to  choose  a  different  password  and  continue  to  access  the 

areas/services that are made conditional upon the possession of this item of information – such as 

credit cards, ATM machines, computers, secured areas, and so on. Conversely, no replacement is 

possible following the theft of one’s fingerprints. It is a case of total identity forgery, and the only 

way to prevent unlawful use by others consists in discontinuing the use of this identification means. 

49

 
However, for the individual concerned this entails being excluded from all systems that are based 

on  fingerprints  as  well  as  a  social  and  individual  harm  whose  severity  is  directly  related  to  the 

availability  of  such  systems.  In  the  light  of  this  situation,  the  desirability  of  the  widespread 

implementation of fingerprint-based systems should be questioned. 

The issues related to identity theft become complex in the extreme if one considers genetic data. 

Indeed, fingerprints and other biometric data do not provide additional information on the persons 

they  relate  to,  whereas  a  basic  feature  of  genetic  data  consists  exactly  in  providing  a  set  of 

information that goes well beyond identification and refers, in particular, to health, race, and family 

relations.  As  already  pointed  out,  it  is  quite  easy  to  gather  genetic  material  for  extracting  this 

information.  The  genetic  data  collected  in  this  way  can  be  used  for  the  most  diverse  purposes, 

even unbeknownst to the data subject – such as to carry out paternity tests. 

The  violation  of  the  private  sphere  –  in  itself  most  serious  –  is  of  even  greater  concern  if  one 

considers that the data derived from any genetic sample – be it based on saliva, hair, skin or blood 

– allow obtaining information not only on a person’s identity, but also “predictive” data. Since the 

genome  is  a  link  between  generations,  the  data  concerning  a  given  individual  also  provide 

information on all the individuals belonging to his/her biological group – which raises the difficult as 

well  as  inescapable  issue  of  establishing  who  is  the  owner  of  genetic  data.  In  summary,  past, 

present  and  future  of  both  individuals  and  groups  can  be  probed  in  depth  by  means  of  genetic 

data. 

Furthermore, the theft of genetic material might actually be used to clone a specific individual – so 

much so that an American company (DNA Copyright Institute) has suggested that this risk could 

be  prevented  by  means  of  a  sort  of  “ownership  certificate”  somehow  replacing  the  copyright  on 

one’s own genome that has not yet been granted  by the US Copyright Office. Thus, the human 

genome  ends  up  playing  an  almost  autonomous  role  –  containing  the  veritable  essence  of  an 

individual. Indeed, in the United Kingdom a proposal has been put forward with regard to unsolved 

criminal cases where the offenders have left a genetic trace – i.e., formally indicting their genome. 

The wide-ranging gamut of the possible applications of genetic data can account for the growing 

number of proposals alleging the need to process genetic data for the most diverse purposes – in 

particular  to  prevent  and  suppress  crime  or  protect  human  health.  However,  the  trend  towards 

setting  up  genetic  data  banks  –  containing  either  DNA  samples  or  genetic  data  proper  –  is 

simultaneously causing increased concern for the risks related to discrimination and limitations on 

social and political freedoms. 

50

 
As  for  setting  up  DNA  databases,  this  should  be  limited  to  especially  important,  well-defined 

purposes. The information should concern very specific categories of data subject and only such 

data as are relevant to identification should be collected – i.e., any data with predictive potential 

and/or  allowing  linkages  with  other  entities  should  be  kept  out.  Furthermore,  the  relationships 

between the collected data and the respective source materials should be clarified. In all events, 

massive filing systems and/or applications with whatever discrimination potential must be ruled out. 

Neither  security  purposes  nor  business  interests  may  question  the  inescapable  principle  of 

equality. 

Nor should one fail to consider the risk of creating false evidence against a given person, as it is 

quite  easy  to  leave  a  genetic  sample  (a  hair  can  be  enough)  concerning  that  person  in  a  given 

place. The body can be “disseminated” without its owner’s knowledge. How can one retain control 

over this “new” body, which is unrelentingly created outside its physical unity? 

This  concern  has  been  voiced  for  many  years  and  is  justified  exactly  by  the  progress  made  in 

genetic research, which points to evermore-innovative applications of genetic data. However, there 

should be little doubt by now that no scientific and technological drift is admissible. There is much 

to learn from bioethics analysis, which is increasingly focused on information and communication 

technology  especially  with  regard  to  the  body  and,  in  particular,  genetic  data.  It  is  necessary  to 

speak  up  and  say  that  not  everything  that  is  technologically  feasible  is  also  socially  desirable, 

ethically acceptable, and legally admissible. 

It  is  exactly  the  institutional  context  of  bioethics  that  helps  clarify  the  values  involved  in  the 

processing  of  genetic  data.  The  non-discrimination  principle  was  already  referred  to  in  the 

Universal  Declaration  on  the  Human  Genome,  and  is  mentioned  in  the  title  of  Article  11  of  the 

Council  of  Europe’s  convention  on  human  rights  and  biomedicine  –  which  reads  “Any  form  of 

discrimination against a person on grounds of his or her genetic heritage is prohibited”. This same 

clear-cut  statement  can  be  found  in  Article  21  of  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  EU, 

under which “Any discrimination based on any ground such as sex, race, colour, ethnic or social 

origin, genetic features, language, religion or belief, political or any other opinion, membership of 

a  national  minority,  property,  birth,  disability,  age  or  sexual  orientation  shall  be  prohibited”  (my 

emphasis).  This  approach  is  supported  further  by  the  provisions  laid  down  in  Article  12  of  the 

Biomedicine Convention as regards genetic tests, which are only admissible “for health purposes 

or  for  scientific  research  linked  to  health  purposes”  –  which  means  that  using  these  tests  for 

whatever other purpose is unlawful, including first and foremost economic purposes such as those 

related to insurance policies and/or the employment context. 

51

 
Personal data protection has therefore come to play the role of a prerequisite for respecting the 

equality principle itself. Indeed, at-risk individuals may decide not to undergo genetic tests for fear 

of  being  denied  an  insurance  policy,  or  else  of  being  fired,  exactly  in  order  not  to  be  obliged  to 

disclose  the  outcomes  to  the  relevant  insurance  company  and/or  employer.  In  the  USA,  for 

instance,  it  was  found  that  one-third  of  the  women  that  were  offered  a  free  breast  cancer  test 

refused to undergo it. This refusal was accounted for by the fear of genetic discrimination, which 

placed those women before a tragic choice – should they accept the test, and run the risk of being 

discriminated against, or rather refuse it and thereby endanger their health? It was on the basis of 

these findings that the American Senate unanimously adopted, at the beginning of 2005, a Genetic 

Non-Discrimination Act to prohibit insurance companies and employers from using genetic data.18 

In the light of this new situation, an approach is required that is aimed to minimise the processing 

of  personal  data  and  limit  collection  to  the  minimum  necessary  to  achieve  legitimate  purposes. 

This  approach  is  based  on  the  data  minimisation  principle  mentioned  before,  which  is  closely 

mirrored by the wording of Section 3 in the Italian data protection Code: “Information systems and 

software shall be configured by minimising the use of personal data and identification data”. This is 

actually  the  policy  supported  in  the  instruments  issued  by  several  international  organisations  – 

from OECD to the Council of Europe. 

This  approach  is  based  firstly  on  the  requirement  that  the  purpose  limitation,  relevance  and 

proportionality  principles  be  applied  stringently.  Secondly,  emphasis  is  put  on  the  need  for 

precisely distinguishing between identification and authentication/verification purposes, preference 

being given unreservedly to de-centralised systems over centralised ones and 1-to-1 rather than 1-

to-N  identification.  Several  European  data  protection  authorities  have  endorsed  the  view  that 

biometric data should not be stored in centralised databases but only in an object that is directly in 

the data subject’s possession – like a smart card, a mobile phone or a credit card. In other words, 

identification and authentication should be carried out by comparing the data contained in the said 

object  with  the  data  provided  by  the  data  subject  at  the  time  of  undergoing  identification  and/or 

verification.  

For  instance,  in  order  to  establish  an  individual’s  identity  via  the  fingerprints  contained  in  an 

electronic document, there should be no need to compare such fingerprints with those that were 

stored  in  a  centralised  data  bank  at  the  time  of  issuing  the  document  in  question.  There  are 

technologies  available  that  allow  identity  controls  by  simply  inserting  the  document  into  a  small 

device  that  also  contains  equipment  for  the  individual  to  place  his  or  her  finger  on  and  thereby 

verify directly that the fingerprint on the document and the one submitted by the individual match. 

18 This Act will have to be adopted ultimately by the Chamber of Representatives. 

52

 
                                                 
As regards genetic data, their collection for identification purposes should only concern the items 

that  are  absolutely  required  to  establish  identity,  i.e.  one  should  leave  out  the  data  that  provide 

additional  information  on  the  genome  pertaining  to  both  the  specific  data  subject  and  other 

members  of  the  same  biological  group.  Furthermore,  it  should  never  be  possible  to  override  the 

prohibition  against  specific  applications  of  the  personal  data  by  obtaining  the  data  subject’s 

consent, since such consent may be affected by several circumstances and appears anyhow to be 

unsuitable for coping with issues that have to do with fundamental aspects of human personality. 

This is not a mistrustful approach. We are continuously experiencing the power of technology that 

is  reshaping  our  societies.  The  social  assessment  of  the  impact  of  scientific  and  technological 

innovations is nowadays a duty for all public and private entities, in particular those in charge of 

safeguarding  a  fundamental  component  of  contemporary  freedom  by  means  of  personal  data 

protection. 

In fact, this is the only approach to safeguard bodily integrity, personal freedom, and freedom from 

surveillance. In particular, in safeguarding integrity one would fail in only considering the body – 

where physical and electronic components are continuously interacting. The safeguards should be 

equal  to  a  reality  where  one  has  increasingly  to  deal  with  “multiplied”  and  “distributed”  bodies. 

There  is  a  growing  trend  for  the  law  to  regulate  the  body  in  a  partial  manner,  which  mirrors  the 

fragmentation  resulting  from  scientific  and  technological  innovation  and  the  attending  cultural 

models. Thus, one finds neatly distinguished regulations applying to a man’s body as opposed to a 

woman’s body, live vs. dead bodies, the body of capable individuals vs. the body of the disabled, 

the body of the sick vs. the body of the healthy, the “terminal” vs. the “recoverable” body, the body 

of single vs. dual organs, and the body “separate” from blood, cells, and tissues.19 

It is exactly the possibility to break down and separately preserve body parts and/or products that 

leads to the establishment of the distributed body. In 1993, the German Supreme Court tackled the 

issue of destruction of the sperm deposited by an individual with a sperm bank.20 The data subject 

could only be awarded damages if destruction was regarded as a “body injury”. The Court held that 

the material separation of sperm from the source body was not a decisive factor, because sperm 

was intended to allow reproduction. Thus, the body was seen as a “functional unit” also including 

components that could be distributed over different locations.21 

19 More detailed considerations on this point can be found in my book on Tecnologie e diritti, Il Mulino, Bologna, 1995, 
p. 179 and ff. 
20 Bundesgerichtshof, 9 November 1993, in “Familienrecht”, 1994, p. 154-156. 
21 On the complex relationships between law and body concepts in a historical perspective, see J.-P. Baud, L’affaire de 
la main vole. Une histoire juridique du corps, Seuil, Paris, 1993. 

53

 
                                                 
Thanks  to  scientific  and  technological  innovations,  it  is  currently  possible  to  “deposit”  blood, 

tissues, cells and gametes with specialised banks in order to use them subsequently for the most 

diverse  purposes  –  be  they  related  to  reproduction  or  treatment  –  as  well  as  for  control  and 

surveillance. This is giving rise to a body that extends into the future and can actually survive the 

original body – which allows, for instance, to giving birth to a child from a deceased person. The 

body is “distributed”, therefore, not only in space, but in time as well. It is – broadly speaking – a 

body  “deprived  of  its  territory”  22  that  features  a  ubiquitous  nature  regarded  until  recently  as  an 

exclusive trait of the electronic body – whereas nowadays it also involves the physical dimension. 

At  the  same  time,  this  is  a  permanently  “unfinished”  body.  It  can  be  manipulated  to  restore 

functions  that  either  became  lost  or  were  never  known  –  only  think  of  maiming,  blindness, 

deafness; or, it can be stretched beyond its anthropological normality by enhancing its functions 

and/or  adding  new  functions  –  again,  for  the  sake  of  the  person’s  welfare  and/or  social 

competitiveness, as in the case of enhanced sports skills or intelligence “prostheses”. We have to 

deal  with  repairing  and  capacity  enhancing  technologies,  the  multiplication  of  “body-friendly”23 

technologies  that  can  expand  and  modify  the  concept  of  body  care  and  herald  the  coming  of 

cyborgs – of the post-human body. “In our societies, the body tends to become a raw material that 

can  be  modelled  according  to  environmental  circumstances”24.  The  possibilities  of  customised 

configuration  undoubtedly  increase,  and  so  do  the  opportunities  for  political  measures  aimed  at 

controlling the body by means of technology. 

The body is regarded as “an apparatus for the transmission of energy and information” – to quote 

the wording used to describe the subject of patent no. 6,754,472 granted to Microsoft in the USA. 

Thus, not only does the body become a tool to directly connect a set of portable devices – from 

mobile phones to palm-tops and music readers –, which allows going beyond current technologies 

and  setting  up  a  “personal  area  network”  in  the  place  of  the  networks  currently  operating,  i.e.  a 

personal network that is kept together by our skin and tissues. In fact, the body also becomes a 

tool that is no longer fully under our control, since this new use of the body is made conditional 

upon patent rights, i.e. upon a payment made to Microsoft. 

The  downright  reduction  of  our  body  to  a  “device”  does  not  only  enhance  the  trend  –  already 

pointed  out  –  towards  turning  it  increasingly  into  a  tool  to  allow  continuous  surveillance  of 

individuals.  Indeed,  the  latter  are  “dispossessed”  of  their  own  bodies  and  thereby  of  their  own 

autonomy.  The  body  ends  up  being  under  others’  control.  However,  what  can  a  person  expect 

22 G. Deleuze-F. Guattari, Mille Plateaux, Editions de Minuti, Paris, 1981, p. 184. 
23 M. Bogdanowicz, Before the Cyborg Come, IPTS, Sevilla, 2003, p. 4. 
24 D. Le Breton, Signes d’identité, p. 7.  

54

 
                                                 
after being dispossessed of her own body, having to live through an experience that closely mirrors 

the separation between soul and body? 

Thinking  of  the  body,  and  preventing  anyone  from  “laying  his  hands”  on  it,  requires  a  different 

concept  of  body  integrity  –  no  longer  bounded  by  the  long-cherished  physicality  of  one’s  body, 

respect for which has been so far the guiding light of constitutional safeguards. It is a different body 

that is before us – it can be broken down, disseminated, manipulated, and forged. This new body 

enables new forms of surveillance and therefore requires new, stronger safeguards. Once again, 

the  body  and  the  personal  freedom  it  embodies  come  to  the  foreground  because  they  are 

prerequisites for freedom. 

Concluding comments 

The  unity  of  the  individual  can  only  be  re-created  by  extending  the  safeguards  devised  for  the 

physical  body  to  the  electronic  body.  However,  it  happens  that  meanwhile  past  and  future  have 

become  mixed  and  obliged  us  to  face  an  intolerable  present  –  where  physicality  is  taking  a 

revenge one would have preferred not to be a witness to. 

The body has taken the floor and the world has had to look at the vision of tortured bodies. One is 

not naïve, indeed one is aware that torture has not disappeared. Still, one would like to believe that 

this practice has been banned once and for all from Western culture, and that the foundation of 

modern  civilisation  goes  hand  in  hand  with  the  repudiation  of  an  information-gathering  tool  that 

thwarts  the  very  concept  of  humanity.  This  is  why  there  was  someone  who  actually  found  it 

anachronistic – the mere memory, as it were, of a remote past – for the Charter of Fundamental 

Rights of the EU to re-affirm the ban on torture in 2000. Yet, now that torture is back with us, one 

realises  with  dismay  that  this  provision  continues  to  be  necessary  –  it  is  as  if  democracy  were 

always in need of “repeating” vaccinations one believed had finally immunised it against old evils. 

In its evolution, democracy has attached ever-increasing importance to human dignity. A significant 

cultural as well as institutional innovation was marked by the German Constitution of 1949, which 

starts by stating that “Human dignity is intangible”. This clearly shows the intention of repudiating 

the  Nazi  past  and  drawing  an  impassable  boundary  that  is  never  to  be  crossed,  otherwise  –  as 

shown  exactly  by  history  –  not  only  is  democracy  lost,  but  all  human  rights  disappear  into 

nothingness. It was the beginning of a process leading to the “constitutionalisation of the person”, 

which was fully mirrored in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU. It is exactly the memory 

of the 20th century, which experienced other tragedies in addition to the Nazi one, which has led 

55

 
 
Europe to adopt the same approach as the German Grundgesetz. “Human dignity is inviolable. It 

must be respected and protected”: this is the wording that can be found in Article 1 of the Charter. 

The  deepest  meaning  of  democracy  goes  beyond  its  being  the  rule  of  political  games.  It  fully 

incorporates the human dimension, from which it can no longer be separated without denying its 

very nature. 

56

 
2.6. UNITY AND VARIETY OF ETHICAL PRINCIPLES: HUMAN DIGNITY ENDANGERED 

Günter Virt 

As stated elsewhere, the EGE is an independent, pluralist, multidisciplinary group which advises 

the  European  Commission  on  ethical  questions  raised  by  scientific  and 

technological 

developments.  At  the  same  time,  its  aim  is  to  mirror  European  society  in  both  its  diversity  and 

unity. Its diversity lies not only in the members’ professional competences in very varied fields of 

expertise,  but  above  all  in  the  diversity  of  ideologies  and  traditions  in  which  rational  ethical 

discourse  is  embedded.  What  is  it  that  allows  a  consensus  opinion  to  be  reached  on  the  often 

complex, new ethical problems under consideration? Nor is a consensus always reached, as the 

independence of members may, exceptionally, lead to a dissenting opinion. This pluralism of moral 

views, ethical systems and ideologies, extends even into one’s own conscience and often creates 

uncertainty. How much pluralism can someone endure without taking refuge in simplifications and 

becoming susceptible to populist, fundamentalist or totalitarian tendencies? On the other hand can 

relativism  -  devoid  of  moral  identity  -  really  form  a  sound  basis  for  tolerance?  Are  there  any 

prerequisites, without which the pluralism of liberal democracy based on the principle of freedom 

would  be  jeopardised  in  the  long  run,  and  what  are  they?  Just  as  analysis  does  not  yet  mean 

synthesis of human existence, so too an analytical perception of pluralism in Europe does not yet 

signify that which gives it its homogeneous form, namely its soul. 

This  search  for  the  common  solid  foundations  is  reflected  in  the  work  of  the  EGE  whenever  it 

formulates a new Opinion, as the principles underpinning the search for a guiding solution to the 

problems of new issues raised have to be made transparent and developed afresh each time. This 

entails  the  difficult  task  of  preserving  the  substance  of  European  values  as  distinct  from  other 

cultures,  while  nevertheless  taking  a  realistic  view  of  the  competition  with  other  cultures,  which 

manifests  itself  in  particular  in  technically  innovative  advances  and  the  associated  social 

structures. Ethics must not simply play second fiddle to considerations of economic competition. 

The concept of “principle” as an expression of such foundations is itself also ambiguous. For some, 

principle as a category means stringing together important aspects (for example autonomy, non-

maleficence, beneficence and justice in US principles, where it is not clear how to decide if tension 

and contradiction arise between these axioms). However, in our European culture the demand was 

and is different. It is naive to retreat from the standards reached through systematic reflection on 

the basis of fundamental ethical postulates. Such ethical principles cannot be challenged without 

self-contradiction.  If  such  reflection  is  not  scrupulously  pursued,  conflicts  of  values  will  lead  to 

minimal consensus which will not be sound in the long term. 

57

 
In  Europe’s  crisis-ridden  history,  a  history  characterised  by  human  and  social  disasters 

accompanied  by  lofty  philosophical  reflections,  the  inalienable  and  equal  dignity  of  all  people 

crystallised out ever more clearly as the basis of the European culture. Slowly, in ever-widening 

ripples,  individual  human  rights  emerged  and  are  still  emerging  on  this  basis.  Faced  with  crisis 

situations,  they  were  formulated  in  concrete  terms  and  in  this  sense  can  be  interpreted  as 

instruments of crisis- resolution. It is probably not by chance that human rights based on human 

dignity emerged in this and no other culture. The roots lie in Greek and Stoic philosophy, in the 

Jewish-Christian interpretation of being human, and in their continuation in the various branches of 

the Enlightenment, revolutionary and evolutionary social development and pragmatic reflections. 

However,  the  principle  of  human  dignity,  as  well  as  all  other  from  dignity  derived  principles  of 

middle range, is as much in need of interpretation as it is capable of it. The scope and extent of 

human dignity are controversial issues. It is therefore hardly surprising that human dignity is not 

only  often  violated  in  dreadful  ways  in  practice,  but  also  contested  in  theory.  In  the  German-

speaking  world,  book  titles  such  as  “Die  Würde  des  Menschen  ist  antastbar”  (Human  dignity  is 

violable)  (F.  J.  Wetz)  and  a  critical  newspaper  article  entitled  “Die  Würde  des  Menschen  war 

unantastbar” (Ernst-Wolfgang Böckenförde, in: „Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung“, 3.9.2003, S. 33) 

bear witness to this. The debate revolves around the various reductionisms involved in interpreting 

what it is to be human. Is man the product of social mechanisms? Is he the sum of his genes? Can 

all cultural output be interpreted as a result of the development of egoistic genes? Is the human 

spirit the ensemble of “firing neurons”? Is a human being a conglomeration of abilities to achieve 

certain  things  and  to  represent  interests?  Is  man  a  computer  produced  by  evolution,  who, 

networked  with  others  through  chips  implanted  in  his  body,  will  eventually  be  enhanced  through 

technology  into  an  improved  superhuman  (according  to  whose  ideas  and  wishes)?  Is  man  only 

this  or  are  these  merely  partial  aspects,  a  reduction  of  a  greater  whole?  The  Jewish-Christian 

tradition interprets man not only in terms of consciousness but also in terms of his mind-body as a 

whole.  The  message  of  Christianity  is  not  deliverance  from  the  body  but  its  transformation  after 

death. What man ultimately is emerges only from completion, but this is beyond our experience, for 

everyone  dies  incomplete  in  some  way.  The  unfathomability  of  death,  which  we  experience 

particularly intensely on the death of our loved ones and which awaits us all, provides further food 

for thought and reinforces the motif of the inviolability of human dignity. 

Faced with the many different reductionisms and violations of this dignity, further work is needed 

on  the  insight  into  and  interpretation  of  human  dignity.  Anyone  who  denies  dignity  unavoidably 

presupposes in doing so that he is himself claiming respect for his dignity for the purpose of his 

argument; otherwise it is a superficial objection and cannot be taken seriously at all. Anyone who 

58

 
denies  other  people  or  other  stages  of  human  life  the  dignity  which  he  claims  for  himself  must 

admit the question what right he has to do so or from what standpoint beyond dignity he denies it 

to others. 

Inflationary use of the concept of human dignity to gain acceptance in society for certain desires or 

positions is counterproductive. This calls for reflection on the crux of what is meant by it. The basic 

mindset of valuing people as people is not subject to any limits. When it comes to action, however, 

human  beings  are  always  subject  to  limits.  Where  precisely  these  limits  lie  is  discovered  in 

historical terms only when they are seriously overstepped, thereby violating human dignity in often 

dreadful  contrasting  experiences.  Whenever  people  are  totally  instrumentalised,  treated  without 

informed consent, or used as guinea pigs in research, whenever they are sold or whenever parts 

of  their  bodies  are  sold  or  they  are  forced  to  sell  their  organs,  human  dignity  is  being  violated. 

There  is  wide  consensus  on  this.  Whenever  human  rights  violations  of  this  or  any  new  kind 

increase, new areas of consensus have to be sought or old ones reconfirmed. 

It  is  practically  impossible  to  retreat  behind  a  formulation  of  human  dignity  in  the  Categorical 

Imperative of Immanuel Kant, whereby human beings must never be treated merely as a means to 

an end, but must always be respected for their own sake, without repudiating the most important 

human rights documents. Recognition of man as an end in himself means recognition of human 

dignity. Objects of value and goods are exchangeable, can be weighed up and are negotiable, but 

human dignity is not. Human dignity cannot therefore be the subject of ethical weighing up. It is the 

prerequisite for doing so. Weighing up goods, even human goods, in conflict situations therefore 

poses no risk to human dignity but an incentive to constantly improve the weighing up in order to 

express human dignity ever more clearly in a process of historical insight and to translate it into 

concrete ethical solutions to problems. In this sense, the criterion of proportionality has its roots 

in human dignity and therefore cannot signify any gradation of that dignity. Rather, it is a pointer for 

drawing the conclusions from dignity ever more effectively. Proportionality means weighing up the 

advantages and risks for the protection of human dignity in such a way that no greater problems 

are created by a specific measure than are solved by it. 

Recognition  of  the  dignity  of  every  human  being  gives  rise  to  a  number  of  criteria  –  often  also 

referred to as principles – essentially concerned with care and protection of human beings on the 

one  hand,  and  respect  for  human  freedom  on  the  other.  Both  sets  of  criteria  (protection  and 

respect) equally have their origin in human dignity. 

It is mostly the rights of autonomy and freedom (respect) that are currently at the forefront of the 

bioethical  debate.  There  must  be  no  treatment,  no  intervention,  and  no  inclusion  in  research 

projects  without  informed  consent.  There  must  be  respect  for  privacy  in  a  society  increasingly 

59

 
permeated  by  controls,  freedom  of  research  for  researchers and cooperation in research, etc. A 

growing ethical sensitivity for the freedom and human rights of future generations can be observed. 

Future  generations  have  a  right  to  be  given  scope  for  freedom  and  the  opportunity  to  solve  the 

problems  that  our  generation  leaves  behind  for  them  (e.g.  environmental  problems,  ultimate 

disposal of radioactive waste, etc.). 

In view of the often one-sided focus on the criteria of freedom, another equally important branch of 

protection  criteria,  in  the  shape  of  “care  ethics”,  has  recently  emerged  –  not  only  under  the 

influence of feminist ethics. Since men are often confined and limited in their finite freedom, care 

for people evidently follows as a necessary consequence of respect for and protection of human 

dignity. Human dignity confers on the basic assets of being human the importance that is protected 

through  fundamental  rights.  Protection  rights  can  be  linked  with  the  obligation  recognised  in 

medical ethics for thousands of years not to cause harm (nil nocere) and to care for the well-being 

of the patient (beneficence). The basic expression of the care due to human dignity is to be found 

in  his  right  to  life  and  the  protection  of  life  (Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European 

Union, Article 2). If, to remain capable of action in tragic conflict situations, human life has to be 

weighed  up,  care  must  be  taken  that  life  can  only  be  weighed  up  against  life  and  not  against 

incomparable  economic,  political,  utilitarian  or  other  goods.  In  addition,  present  life  cannot  be 

weighed up against future life, for instance in research. 

The protection criteria include, in particular, protection against discrimination on the grounds of 

religion, skin colour, sex, genetic or other predisposition, abilities or lack of them, especially in the 

form of disabilities. Human dignity and the resulting care criteria must be emphasised especially in 

respect  of  particularly  vulnerable  groups,  such  as  the  disabled.  Not  only  the  right  to  protection 

against claims and exploitation by third parties, but also the right to be cared for by others follow 

from the dignity of everyone who, on account of his mortal nature or as a result of his way of life, is 

restricted and disabled in a particular way or may become so at any time. 

The solidarity criterion covers both fair and equal access to health-related resources, solidarity in 

sharing  the  risks  of  health  costs  and  consideration  for  the  weak  in  society  in  health-related 

research. This is particularly true concerning research on children and the aged and, in worldwide 

terms,  nursing  mothers  (cf.  WHO  report  on  priority  medicine).  A  research  allocation  under  the 

social  contract  must  take  account  of  gender-specific  aspects,  which  so  far  have  been  given  too 

little consideration. The conclusions drawn so far from the equal dignity of men and women are by 

no means adequate, especially as far as women are concerned. 

The criterion of truth and the ensuing right to truth in order to protect people against deception and 

tendentious half-truths has to be satisfied principally through transparency. Everyone has the right 

60

 
to  true,  sympathetic  communication  of  information  obtained  on  his  state  of  health  or  illness  and 

when  participating  in  research,  on  the  approval  of  the  research  (committees  on  ethics),  on  the 

implementation  of  the  research  and  not  least  on  the  reporting  of  the  research  results. 

Transparency  includes  uncensored  publication  –  not  only  of  positive  results,  but  also  and 

especially of unexpected, undesired and, in this sense, negative results of the research. 

The criterion of justice (in so far as it is not a statement of a moral-ethical position, but represents 

usable  criteria),  often  cited  separately,  has  already  been  dealt  with  and  differentiated  in  broad 

terms  at  the  various  levels.  The  explicit  mention  of  justice  at  the  conclusion  of  these 

considerations,  despite  the  many  different  conceptions  of  justice,  nevertheless  leads  back  once 

again to the basis of justice in the inalienable and equal dignity of all human beings. 

In the explanatory memorandum to its Recommendation 1418/9925 on the protection of the human 

rights and dignity of the terminally ill and the dying (adopted by the Parliamentary Assembly by a 

large  majority  and  welcomed  by  the  Council  of  Ministers  and  confirmed  in  the  case  law  of  the 

European  Court  of  Human  Rights)  the  Council  of  Europe  established  what  is  meant  by  human 

dignity in European culture: 

(cid:131) 

“Dignity  is  bestowed  equally  upon  all  human  beings,  regardless  of  age,  race,  sex, 

particularities  or  abilities,  of  conditions  or  situations,  which  secures  the  equality  and 

universality of human rights. Dignity is a consequence of being human. Thus a condition of 

being can by no means afford a human being its dignity nor can it ever deprive him or her 

of it. 

(cid:131)  Dignity is inherent in the existence of a human being. If human beings possessed it due to 

particularities,  abilities  or  conditions,  dignity  would  neither  be  equally  nor  universally 

bestowed upon all human beings. Thus a human being possesses dignity throughout the 

course of life. Pain, suffering or weakness does not deprive a human being of his or her 

dignity. 

(cid:131)  The equality and universality of human dignity and human rights do not originate from a 

convention. One possesses dignity and its subsequent rights not due to the recognition of 

other human beings, but due to one’s descent from them. 

25 http://assembly.coe.int/documents/adoptedtext/ta99/erec1418.htm"  
http://assembly.coe.int/documents/adoptedtext/ta99/erec1418.htm 
"http://assembly.coe.int/Main.asp?link=http%3A%2F%2Fassembly.coe.int%2FDocuments%2FWorkingDocs%2FDoc9
9%2FEDOC8421.htm" }http://assembly.coe.int/Main.asp?link=http%3A%2F%2Fassemb 
ly.coe.int%2FDocuments%2FWorkingDocs%2FDoc99%2FED 
OC8421.htm 

61

 
                                                 
(cid:131)  An individual’s dignity can be respected or violated, yet it can neither be granted nor lost. 

Respect for human dignity is independent of factual reciprocity. Respect for human dignity 

is also due where reciprocity is not, not yet or not anymore possible (i.e. towards patients 

in coma). To believe that human dignity may be divided or limited only to certain stages or 

conditions of life is a form of disregard for human dignity. 

(cid:131)  The recognition and protection of the dignity of the most vulnerable members of society – 

who  may  find  it  difficult  to  express  themselves  on  a  societal  level  –  have  proven  to  be 

inadequate.  The  terminally  ill  or  dying  are  among  these  vulnerable  members  of  society. 

Due to their public marginalisation they are in danger of being exposed to individual, social 

and societal pressure. 

(cid:131)  The  responsibility  of  affording  a  terminally  ill  or  dying  person  with  the  means  and  the 

infrastructure worthy of his or her dignity results from the fundamental understanding that 

human dignity is imperishable.” 

Under the terms of this Council of Europe text, dignity is neither divisible nor can it be gradated. 

In  the  future,  it  will  not  be  enough  for  the  EGE  only  partially  to  reflect  the  ethical  and  moral 

pluralism of Europe. Rather, the progress of reflection on how to deal ethically with this pluralism 

needs to be stimulated so that the standards reached are not undercut by minimal consensus and 

so that what has made Europe, through its crisis-ridden history, into what it is, is not forgotten. 

In  view  of  the  questioning  of  human  dignity  and  attempts  to  restrict  its  scope,  a  constructive 

dialogue is necessary to render productive the  motivating forces not only of the various sources 

that  flow  into  our  understanding  of  human  dignity  and  but  also  those  of  the  other  advanced 

civilisations and religions about which we still know far too little 

62

 
2.7. BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ETHICS: THE NEXT TEN YEARS 

Peter Whittaker 

The precursor of the EGE (the Group of Advisers on the Ethical Implications of Biotechnology) was 

established  in  1991.  It  was  perceived  at  that  time  that  developments  in  Biotechnology  were 

presenting  governments  with  the  need  to  make  decisions  based  not  only  on  economic  and 

scientific  considerations  but  also  on  ethical  ones.  If  there  was  a  need  for  a  body  to  advise  the 

European Commission on ethical aspects of developments in technology then, the need today is 

on a different scale altogether. It is rare that a week passes without news media reporting some 

development in medical, information, communication or agricultural technology that challenges the 

ethical standards that should be at the root of our medical, social and educational systems. 

In the next ten years we can expect the issues that engage the EGE to be both developments in 

research  areas  that  have  already  been  considered  by  the  Group  together  with  newly  emerging 

issues. I have chosen one example of each that I think will be taken up by the EGE in the coming 

years. 

In the context of continuing developments there can be little doubt that stem cells will appear on 

the agenda again. The EGE have already produced 4 Opinions in this area, namely: 

Opinion N° 9 

(28/05/1997)  Ethical aspects of cloning techniques 

Opinion N° 15 

(14/11/2000)  Ethical aspects of human stem cell research and use. 

Opinion N° 16 

(07/05/2002)  Ethical aspects of patenting inventions involving human stem cells. 

Opinion N° 19 

(16/03/2004)  Ethical aspects of umbilical cord blood banking. 

Despite  this,  the  field  has  advanced  at  such  a  pace  that  there  are  many  aspects  of  stem  cell 

research that were not covered in these Opinions or were dealt with in a manner that would now 

be considered to be inadequate or outdated. The following aspects come immediately to mind – 

others will undoubtedly emerge during the coming years: 

1. 

Production  of  nuclear  transfer  embryos  for  stem  cell  derivation.  Whilst  the  most  widely 

publicised application of this procedure would be so-called “therapeutic cloning”, a more 

immediate use will be to produce stem cells derived from persons with inherited disease in 

order to study the molecular biology of the disease, which could lead to superior therapies. 

As with the production of other embryo-derived stem cells the major ethical pitfall would be 

the  status  accorded  to  an  early  human  embryo.  No  scientific  investigation  is  going  to 

illuminate this question and general ethical agreement is never likely to be achieved. The 

probability is that more countries will follow the lead of governments in the United Kingdom 

63

 
and some other countries that are permitting this type of research under strictly regulated 

conditions. 

2. 

The use of parthenogenetic or other types of “embryos” that are genetically incapable of 

developing  beyond  a  certain  embryonic  stage,  to  produce  stem  cells.  This  could 

circumvent the embryo status problem if there was general agreement that these could not 

be  considered  to  be  true  embryos.  However  there  are  the  problems  that  stem  cells 

produced  in  this  way,  because  of  their  genetic  deficiencies,  might  not  be  useful  for 

therapeutic purposes and could have limited value for the study of disease. 

3. 

The source of eggs for use in nuclear transfer could be an important ethical issue. Human 

eggs are far from being an unlimited resource and are only accessible with considerable 

discomfort  and  inconvenience  to  the  donor.  The  likely  demand  for  eggs  should 

“therapeutic cloning” become a reality is likely to far outstrip the supply. Animal (rabbit or 

cow)  eggs  have  been  suggested  as  alternatives  but  there  are  unresolved  problems  of 

potential  immune  rejection,  the  compatibility  of  human  nuclear  DNA  with  animal 

mitochondrial DNA and the possibility of animal disease transfer to human populations. 

4. 

Conversion  of  embryonic  stem  cells  to  eggs  or  sperm.  This  has  been  achieved  in  mice 

although the fertility of the apparent gametes has yet to be established. It also remains to 

be established whether these procedures can also be applied to human embryonic stem 

cells. If these prove to be possible the way could be open for applying the procedure in 

cases of infertility. Before this could be attempted under any ethical umbrella, it would be 

necessary to ensure that the risks of developmental defects were no greater than those 

observed with standard IVF. It would be desirable to address the ethical considerations of 

such procedures well in advance of their development. 

In  the  context  of  new  developments,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the  question  of  brain  manipulation. 

Advances in neurosciences are pointing to ways in which it might be possible to manipulate the 

human brain to control behaviour, personality and motivation. Commercial uses have already been 

seen  in  the  areas  of  advertising  using  subliminal  visual  or  auditory  cues.  Whilst  this  in  itself  is 

ethically highly questionable, leading to learning without consent, possible future uses pose even 

more serious ethical questions. 

It  is  possible  that  in  the  near  future  the  use  of  chemicals,  electromagnetic  radiation  or  brain 

implants could be used for crowd control, to gain military superiority or to control violent people or 

sex offenders. Such uses could, in comparison, make Huxley’s “Brave New World” appear to be a 

quite benign regime.  

64

 
There is little doubt that such developments could represent a serious threat to human dignity and 

would undermine the principles of autonomy and consent. This is an area that needs, as far as is 

possible, to be closely watched. There are suggestions that studies in these areas are at relatively 

advanced stages in the laboratories of major military powers. 

Two other areas are likely to be continuing themes in all of the future considerations of the EGE – 

education and solidarity.  

Future decisions in science are likely to be made by governments, which might not always have 

the  greater  welfare  of  their  citizens  at  the  forefront  of  their  considerations.  I  think  that  it  will  be 

important to stress the need in the future to involve interested members of the public in decisions 

concerning  developments  in  technology.  The  pace  of  technology  is  such  that  retrospective 

approval or disapproval in the context of parliamentary elections is not going to be sufficient. There 

are,  of  course,  those  that  do  not  have  an  interest  in  understanding  and  who  are  motivated  by 

incomplete  information  or  misinformation  coming  from  industries,  pressure  groups  and  news 

media, all of which may have good reasons for putting over their message in strident terms. There 

are also citizens that would like to gain an understanding of the latest technological advances and 

to make a responsible contribution to decision-making processes. There will be a responsibility to 

provide access to clear, unbiased information for such people and to provide a means for involving 

them in the decision-making process. 

Advances  in  medical  biotechnology,  whether  in  the  form  of  “biologic”  drugs  emanating  from  the 

greater  understanding  of  molecular  medicine  or  of  cell-based  therapies  emerging  from  stem  cell 

research are likely to be expensive. The expectation that these will be provided on demand for all 

citizens  will  impose  major  strains  on  already  economically  struggling  health  services.  The 

principles of justice and solidarity demand that  developments in medical therapy should become 

available to all that might benefit from them. This is a challenge that we are already facing and one 

to  which  there  are  no  easy  answers.  The  problem  is  compounded  by  the  fact  that  ill  health 

correlates with levels of poverty and there is a strong ethical case to be made for addressing this 

situation  as  a  clear  priority.  It  will  be  for  the  EGE  to  highlight  this  situation  and  to  stress  that 

advances in medicine should come not only from high tech research that will tend to benefit the 

already more advantaged but also from addressing the medical needs of the poorer members of 

society  not  just  in  the  relatively  affluent  countries  of  the  EU  but  also  the  poorer  countries  of  the 

developing world. 

65

 
 
 
 
3. INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES OF THE MEMBERS 

relevant to EGE membership 

 
 
 
 
Main International Conferences and Meetings 

Göran Hermerén, President of the EGE 

November 2001 

Nordic  Committee  on  Bioethics, 

International  Conference  on 

Teaching bioethics, Copenhagen, Denmark 

March 2002 

Genetic Knowledge and the Future of Mankind, German Ministry of 

Education together with DRZE (German Reference Center for Ethics 

in the Life Sciences), Berlin, Germany 

August 2002 

First  European  Ethics  Summit,  European  Parliament.  European 

Ethics Network, Brussels, Belgium 

September 2002 

Symposium  on  Screening  for  Cancer  in  the  Prostate,  Cambridge, 

UK. 

October 2002 

Danish  Council  on  Ethics,  International  Conference  on  Role  of 

Ethics  Committees  at  National  and  European  Level,  Copenhagen, 

Denmark 

May 2003 

Ethical  Aspects  of  Stem  Cell  Research  and  Use,  WHO,  Geneva, 

Switzerland. 

Cloning  in  Biomedical  Research  and  Reproduction.  International 

Conference,  arranged  by  the  Federal  government  of  Germany 

together with DRZE (German Reference Center for Ethics in the Life 

Sciences), Berlin, Germany 

December 2003 

7th European Conference of National Ethics Committees. Council of 

Europe, Strasbourg, France 

EuroNanoForum. Trieste, Italy 

February 2004 

Ethical  implications  of  Scientific  Research  on  Bioweapons  and 

Prevention  of  Bioterrorism,  European  Commission,  Brussels, 

Belgium 

European  Society  of  Gene  Therapy  ESGT  Meeting.  Edinburgh, 

Scotland 

69

 
 
 
 
March 2004 

Mapping out Nano Risks. European Commission, Brussels, Belgium 

Public  Hearing  on  Stem  Cell  Research,  Parliament  of  Sweden, 

Standing Committee on Social Affairs 

April 2004 

2nd  International  Meeting  of  the  Stem  Cell  Network  NRW.  Bad 

Godesberg, Germany 

Stakeholder conference for the study carried out by IPTS (Institute of 

Prospective  Technological  Studies)  on  Human  Tissue-Engineered 

Products, Brussels, Belgium 

June 2004 

Nanotechnologies,  Problems  and  Possibilities, 

International 

Conference, Stockholm, Swedish Research Council. 

August 2004 

Patenting  on  Genes  and  Stem  Cells,  International  conference, 

Danish Council on Ethics, Copenhagen, Denmark 

November 2004 

Hearing,  Standing  Committee  on  Social  Affairs,  Valetta,  Maltese 

Parliament 

Lecture for the National Bioethics Committee, Valetta, Malta 

Priority  Medicines 

for 

the  Citizens  of  Europe. 

International 

conference. Panel debate. The Hague, Netherlands 

Linda Nielsen, Vice-President of the EGE 

November 2001 

Nordic  Committee  on  Bioethics, 

International  Conference  on 

Teaching Bioethics, Denmark 

March 2002 

Genetics Knowledge and the Future of Mankind. German Ministry of 

Education together with German Reference Centre for Ethics in the 

Life Sciences. Berlin, Germany 

April 2002 

Conference on Stem Cells, Brussels 

August 2004 

Patenting  on  Genes  and  Stemcells. 

International  Conference. 

Danish Conference on Ethics. Copenhagen, Denmark 

November 2004 

Science and Technology in Society (STS), Forum Kyoto, Japan 

70

 
  
 
 
 
 
Rafael Capurro 

March 2001 

ICIE  (International  Centre 

for 

Information  Ethics)  Symposium: 

Konzepte der Informationsethik, Augsburg, Germany 

May 2001 

Annual Course and Conference: Libraries in the Digital Age (LIDA): 

Ethics  and  Information  in  the  Digital  Age,  Inter-University  Centre, 

Dubrovnik, Croatia 

November 2001 

4th  Conference  of  the  Group  on  Ethics  and  Economy,  German 

Society of Philosophy, Stuttgart, Germany 

November 2001 

I  Symposium  on  Media  Ethics  of  the  Hochschule  der  Medien 

Stuttgart,  Menschenbilder  in  den  Medien  –  Ethische  Vorbilder? 

Stuttgart, Germany 

December 2001 

CEPE  Computer  Ethics:  Philosophical  Enquiry, 

International 

Conference, IT and the Body, Lancaster University, UK 

January 2002 

Fondation  Robert  Schuman  and  Berlin-Brandenburgisches  Institut 

für  Deutsch-Französische  Zusammenarbeit  in  Europa  e.V.  (BBI), 

Colloquium For European Foundational Values in Bioethics, Schloss 

Genshagen, Germany 

June 2002 

Federal  Foreign  Office,  French  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  in 

conjunction with the National Ethics Council of the Federal Republic 

of  Germany  and  the  National  Consultative  Ethics  Committee  for 

Health and Life Sciences of the French Republic, Towards a Global 

Bioethics? An Intercultural Dialogue, Berlin, Germany 

August 2002 

First  European  Ethics  Summit.  European  Parliament,  European 

Ethics Network, Brussels, Belgium 

October 2002 

II ICIE (International Centre for Information Ethics) Symposium: Der 

Digital Divide aus ethischer Sicht, Augsburg, Germany 

November 2002 

II  International  Conference  on  Technoethics,  EPSON  Foundation: 

Institute  of  Technoethics  and  Universidad  Autónoma  de  Barcelona, 

Barcelona, Spain 

71

 
 
November 2002 

II  Symposium  on  Media  Ethics  of  the  Hochschule  der  Medien 

Stuttgart,  Krieg  und  Medien  –  Verantwortung 

zwischen 

apokalyptischen  Bildern  und  paradischen  Quoten?  Stuttgart, 

Germany 

July 2003 

Symposium:  Der  Perfekte  Mensch.  Perspektiven  und  Kontroversen 

der Gendebatte, Karlsruhe University, Germany 

November 2003 

III  Symposium  on  Media  Ethics  of  the  Hochschule  der  Medien 

Stuttgart, Cool, connected, charming – Tugenden der Medienkultur? 

Stuttgart, Germany 

November 2003 

Forum  Denk!ZEIT.  Access  to  Information  Technology.  The  New 

Social Question for the 21st Century. A Dialogue between Dr. Carlos 

Braga  (World  Bank)  and  Rafael  Capurro  organized  by  Microsoft 

Deutschland GmbH, Berlin, Germany 

December 2003 

Plenary  meeting  of  the  Ethisch-Rechtlich-Sozialwissenschaftliche 

Arbeitsgemeinschaft 

des 

Kompetenznetzwerkes 

Stammzellforschung  NRW:  Probleme  der  Patentierung 

im 

Zusammenhang  der  Stammzellforschung,  Nordrhein-Westfälische 

Akademie der Wissenschaften, Düsseldorf, Germany 

June 2004 

International  Conference.  The  Age  of  Information:  New  Anxieties  – 

New  Opportunities.  Institute  of  Communication  Ethics,  Lincoln 

University, UK 

October 2004 

International 

ICIE  (International  Center 

for 

Information  Ethics) 

Symposium  sponsored  by  Volkswagen  Stiftung:  Localizing  the 

Internet.  Ethical  Issues  in  Intercultural  Perspective,  Karlsruhe, 

Germany 

December 2004 

IV  Symposium  on  Media  Ethics  of  the  Hochschule  der  Medien 

Stuttgart, Medien – Wirtschaft – Ethik: Eine Frage des Vertrauens? 

Stuttgart, Germany 

January 2005 

International  Workshop  on  Bioethics  and  Society,  Universidad  de 

Talca, Chile 

72

 
April 2005 

International  Congress  Bioethics  and  Regenerative  Medicine.  Max-

Delbrück  Centrum  für  Molekulare  Medizin  and  Friedrich-Ebert-

Stiftung, Berlin 

Inez de Beaufort 

October 2002 

Workshop Public Debate and Ethics and Literature, Vienna 

March 2003 

March 2004 

June 2004 

Workshop on Stem cells, Bilbao 

EU Conference on Science and Society, Genoa 

Workshop Fiction and Medicine, Madeira 

December 2004 

Workshop Definitions Research, Paris 

February 2005 

Meeting on Stem cells, Manchester 

April 2005 

CESAGen Conference on Societal Aspects of Genomics, London 

Yvon Englert 

Mai 2001 

Audition en Commission spéciale au Sénat belge sur la Recherche 

scientifique sur ces Embryons 

2001-2003 

Vice-Président  du  bureau  du  COMETH  (European  National  Ethics 

Committee) Council of Europe 

January 2001 

La fabrication de l’humain : reproduction des hommes. Colloque du 

centre d’étude du vivant – Université Paris / Denis Diderot, Paris 

May 2001 

La  fin  de  vie.  Journée  de  réflexion  dans  les  salons  du  Ministre 

délégué à la santé, Mr Bernard Kouchner. Orateur invité à Paris 

January 2002 

L’assistance médicale à la procréation chez les couples porteurs du 

virus  de  l’immunodéficience  humaine.  Lecture  à  la  séance  plénière 

de l'Académie Royale de Médecine de Belgique, Bruxelles 

April 2002 

Ethical  Aspects  of  Clinical  Research  in  Developing  Countries. 

Présentation pour « The European Group on Ethics in Science and 

73

 
 
 
New  Technologies  to  the  European  Commission »,  EU  meeting 

Barcelona 

March 2003 

Conférence  citoyenne  sur 

les 

tests  génétiques : 

impact  et 

gouvernance. Salle du Congrès – Fondation roi Baudouin – Maison 

des Parlementaires, Bruxelles 

April 2003 

De  la  sexualité  sans  reproduction  à  la  reproduction  sans  sexualité. 

Cité des Sciences à Paris : « Procréation, sexualité, filiation », Paris 

January 2004 

Bioethics  and  Clinical  Research  at  the  First  BCPM  Symposium: 

« How  to  Foster  European  Research  on  Medicines  in  Belgium »., 

Académie de Médecine de Belgique 

March 2004 

Ethical  Aspects  of  Clinical  Research  in  Developing  Countries. 

Presentation for the “European Group on Ethics in Science and New 

Technologies” – Nationaler Ethikrat, Berlin 

November 2004 

Aspects éthiques – Santé de la reproduction au Nord et au Sud- De 

la  connaissance  à  l’action.  Institut  de  Démographie,  Université 

Catholique de Louvain -Louvain la Neuve - Chaire Quetelet 

Catherine Labrusse-Riou 

January 2002 

Universités d’Osaka et de Tokyo (cours et conférences), Japon 

January 2002 

Fondation Robert Schuman and Berlin-Brandenburgisches Institut für 

Deutsch-Französische  Zusammenarbeit  in  Europa,  Colloque  « Pour 

des  valeurs  européennes  fondamentales  en  bioéthique »,  (rapport 

« comment penser l’embryon humain en droit ? ») Berlin, Allemagne 

March 2003 

Séminaire 

franco-chinois,  Le  Clonage  humain, 

(intervention 

« Questions de politique législative »), Paris, France 

June 2003 

Participation au Congrès France, Allemagne, Japon, La recherche sur 

l’embryon  humain,  (rapport  « l’embryon  in  vitro  entre  éthique  et 

droit »), Tokyo, Japon 

June 2003 

Universités d’Osaka et de Sapporo, (cours et conférences), Japon 

74

 
 
 
January 2004 

Gouvernants  et  gouvernés :  de 

leurs 

rôles 

respectifs  dans 

l’élaboration  du  droit  des  sciences  et  des  techniques,  (rapport  «Le 

diagnostic prénatal et la responsabilité civile : l’impact d’un procès sur 

les gouvernés et les gouvernants »), Paris, France 

March 2004 

Vers  la  fin  de  l’homme ?  Colloque  Université  Paris  V,  (rapport 

« L’humain  en  droit :  réalités,  fictions,  utopies »),  Université  de 

Paris V et de Paris Val de Marne, France 

September 2004 

La  fin  de  vie,  Colloque  franco-italien  de  l’Institut  international  de 

criminologie  (rapport  « regards  civilistes  sur  la  fin  de  v  ie »),  Paris, 

France 

January 2005 

Séminaire  européen,  PropEur  –  Property  Regulation  in  European 

Science,  Ethics  and  Law,  Eberhard  Karls  Universität  Tübingen 

(Rapport  “Human  tissues  between  public  and  commercial  law”), 

Tübingen, Allemagne 

May 2005 

Séminaire  de  bioéthique,  L’assistance  médicale  à  la  procréation, 

Problèmes  de  législation,  Université  de  Foggia  (Rapport  « Produire 

l’homme :  de  quel  droit ?  regards  laïques  sur  l’AMP  dans  le  droit 

français »), Foggia, Italie 

October 2005 

Universidad  Nacional  de  Cuyo,  Institut  de  Bioéthique,  (cours  et 

conférences), Mendoza, Cordoba, Buenos-Ayres, Argentine 

Anne McLaren 

January 2001 

Workshop on Ethics in Biomedical Research, Madras, India 

March 2001 

Conference on Stem Cells, Oslo, Norway 

April 2001 

May 2001 

European Parliament, Debate on Genetics, Brussels, Belgium 

Ethics Committee of Medical Association, Cologne, Germany 

August 2001 

Latin American Network on Biological Sciences, Santiago, Chile 

September 2001 

INRA Cellular Totipotence meeting, Paris, France 

September 2001 

Ethics of Genetics (Dialogue), Berlin, Germany 

75

 
 
December 2001 

European  High  Level  Group  (EC)  Stem  Cell  Discussion  Platform, 

Brussels, Belgium 

March 2002 

Academy of Sciences, Stem Cells & Cell Therapy, Paris, France 

May 2002 

Royal  Danish  Academy,  Symposium  on  Cloned  Embryos, 

Copenhagen, Denmark 

September 2002 

(FDA,  NIH,  DHHS)  Workshop  on  Evidence  Based,  Reproductive 

Technologies, Washington DC, USA 

February 2003 

Stem Cell Review Panel, Ottawa, Canada 

March 2003 

Ethics Workshop & Public Forum, Hong Kong, China 

April 2003 

May 2003 

May 2003 

May 2003 

June 2003 

Stem Cell Workshop, Bangalore, India 

WHO Committee on Cloning, Geneva, Switzerland 

Transatlantic  Dialogue  on  Genetics  &  Health  (for  EC),  Washington 

DC, USA 

EC Expert Group on Biotechnological Inventions, Brussels, Belgium 

EC Funding of Embryo Research, Rome, Italy 

September 2003 

Ukrainian  Association  of  Bioethics,  Legal  &  ethical  approaches  to 

stem cell Research, Kiev, Ukraine 

October 2003 

Impact of New Biology on Justice Delivery System, Hyderabad, India 

November 2003 

Pontifical Academy of Sciences, Working Group, Vatican, Italy 

May 2004 

June 2004 

Ethics of Stem Cell Research, Barcelona, Spain 

FEBS Stem Cell Meeting, Warsaw, Poland 

September 2004 

European  Group  of  Life  Sciences  Assisted  reproduction,  stem  cell 

therapy, Brussels, Belgium 

November 2004 

Science  &  Technology 

in  Society 

(STS)  Forum:  Ethics  of 

Reproductive & Therapeutic Cloning, Kyoto, Japan 

November 2004 

Washington DC, USA USNAS, Stem Cell Research Guidelines. 

76

 
Günter Virt 

April 2001 

Medical Ethics in Economy: 5 Levels of Allocation, Pharmig – Vienna 

August 2001 

The  Division  of  Humans  through  modern  Life  Sciences,  European 

Academy of Science and Art, Salzburg 

September 2001 

Ethical  Perspectives  in  the  Process  of  Globalisation,  International 

Congress of the International Society for Moral Theology and Social 

Ethics (chairman), Vienna 

November 2001 

Euthanasia? Symposium IGSL, Bingen, Germany 

November 2001 

Publication  of  Negative  Results  of  Research, 

International 

Symposium on Bioethics, University of Agriculture Vienna 

April 2002 

Patenting of Inventions with Embryonic Stem Cell Lines, Georgetown 

University, Washington DC 

October 2002 

Hearing of the Council of Europe on Euthanasia, Paris 

October 2002 

Stem Cell Research, International Conference Science and Society, 

Luzern 

May 2003 

The  Theological  Dimension  in  Political  Counselling  on  Bioethics 

Lecture to the Jubilee of the University of Salzburg, Austria 

October 2003 

The Gospel of Life for the Future of Europe, International Conference 

within the Programme of Central European Catholic Days, Bratislava 

March 2004 

Rediscovering the Sigh of Creation, Contemporary Creation Theology 

in Catholic Perspective, Consultation on Creation Theology, J. Knox 

International Reformed Centre, Geneva 

July 2004 

Commitment to the Human Rights and the Dignity of the Dying, 10th 

International Congress of F.E.A.M.C., Bratislava. 

77

 
 
 
4.  THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS 

4.1. MEMBERS 2001-2005 

4.1.1. Göran HERMERÉN (President) 

Nationality 

Swedish 

Position 

Philosopher,  Professor  of  Medical  Ethics,  Faculty  of  medicine,  Lund 
University 

Education 

Ph. D. in Philosophy 

Experience 

Professor of Philosophy of Science at Umea University (1970); Professor of 
Practical Philosophy (since 1975) and of Medical Ethics (since 1991) at Lund 
University; Member of the Swedish National Council of Ethics (since 1985); 
Member of the Research ethics committee of the Medical Research Council, 
Stockholm; Chairman of the Advisory Board of the German reference Centre 
of  Ethics  in the Life Sciences  in Bonn; Member  of  the  European  Group  on 
Ethics  (since  1998),  Vice-President  (since  2001),  and  President  (since 
2002). Former member of the Steering Committee for Bioethics (CDBI) of the 
Council of Europe; Former member of the Bioethics Committee of the Nordic 
Council  of  Ministers;  Contributor  to  several  governmental  Commission 
reports in Sweden on problems of biomedical ethics; Author of papers and 
books  on  ethical  problems  in  various  areas  mainly  medical  research  and 
health  care;  Current  research  interests  include  priorities  and  allocation  of 
resources  in  health  care  as  well  as  ethical  aspects  of  genetic  testing  and 
care at the end of life. 

79

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1.2. Linda NIELSEN (Vice-President) 

Nationality 

Danish 

Position 

Rector at the University of Copenhagen, Denmark 

Education 

Doctoral thesis in 1993 and Professor of Law in 1996. 

Experience 

Former Chairman of the Danish Council of Ethics (until 2000); Chairman of 
an  expert  group  on  Biotechnology  and  Ethics  established  by  the  Danish 
Government.  Member  and  former  chairman  of  the  Nordic  Committee  on 
Bioethics.  Former  member  of  a  standing  bureau  on  Ethics  committees, 
established by the Council of Europe (COMETH). Participation in a number 
of  international  research  projects  in  the  field  of  bioethics  and  bio-law  and 
presenting papers at many international conferences; evaluation of research 
projects  for  the  European  Commission;  Chairman/Member  of  a  number  of 
Law  Reform  Commissions,  including  Law  Reform  Commission  on  genetic 
testing in the workplace, on DNA-registers, on Biobanks, on information and 
consent questions etc.; Member of an interdisciplinary steering group at the 
University  of  Copenhagen  regarding  Biotechnology;  Author  of  numerous 
papers  on  bio-law,  including  comparative  bio-law  and  the  relation  between 
bio-law and bio-ethics. 

4.1.3. Nicos C. ALIVIZATOS 

Nationality 

Greek 

Position 

Education 

Experience 

Professor,  Department  of  Public  Law,  Faculty  of  Law,  Athens;  Attorney-at-
Law, Alivizatos & Partners, Athens; Member of the Hellenic Data Protection 
Authority;  President  of  the  Hellenic  League  of  Human  Rights  (founding 
member of the FIDH, Paris) 

Ptychion  (LL.B),  University  of  Athens;  D.E.S.  (LL.M.),  University  of  Paris  II 
(Public Law); Doctorat d'Etat (S.J.D.) University of Paris II. 

Practicing  lawyer,  specialized  in  public  law  litigation  before  the  European 
Court  of  Human  Rights  and  the  Greek  Supreme  Administrative  Court 
(Council of State); Participation in various committees drafting legislation on 
issues  such  as  data  protection  (Chair  1995-6);  Professor  of  Constitutional 
Law,  University  of  Athens  (1992-present);  Visiting  Fellow,  Princeton 
University  (1997);  Visiting  Professor,  Temple  University  School  of  Law, 
Athens  Summer  Session  (1987-present);  Visiting  Scholar,  School  of  Law, 
Stanford University (1989). 

Author of numerous books, articles and papers. 

80

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1.4.  Inès de BEAUFORT 

Nationality 

Dutch 

Position 

Education 

Experience 

Professor  of  Health  Care  Ethics  at  the  Medical  Faculty  of  the  Erasmus 
University, Rotterdam 

Graduate 
experimentation at University of Groningen 

in  Theology  at  University  of  Utrecht 

;  Ph.D.  on  human 

Senior Research Fellow at the Institute of Bioethics in Maastricht; Professor 
of  Healthcare  Ethics  at  the  Medical  Faculty  of  the  Erasmus  University, 
Rotterdam  (since  1991);  Member  of  the  Health  Council,  the  Council  for 
Public  Health  and  Healthcare  and  the  Central  Committee  on  Research 
involving Human Subjects; Member of many different ethical committees and 
committees  that  review  research;  Member  of  the  EU  working  group  on 
Human Embryos and Research;  

Expert  on  ethics  in  quite  a  number  of  legal  cases;  Co-ordinator  (with  the 
University  of  Manchester)  of  the  project  Individual  Responsibility  for  Health 
and Beauty and the Doctor; Lecturer in many ethics courses for lay persons, 
medical students, nurses, physicians and mixed audiences; Author of papers 
on a wide variety of topics in medical ethics such as reproductive technology, 
euthanasia and end of life, beauty and ethics, paediatrics and ethics etc. 

4.1.5. Rafael CAPURRO 

Nationality 

German 

Position 

Education 

Experience 

Information  Management  and 

Information  Ethics  at 
Professor  of 
Fachhochschule  Stuttgart,  Hochschule  der  Medien,  University  of  Applied 
Sciences. 

Graduate  in  Philosophy  at  Salvador  University,  Buenos  Aires;  Diploma  in 
Documentation  at  Lehrinstitut 
in 
Philosophy  at  Düsseldorf  University;  Postdoctoral  teaching  qualification  in 
Practical Philosophy at Stuttgart University. 

für  dokumentation,  Frankfurt;  Ph.D. 

Research  worker  at  the  Zentralstelle  für  Atomkernenergie  -  dokumentation 
(ZAED)  Karlsruhe  (1972-1973);  Professor  of  Information  Management  and 
Information  Ethics  at  Fachhochschule  Stuttgart.  Hochschule  für  Bibliotheks 
und Informationswesen University of Applied Sciences (since 1986); Lecturer 
at the Institute of Philosophy, Stuttgart University (since 1987). 

81

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1.6. Yvon ENGLERT 

Nationality 

Belgian 

Position 

Head  of  Fertility  Clinic,  Free  University  of  Brussels  (ULB),  Professor  of 
Medical Ethics and Deontology, ULB 

Education 

MD, Ph.D. in Obstetrics and Gynaecology 

Experience 

Residential  Medical  Doctor 
(1987-1993);  Associate  Clinical  Head, 
Department  of  Obstetrics  and  Gynaecology  Erasme  Hospital-Brussels 
(1993-1996);  Associate  professor  of  «Medical  Deontology  and  Legislative 
aspects»  Medicine  faculty  of  the  ULB-Brussels  (1995-1998);  Professor  of 
«Bioethics  and  Deontology»  Medicine  faculty  and  Public  Health  School, 
ULB-Brussels  (since  1999);  Head  of  Fertility  Clinic  -  ULB-Brussels  (since 
1996); Head of the «Biology and psychology of human fertility» laboratory at 
the  medical  school  of  the  ULB-Brussels  (since  1998);  Head  of  the  Health 
program «Reproductive Medicine - B» ULB-Brussels (since 1999); Member 
of  the  Director  Committee  of  the  Interdisciplinary  Research  Centre  for 
Bioethics  ULB-Brussels  (since  1987);  WHO/UNFPA  expert  Fertility  and 
Family  planning  (1989);  President  of  «Working  group  Human  Embryo  and 
Foetus  Protection»  DGXII  of  the  European  Commission  (1994-1998); 
Member and first President (1996) of the Belgian Consultative Committee of 
Bioethics  (since  1996);  Member  of  the  Ethical  Committee  of  the  Belgian 
National Fund for Scientific Research (FNRS) (since 1997); Vice President of 
the medical board of the Erasme Hospital ULB-Brussels (since 1999); Office 
member  of  the  group  COMETH  of  the  European  Council  (2000-2001); 
Director of several fellowships of the Belgian National Research Foundation. 

82

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1.7. Catherine LABRUSSE-RIOU 

Nationality 

French 

Position 

Professor at the University of Paris I Panthéon-Sorbonne. 

Director of the Department of "Sciences and Technical Law" of the Research 
Centre of Public Law of the University of Paris I (1990-2002). 

Director of the High Level Course "The Status of Persons in the law" 

Education 

Doctorat d'Etat, University of Paris. 

Aggregation of Private Law and Criminal Sciences 

Experience 

Member  of  the  Consultative  Committee  on  Ethics  for  Life  Sciences  and 
Health (1983-90). 

Council  of  State:  Member  of  the  Working  group  (Section  of  Studies  and 
Report, then of the Inter-ministerial Commission in charge of the preparation 
of a preliminary draft law on Life Sciences (1987-89). 

Member of the High Council of Population and Family (1993-1999). 

Member of the Commission on Bio-molecular Engineering (1998-2001). 

Member of the Council Board of the "Université de tous les savoirs" 

Editorial activities: Director of the collections: Thémis / Droit privé et doctrine 
juridique at the Presses Universitaires de France; Member of the Scientifique 
Committee of the Revue d'éthique et de la théologie morale, supplément (le 
Cerf ed.). 

Author of numerous books, articles and papers 

83

 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1.8. Anne Mc LAREN 

Nationality 

British 

Position 

Geneticist, Research Associate at Wellcome CRC Institute, Cambridge 

Education 

Ph.D. (Genetics, Reproductive Biology, Developmental Biology) 

Experience 

Member of the scientific staff of the Agricultural Research Council's Unit of 
Animal  Genetics  in  Edinburgh  (1959-1974);  Director  of  Medical  Research 
Council's Mammalian Development Unit at University College London (1974-
1992); Foreign Secretary, Royal Society (1991-1996); Former Chair of WHO 
Scientific & Technical Advisory Group on Human Reproduction; Member of 
the  Group  of  Advisers  on  the  Ethical  Implications  of  Biotechnology  of  the 
European  Commission  (1994-1997);  Member  of  the  European  Group  on 
Ethics  (since  1998).  Chair  of  the  European  Dept.  Biology  Organisation; 
President  of  the  International  Society  of  Differentiation;  Former  Member  of 
the  Nuffield  Bioethics  Council,  London;  Member  of  the  Human  Fertilisation 
and  Embryology  Authority;  Member  of  Nuffield  Bioethics  Council's  Working 
Group on Health-related Research in Developing Countries. 

4.1.9. Pere PUIGDOMENECH ROSELL 

Nationality 

Spanish 

Position 

Education 

Experience 

Research  Professor  at  the  Department  for  Molecular  Genetics,  Director  of 
the Institute de Biologia Molecular de Barcelona, CSIC. 

Studies  in  Physics  (University  of  Barcelona,  1970).  Theses  de  l’Université, 
mention  Chimie  Physique  (Montpellier,  France,  1974).  Ph.D.  in  Biology 
(Autonomous  University  of  Barcelona,  1975).  Postdoctoral  at  Biophysics 
für 
Laboratory,  Portsmouth  Polytechnic,  UK  and  Max-Planck-Institute 
Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany. 

fellow  at 

Research 
the  Department  of  Molecular  Genetics,  Centre 
d’Investigació  i  Desenvolupament  (since  1981);  Presently  Professor  de 
Investigación  del  CSIC,  Department  de  Genètica  Molecular  and  Director, 
Institute de Biologia Molecular de Barcelona, CID-CSIC. 

Member of Academia Europea and EMBO. President (since 2000), Societat 
Catalana  de  Biologia.  Member  of  the  Commission  on  Biology  and  Society, 
European  Science  Foundation  (2000-2001);  Member  of  the  Consultative 
Forum on Biotechnology USA-EU (2000) ; Member of the Scientific Steering 
Committee,  European  Union  (since  2000);  Member  of 
the  Spanish 
Committees on Biosafety and on BSE-TSE. Narcís Monturiol Medal (1992); 
Award  of  the  Fundació  Catalana  per  la  Recerca  (2000)  ;  Main  research 
subjects: Plant molecular Biology, Gene regulation mechanisms. Funded by 
Spanish  and  European  Agencies  in  collaboration  with  public  and  private 
groups from Europe, Latin America and Eastern Europe. 

84

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1.10. Stefano RODOTA 

Nationality 

Italian 

Position 

Professor  of  Civil  Law,  University  of  Rome;  Chairman  of  the  Italian  Data 
Protection Authority; Chairman of the European Group of the Data Protection 
Authorities. 

Education 

Professor of Civil Law. 

Experience 

Chairman of the Commission on Genetic Testing and Counselling; Member 
of  the  Convention  drafting  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the 
European  Union  (2000);  Former  Member  of  the  HUGO  Ethics  Committee 
(1997-2000);  Member  of  the  Ethics  Committee  of  the  National  Research 
Council;  Work  in  the  field  of  the  legal  and  social  effects  of  scientific 
innovation (1972-2000); Important work in the field of bioethics (1989-2000); 
Author of several books and editor of a number of periodicals; Member of the 
Italian  Parliament  (1979-1994);  Vice-President  of  the  Chamber  of  Deputies 
(1992);  Member  of  the  Parliamentary  Assembly  of  the  Council  of  Europe 
(1983-1994); Member of the European Commission's Group of Advisers on 
the  Ethical  Implications  of  Biotechnology  (1994-1997);  Member  of  the 
European Group on Ethics (since 1998); Chairman of the European Group of 
Authorities for the Protection of Privacy (1999-2000). 

4.1.11. Günter VIRT 

Nationality 

Austrian 

Position 

Education 

Experience 

Professor  of  Theology,  Institute  of  Catholic  Moral  Theology,  University  of 
Vienna 

Doctorate  in  theology  «  Wiener  Kreis  für  Tiefenpsychologie  »,  Studies  of 
psychoanalysis, University of Vienna 

Associate  Professor,  University  of  Tuebingen,  Germany  (1981)  ;  Professor 
for Moral Theology, University of Paderborn, Germany (1981) ; Professor for 
Moral  Theology,  University  of  Salzburg,  Austria  (1983)  ;  Director  of  the 
Institute  of  Moral  Theology,  University  of  Vienna  (since  1986)  ;  Director  of 
the  Institute  for  Ethics  in  Medicine,  University  of  Vienna  (1993)  ;  Author  of 
books  and  articles  ;  Advisor  for  national  and  international  institutions  ; 
Lecturer at national and international conferences, seminars and courses. 

85

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1.12. Peter WHITTAKER 

Nationality 

Irish 

Position 

Biologist,  Professorial  Fellow,  Centre  for  Economic  and  Social  Aspects  of 
Genomics (CESA Gen), Lancaster University. 

Education 

Ph.D. in Biochemistry, Leicester University. 

Experience 

Lecturer in Genetics (1964-1968), University of Hull; Lecturer in Biochemistry 
(1968-1978),  Sussex  University;  Head  of  the  Biology  Department,  National 
University  of  Ireland,  Maynooth  (since  1978  );  Member  of  the  Royal  Irish 
Academy  National  Committee  for  Biology  (1984-1987  and  2000-);  Senior 
Vice-President  of  the  Royal  Zoological  Society  of  Ireland  (1992-1996); 
Chairman of the National Committee for Biology at the Royal Irish Academy 
(1997-2000  );  Member  of  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  (since  1998). 
Secretary General of International Union of Biological Sciences; Member of 
Irish  Council  for  Science,  Technology  and  Information  Task  Force  for 
Biotechnology (since 1999); Author of numerous books, articles and papers. 

86

 
 
 
 
 
Members who left during this reporting period: 

4.1.13. Noëlle LENOIR : (ex President : April 2001 – May 2002) 

Nationality 

French 

Position 

Deputy Minister of European Affairs since Juin 2002. 

Education 

Experience 

Justice  of  the  French  Administrative  Supreme  Court  (Conseil  d'Etat); 
Former  Justice  of  the  French  Constitutional  Court  (1992-2001);  Visiting 
Professor at Columbia University, Yale University and University College of 
London; Associated Professor of Bioethics Law and Human Rights at Paris 
University. 

Graduate of the Institute of Political Studies, Paris; Postgraduate diploma in 
public  law;  successful  candidate  in  examination  for  administrators,  Senate 
of the French Republic. 

Administrator  in  the  Senate  (1972-1977);  Principal  Administrator  in  the 
Senate (1977-1982); Director of the Commission Nationale de l'Informatique 
et des Libertés (National Commission for Information Technology and Civil 
Liberties)  (1982-1984);  Justice  onf  the  Conseil  d'Etat  (since  Oct.1984); 
Chief  of  staff  of  the  Minister  of  Justice  (Nov.1988  -  Oct.  1990);  Prime 
Minister's  office,  special  assignment  on  bioethics  (1990);  Assistant  at  the 
Faculty  of  Law,  Paris  (1972-1982);  Assistant  Professor  at  the  Institute  of 
Political  Studies,  Paris  (1982-1988);  Mayor  of  Valmondois  (1989-1995); 
President  of  the  UNESCO  International  Bioethics  Committee  (1992-1998); 
Justice  of  the  French  Constitutional  Supreme  Court  (1992-2001);  Member 
(1991-1993)  and  Chair  (1994-1997)  of  the  European  Commission's  Group 
of  Advisers  on  the  Ethical  Implications  of  Biotechnology;  Member  of  the 
EU/US Biotechnology Consultative Forum (2000); Member and President of 
the  European  Group  on  Ethics  (since  1998).  Expert  on  ethics 
in 
biotechnologies with the FAO (2000). President of the Committee on Ethics 
and  Deontology  of  the  Institute  for  the  Research  and  Development  (IRD-
France). 

87

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1.14. Spiros SIMITIS (ex- EGE Member: April 2001 – May 2002): 

Nationality 

Greek 

Position 

President of the German Ethics Committee 

Education 

Experience 

Professor  of  Labour,  Civil  and  Computer  Sciences  and  Law  at  the  Johan 
Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main. 

Professor  Dr  Dr.h.c.;  Dr.  iur.  University  of  Marburg  (1956);  Habilitation 
University of Frankfurt am Main (1962) . 

Professor of Civil, Commercial, Comparative and Private International Law, 
Justus  Liebig  University,  Giessen  (1964-1969);  Professor  of  Labour,  Civil 
and  Computer  Sciences  and  Law  at  the  Johann  Wolfgang  Goethe 
University, Frankfurt am Main (since 1969); Director of the research centre 
for Data Protection at the Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt am 
Main;  Permanent  Visiting  Professor,  Yale  law  School  (since  1980)  and 
University of Paris (since 1990);  

Member  of  the  Research  Council  at  the  European  University  Institute, 
Florence  (  1990-1996);  Member  of  the  Strategic  Commission  of  the 
European University Institute, Florence; Member of the German Council for 
Private International Law (since 1966); Member of the Board of the German 
Lawyers  Associations  (1970-1982);  Data  Protection  Commissioner  of  the 
State  of  Hesse  (1975-1991);  Chairman  of  the  Data  Protection  Experts 
Committee  of  the  Council  of  Europe  (1982-1986);  Consultant  of  the 
Commission  of  the  European  Community  in  matters  of  data  protection 
(since 1988); Consultant of the International labour Office for the drafting of 
a  regulation  concerning  the  processing  of  employee  data  (since  1994); 
Chairman of the High Level Expert Group on Social Rights of the European 
Commission (1998-1999); Member of the Information Society Forum of the 
European Commission; Member of the German National Ethics Committee. 

88

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.2. REMIT - 26/03/2001 - 

REMIT OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS 
IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES 

26 March 2001 

1. Purpose 

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies, hereafter the “Group”, shall 
act within the scope of the following remit. 

2. Remit and request for opinions 

The  task  of  the  Group  shall  be  to  advise  the  Commission  on  all  ethical  questions  relating  to 
sciences and new technologies, either at the request  of  the  Commission  or  on  its  own  initiative. 
The  Parliament  and  the  Council  may  draw  the  Commission's  attention  to  questions  which  they 
consider  of  major  ethical  importance.  The  Commission  shall,  when  seeking  the  opinion  of  the 
Group, set a time limit within which such opinion shall be given. 

3. Composition 

The Group shall have twelve members appointed for their expertise and personal qualities. It shall 
be independent, pluralist and multidisciplinary. 

4. Appointment 

The members of the Group shall be appointed by the Commission. 

5. Term of office 

Each  member  of  the  Group  shall  be  appointed  for  a  term  of  four  years.  This  term  shall  be 
renewable once. A member who resigns before completion of the term of office shall be replaced 
for the remainder of the term in accordance with the procedure laid down in Point 4. 

6. Reimbursement of expenses 

Travel and subsistence expenses for the Group’s meetings shall be covered by the Commission in 
accordance with the relevant administrative rules. 

7. Chair 

The  Group  shall  elect  a  chairperson  and  a  vice-chairperson  from  among  its  members  for  the 
duration of the term of office. 

89

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. Secretariat 

The  Secretariat-General  of  the  Commission,  acting  in  close  cooperation  with  the  Group’s 
chairperson, shall be responsible for organising the work of the Group and its secretariat. 

9. Working methods  

The Group’s regular working meetings shall not be open to the public.  
For the purposes of preparing its Opinions and within the limits of the available resources for this 
action, the Group 
- 
part in its proceedings on a given topic on the agenda.  
- 

may invite experts either from a Member State of the Union or from outside to  

to  collect  all  necessary  scientific  and 

may 
information 
may set up working groups to consider specific issues 
may  organize  public  Round  Tables 
transparency 
may establish closer links with representatives of the various ethics bodies which exist in 
the European Union and in the applicant countries. 

to  promote  dialogue  and 

initiate  studies 

in  order 

in  order 

technical 

-  
-  

-  

improve 

take 

10. Opinions 

Every opinion shall be published immediately after its adoption. Where an opinion is not adopted 
unanimously, it shall include any dissenting point of view.  

11. Rules of Procedure 

The Group shall adopt its Rules of Procedure. 

12. Activity report 

A  report  on  the  Group’s  activities  shall  be  produced  under  the  responsibility  of  the  chairperson 
before the end of its term of office. The report shall be published. 

13. Replacement of previous text 

This text describing the remit of the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 
shall replace the remit annexed to the Communication to the Commission of 12 December 1997 on 
the  establishment  of  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New  Technologies 
(SEC(97)2404). 

90

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.3. RULES OF PROCEDURES - 03/07/2001 - 

RULES OF PROCEDURE  (03.07.2001) 

A. 

1. 

General Dispositions 

The  activities  of  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New  Technologies 

(hereafter the “Group”), instituted as an independent body, are governed by these rules of 

procedure. 

2. 

The  task  of  the  Group  is  to  examine  ethical  questions  arising  from  science  and  new 

technologies and on this basis to issue Opinions to the European Commission. 

3. 

Members of the Group deliberate freely and in total independence. 

B. 

4. 

5. 

President and Vice-President 

The Group elects a President and a Vice-President. 

A  candidate  for  either  position  will  be  deemed  elected  when  he/she  attains  an  absolute 

majority of the votes of the members of the Group. If this is not achieved on the first ballot, 

a second ballot is held between the two candidates who obtained the highest number of 

votes. Tied votes are decided either by voluntary withdrawal of one of the candidates or by 

lottery. 

6. 

The President will have the following responsibilities: 

a. 

b. 

c. 

d. 

e. 

f. 

Institutional representation of the Group; 

Preparation of the Agenda for meetings of the Group; 

Acting as Chairperson of meetings of the Group; 

Direction of the Group’s activities; 

Relationships with the European Institutions and other bodies; 

Preparation of the report of activities at the end of the mandate for approval by the 

Group; 

g. 

Organisation of relations with the media. 

7. 

The  President  may  be  substituted  by  the  Vice-President  upon  her/his  being  unable  to 

attend.  If  neither  the  President  nor  the  Vice-President  is  able  to  attend  a  particular 

meeting, the President may delegate another Group member to chair that meeting. 

8. 

The  Vice-President  assists  the  President  in  carrying  out  the  responsibilities  listed  in 

Article 6. 

91

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. 

9. 

Meetings of the Group 

The  Group  meets  on  a  schedule  agreed  with  the  Secretariat  (about  15  working  days  a 

year). (It is expected that Members should attend a minimum of 6 working days a year.) 

10. 

The Group usually meets at the offices of the European Commission in Brussels.  It also 

meets in the Member State that holds the Presidency of the European Union. 

11. 

The  Group  may  take  decisions  only  when  at  least  seven  members  of  the  Group  are 

present. 

12. 

All  meetings  are  convened  at  least  ten  days  in  advance,  the  date  of  the  meeting  and 

agenda  to  be  communicated  at  that  time.  Shorter  notice  may  be  given  when  there  are 

urgent matters to discuss. 

13. 

Any member may request that a specific item is included in the relevant agenda. 

14. 

Minutes of sessions are drafted by the Secretariat, and, approved by the Group on request 

of the President at the following meeting. 

15. 

The Group may invite any of the following to attend meetings of the Group: 

a. 

b. 

c. 

d. 

Representatives of the responsible services of the European Commission; 

Representatives of other Institutions of the European Union; 

Experts appointed by the Group; 

Other interested parties. 

16. 

For  every  Opinion  to  be  issued  by  the  Group,  one  or  more  round-table  may  be  held,  to 

which representatives of the Institutions  of the European Union and parties representing 

different  interests are  invited to participate. The reports of these round-table discussions 

are prepared by the Secretariat, and made available to the public. The Group may decide 

to hold other public hearings of experts on any relevant topics.  

D. 

External Relations 

17. 

Group  members  participating  in  external  meetings  on  behalf  of  the  Group,  send  all 

relevant documentation to the Secretariat for distribution to Group members. 

18. 

The Group aims to have close relations with the Institutions of the European Union. 

To  that  end,  on  behalf  of  the  Group  the  President  may  address  the  European 

Commission, the European Parliament or the Council of the European Union. 

92

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. 

Opinions 

General Rules 

19. 

The  Group  issues  Opinions  either  at  the  request  of  the  European  Commission  or  on  its 

own initiative. It can also issue Opinions to take into account concerns or questions raised 

by the Parliament or the Council. 

20. 

The Group prioritizes the topics to be considered. 

21. 

The Opinions of the Group normally contain: 

a. 

An  indication  of  all  documentation  considered  by  the  Group  in  arriving  at  an 

Opinion, each item to be preceded by the words “Having regard to”. 

b. 

An  indication  of  any  proposals,  opinions  and  consultations  of  relevance  also 

preceded by the words “Having regard to”. 

c. 

The considerations and the reasons “for and against” relevant to the issue under 

discussion preceded by the word “Whereas”. 

d. 

The  wording  “issues  the  following  Opinion”,  followed  by  the  text  of  the  Opinion 

presented in the form of paragraphs. 

22. 

For each topic the President appoints one or more rapporteurs from amongst the members 

of the Group. The rapporteurs are responsible for drafting the Opinion and a preliminary 

report. 

23. 

For each topic, the Secretariat of the Group, in agreement with the President, may appoint 

one  or  more  experts  to  produce  relevant  studies  on  the  scientific,  legal  and  ethical 

background of the considered issues. The conclusions of these studies are made available 

with the publication of the related opinion. 

24. 

The deliberations of the Group are confidential. 

Adoption of an Opinion 

25. 

The  Opinion  is  adopted  either  by  consensus  or  when  the  majority  of  members  of  the 

Group  is  in  favour.  Where  there  is  dissension,  this  is  recorded,  alongside  the  majority 

Opinion.  All  assenting  members  of  the  Group  sign  the  agreed  Opinion.  The  dissenting 

member(s) sign the dissenting opinion. Once signed, the Opinion is final.  

Distribution of an Opinion 

26. 

Each  Opinion  adopted  by  the  Group  is  forwarded  to  the  European  Commission  by  the 

President of the Group. It is also forwarded to the European Parliament and to the Council 

93

 
of  the  European  Union.  Moreover,  the  Group  makes  public  each  Opinion  at  a  press 

conference. Opinions are available on the web site of the Group.  

F. 

Report of Activities 

27. 

The President of the Group prepares a report of activities at the end of the mandate for 

approval  by  the  Group.  This  report  is  forwarded  to  the  President  of  the  European 

Commission,  to  the  President  of  the  European  Parliament  and  to  the  President  of  the 

Council of the European Union. It is also available on the web site of the Group. 

G. 

Information and Communication 

28. 

In order to promote its objectives, the Group publishes information relating to its activities 

by any appropriate means including publications, brochures and Internet. 

H. 

International Co-operation 

29. 

The  Group  may  organise  conferences  and  meetings  with  representatives  of  national 

advisory  bodies  of  the  Member  States  and  other  states  in  the  field  of  ethics  in  sciences 

and new technologies, and with any other institutional bodies at EU or international level.  

30. 

The  Group  follows  the  work  of  other  international  organisations,  public  authorities  and 

NGOs  that  discuss  ethical  and  social  implications  of  developments  in  science  and  new 

technologies. 

H. 

Administration of the Group 

31. 

The European Commission provides administrative and financial support necessary for the 

running  of  the  Group.  The  Group’s  Secretariat  at  the  European  Commission  assists  the 

Group  in  all  its  tasks.  The  Group  may  receive  information  and  assistance  from  the 

European  Commission  services  through  co-operation  of  the  latter  with  the  Group’s 

Secretariat. 

I. 

Final Dispositions 

32. 

These rules may be modified by the majority of the Group. 

94

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.4. SECRETARIAT of the EGE 

Dr Michael D. Rogers 
Head of the EGE Secretariat 

Tel: 32 (0) 2 295 45 47 
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65 
E-mail: michael.rogers@cec.eu.int 

Ms Patricia Mommens 

Tel: 32 (0) 2 296 84 74 
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65 
E-mail: patricia.mommens@cec.eu.int 

Ms Joelle Bezzan 

Tel: 32 (0) 2 296 19 48 
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65 
E-mail: joelle.bezzan@cec.eu.int 

Ms Cécile Delgrange 

Tel: 32 (0) 2 295 23 97 
Fax: 32 (0) 2 299 45 65 
E-mail: cecile.delgrange@cec.eu.int 

Mail address 

European Commission 
Secretariat of the European Group on Ethics in Science and New technologies 
BERL 8/261 
B – 1049 – Brussels - Belgium 

Office 

European Commission 
Berlaymont Building – rue de la Loi 200 
B – 1049 – Brussels - Belgium 

Web site 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics 

95

 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Commission

General report on the activities of the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies to the 
European Commission — 2000- 05 

20

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities

2005 —  X, 

95

 pp. —  21 x 29.7 cm

ISBN 92-894-9950-8

2005_1870_EN.indd   97

14-09-2005   13:38:48

97

 
 
