TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Editorial 

Michael D. Rogers, Head of the Secretariat of the EGE, Editor Ethically Speaking ........................... 3 

European Union Presidency – News from Austria 

Austrian Bioethics Commission ........................................................................................................... 6 

International Ethics Committees 

Council of Europe .............................................................................................................................. 12 

UNESCO International Bioethics Committee .................................................................................... 13 

World Health Organisation ................................................................................................................ 15 

Contributed Articles by Members of the EGE 

An article by Pere Puigdomènech: Electronic implants in the body .................................................. 20 

National and Regional Ethics Committees 

National Health Ethics Committee, Australia .................................................................................... 24 

Science and Technology Ethics Committee (CEST), Quebec, Canada.............................................. 26 

Hellenic National Bioethics Committee, Greece................................................................................ 28 

Italian National Bioethics Committee, Italy  ...................................................................................... 31 

Bioethics Consultative Committee, Malta.......................................................................................... 33 

Heath Council of the Netherlands, the Netherlands ........................................................................... 35 

Bioethics Commission of the Ministry of Health, Poland  ................................................................. 41 

Committee of Medical Ethics of the Polish Chamber of Physicians and Dentists, Poland ................ 45 

Christian Cultural Centre – Centres for Bioethics, Serbia.................................................................. 49 

Swiss Ethics Committee on Non-Human Gene Technology, Switzerland......................................... 50 

Swiss National Advisory Commission on Biomedical Ethics, Switzerland....................................... 54 

Nuffield Council on Bioethics, the United Kingdom ......................................................................... 58 

e-Justice, the United Kingdom ........................................................................................................... 61 

European Commission 

The Bureau of European Policy Advisers (BEPA) – The European Commission’s Dialogue with 
Religions, Churches and Communities of conviction ........................................................................ 66 

Training proposals 

Ethics Teaching Office, Montréal, Canada ........................................................................................ 68 

 
 
 
 
 
Editorial 

Appointment  of 

the  new  EGE  members  under 

the  revised  Mandate 

for 2005-2009 

On 19 October 2005 President Barroso signed the Decision appointing the 15 members of the 
European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE) under the EGE mandate 
for 2005 - 20091. Six of the new members were reappointed from the previous mandate and 
nine of the new members were appointed for the first time. The EGE held its first meeting on 
25 October 2005 and elected Göran Hermerén as the President and Paula Martinho da Silva as 
the Vice-President of the new Group. 

The  previous  four-year  mandate  of  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New 
Technologies  expired  in  March  2005.  The  European  Commission  took  this  opportunity  to 
review and revise the mandate  of the  EGE. The  new  mandate was published in the Official 
Journal of the European Union on 20 May 20052. This confirmed the essential objectives of 
the EGE namely the provision of advice to the Commission on the ethics of science and new 
technologies. However,  the mandate was changed to allow an increase in membership from 
the  previous  12  to  15.  This  increase  means  that  the  new  EGE  has  a  wider  range  of 
competences and through its membership reflects the enlarged European Union. 

The range of issues studied by the EGE during their previous mandate (from ICT implants in 
the  human  body  to  patents  deriving  from  stem  cell  research)  is  described  in  the  General 
Report for the 2000 – 2005 mandate, which was issued on 15 October 20053. 

The  EGE  remains  an  independent,  pluralist  and  multidisciplinary  body  providing  important 
advice  to  the  European  Commission  on  the  ethics  in  science  and  new  technologies  in 
connection  with  the  preparation  and  implementation  of  Community  legislation  or  policies. 
The  15  members  are  appointed  for  their  expertise  and  personal  qualities.  They  come  from 
different  countries  and  are  high  level  experts  in  disciplines  such  as  biology  and  genetics, 
informatics, law, philosophy and theology. Their names can be found on the EGE Website4. 

The initial Work Programme of the EGE under its new mandate 

During the interregnum the EGE Secretariat had obtained the views of Commission Services 
with an operational interest in the work of the EGE on the priority subjects for ethical analysis 
by the EGE. It  has then been decided, that the EGE will produce an Opinion on the ethical 
aspects of nanomedicine. 

This decision follows from a Communication of the Commission to the Council, the European 
Parliament  and 
the  Economic  and  Social  Committee  entitled  Nanosciences  and 
nanotechnologies: an action plan for Europe 2005 – 2009 (COM(2005) 243 final). Chapter 
5.1.b) of this Communication provides that ‘the Commission will ask the European Group on 
Ethics  in  Science  and  New  Technologies  to  carry  out  an  ethical  analysis  of  nanomedicine. 
This will identify the primary ethical concerns and enable future ethical review of proposed 
N&N (nanosciences and nanotechnologies) R&D projects to be carried out appropriately.’ 

1 C(2005)754; OJ L 284, 27.10.2005, p. 6. 
2 C(2005)383; OJ L 383, 20.05.2005, p. 17.  
3 Available at http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/publications_en.htm 
4 http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/ege2005_en.htm 

3

 
 
                                                 
Consequently,  the  EGE  members  started  work  on  this  immediately  following  their 
appointment. A skeleton Opinion has been produced and over the next months a number of 
experts in the nanomedicine field have been consulted. The new mandate requires the EGE to 
hold  a  round  table  meeting  for  all  full  Opinions  and  the  nanomedicine  round  table  meeting 
took place in Brussels on 21 March 20065. Following this,  if all  goes according to plan, the 
eventual Opinion should be finalised within 2006. 

The Future 

Following  the  departure  of  the  previous  Secretary  of  the  EGE,  Dr  M.  Rogers,  I  have  been 
appointed as new Secretary of the EGE. It is not easy to maintain the standards of excellence 
of my predecessor, such a knowledgeable and nice colleague, but I will devote my efforts not 
only  to  keep  the  outstanding  levels  of  the  past  successes  but  even  to  aim  to  achieve  better 
results in the future.  

Maurizio Salvi, PhD 
 Secretary of the EGE 
Editor Ethically Speaking 

Further Information 

DR MAURIZIO SALVI 
Secretary of the EGE 
Editor Ethically Speaking 

Joëlle BEZZAN 
Editorial Assistant 

Attention : 
New Address: 
EGE Secretariat 
Tel: +32 (0)2.296.19.48 
Fax: +32 (0)2.299.45.65 
Email: bepa-ethics-group@ec.europa.eu 
European Commission - Office: BERL 8/250, B-1049 Brussels 
Website:: 

http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/secret_en.htm 

5 http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/activities05_en.htm 

4

 
 
 
                                                                            
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
European Union Presidency 

News from AUSTRIA

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

the Austrian Bioethics Commission 

and the EU-Presidency 2006 

by Robert Gmeiner, Head of the Secretariat of the Bioethics Commission6 

As Austria assumed the Presidency of the Council of the European Union in January 2006 for 
the  following  six  months,  this  provides  a  most  welcomed  opportunity  to  expose  some 
spotlights on (bio)ethical approaches in Austria in general and within the Austrian Bioethics 
Commission in particular. 

A sceptical attitude of a great part of the Austrian population 

A Eurobarometer survey carried out in 2002 shows that Austrians, despite having a somewhat 
more positive outlook than in 1999, are still more concerned about biotechnology and genetic 
engineering than the average European. Evaluating the biotechnology and genetic-engineering 
items in this survey shows a clear distinction (as in 1999) between medical and agricultural 
applications. Genetically modified foods still fail to convince a majority of those polled, while 
medical applications, the cloning of human cells included, are more widely approved.  

The  latest  Eurobarometer  poll  Social  values,  science  and  technology  (June 2005)  reveals  a 
corresponding  scepticism  with  regard  to  scientific  and  technical  matters.  A  majority  of  the 
population in all Member Sates of the European Union – with the exception of Austria – is of 
the  opinion  that  biotechnology  and  genetic  engineering  have  a  positive  effect  on  society. 
While  77%  of  EU  citizens  believe  that  ‘science  and  technology  will  improve  the  quality  of 
life of future generations’, the figure for Austria – with 62% – is the lowest on this scale. To 
give  another  example,  seven  out  of  ten  Austrians  polled  think  that  ‘the  protection  of  the 
dignity  of  the  unborn  foetus  is  very  important  for  our  society  in  ten  years  time’,  while  the 
average  of  the  EU25  is  53%.  And  again:  Medical  applications,  which  are  awarded  more 
benefits too, have a higher approval-rate in the public than agricultural utilization.  

Austria – ‘a country of committees’ 

If  one  has  a  closer  look  on  the  different  stages  of  the  bioethical  and  biopolitical  debate  in 
Austria,  a  tendency  to  ‘institutionalize  bioethics’  can  be  recognized.  Besides  the  Bioethics 
Commission  there  are  a  number  of  further  bodies,  which  deal  with  ethical  questions  in 
biomedicine and biotechnology. 

The  first  ethics  committees,  dealing  with  research,  especially  dealing  with  questions  of  the 
protection  of  human  beings  involved  in  research  activities,  were  established  in  1980  at  the 
three  medical  faculties  (Vienna,  Graz,  Innsbruck)  on  the  basis  of  the  Helsinki  Declaration. 
Further research ethics committees were introduced particularly in 1994 by the Hospitals Act 
and the Drug Law. Today up to 40 such entities responsible for ethical review and oversight 
of research involving human beings exist in Austria. 

6 This contribution was completed on 20 October 2005 

6

 
 
 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

In  1992  Austria  experienced  the  one  and,  thus  far,  only  creation  of  a  parliamentary 
commission  of  enquiry  to  deal  with  legislation  on  genetic  technology.  No  other  biomedical 
and bioethical subject was ever again treated in this way in Austria. This is in contrast to the 
specialist commissions of enquiry set up by the German Bundestag (federal parliament).  

An Advisory Board on Gene Technology was set up according to the Gene Technology Act in 
1995. 

The Bioethics Commission at the Federal Chancellery was established in summer 2001. This 
happened  largely  in  line  with  parallel  events  in  Germany  (National  Ethics  Council)  and 
Switzerland,  but  relatively  late  when  seen  in  the  European  context  (e.g.  France,  1983,  or 
Denmark,  1988).  The  main  task  of  the  Bioethics  Commission  is  to  advise  the  Federal 
Chancellor  on  the  ethical  aspects  of  all  social,  scientific  and  legal  matters  that  arise  in 
connection with the development of science in the field of human medicine and biology. In 
the  words  of  the  Federal  Chancellor,  the  commission  should  serve  as  ‘an  early  warning 
system’.  The  Bioethics  Commission  is  a  forum  of  experts  only,  composed  of  19  members 
(15 men  and  4 women)  from  a  wide  range  of  disciplines  including  medicine,  molecular 
biology  and  genetics,  jurisprudence,  sociology,  philosophy  and  theology.  On  5 November 
2003  the  Federal  Chancellor  Schüssel  reappointed  the  same  nineteen  members,  who  have 
served during the first mandate. The second two-year mandate of the Bioethics Commission 
completed in November 2005. 

The  composition  of  the  Bioethics  Commission  provoked  much  criticism,  above  all  from 
interest  groups  representing  people  with  disabilities  and  patient  advocacy  groups.  They 
decided therefore to create a committee on their own, in order to develop alternative positions 
parallel  to  the  topics  being  dealt  with  by  the  Bioethics  Commission  and  to  influence  the 
debate.  

In the autumn of 2002, the Government of the Vienna Land set up a committee on biological 
and  medical  ethics  ‘to  complement  the  work  of  the  Bioethics  Commission  at  the  regional 
level’.  

Summing up, one could say, that there is no lack of committees on (bio)ethics in Austria. 

Bioethics Commission - the ‘balance of activities’  

From  the  beginning,  the  Bioethics  Commission  fulfilled  its  function  of  ‘policy-advice’  and 
issued  opinions  and  recommendations  on  various  subjects.  In  doing  so  it  defined  the  key 
topics  of  past  and  future  debates,  clearly  taking  on  an  agenda-setting  role  in  the  Austrian 
biopolitical discussion.  

− 

− 

In  its  first  recommendation  (of  February  2002),  the  Bioethics  Commission  unanimously 
called upon Austria´s accession to the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine of 
the Council of Europe. 

In  March  2002  the  Commission  came  to  the  unanimous  conclusion  that  ‘the  domestic 
implementation  of  the  European  bio-patent  directive  is  important  also  from  an  ethical 
point of view’.  

−  The Bioethics Commission issued its findings regarding the question of stem-cell research 
in the context of the sixth EU research framework programme (2002-2006) in May 2002. 
There was consensus among the members of the commission in that no financial support 
should be made available for research using embryos or therapeutic cloning. Eight of the 

7

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

nineteen  members  of  the  Commission  rejected  all  research  on  stem  cells  derived  from 
human  embryos  for  the  reason  that  their  extraction  was  ethically  unacceptable.  The 
majority  group  of  eleven  members  were  in  favour  of  research  work  on  existing  lines  of 
embryonic  stem  cells,  given  that  the  final  decision  in  individual  cases  depended  on 
whether  strictly  defined  conditions  had  been  met.  There  was  consensus  that  priority 
should be placed on supporting research on adult stem cells.  

− 

− 

− 

In  an  interim  report  of  February  2003,  the  Commission  unanimously  rejected  so-called 
‘reproductive’  cloning  (i.e.  cloning  designed  to  produce  children),  and  asked  for 
corresponding national and international prohibitions to be enacted.  

In  March  2004,  the  Commission  issued  its  opinion  regarding  a  draft  amendment  to  the 
Austrian  Reproductive  Medicine  Law  (FMedG).  On  that  occasion  a  group  of  seven 
members welcomed the suggestion of a comprehensive ban on cloning (i.e. one covering 
both reproductive and therapeutic cloning). Nine members had the opinion that there were 
not sufficiently weighty reasons to justify the imposition of a statutory ban on so called 
therapeutic cloning.  

In  July  2004,  the  Bioethics  Commission  issued  a  report  on  preimplantation  (genetic) 
diagnosis  (PGD),  giving  not  only  a  comprehensive  overview  on  the  scientific,  legal, 
ethical  and  social  aspects  of  PGD,  but  also  containing  two  different  recommendations: 
one  opinion  in  favour  of  a  restricted  approval  of  PGD,  the  other  one  in  favour  of 
maintaining the present legislation unchanged.  

−  During the first half of the year 2005 the Bioethics Commission was invited to discuss the 

aspects of advance directives (living wills). 

−  The  Bioethics  Commission  has  started  discussions  on  biobanks.  The  aim  is  to  deliver  a 

report and recommendations on this subject in 2006. 

−  Additionally  the  Bioethics  Commission  and  its  members  have  (co)organized  and  have 
taken part in various conferences and symposia in order to promote and to contribute to 
the public debate. 

Perspectives 

When this Newsletter is published, it is to be expected, that the Federal Chancellor will have 
already  convened  and  constituted  the  Bioethics  Commission  for  its  third  term.  The 
Commission  will  hopefully  agree  on  a  working  programme.  As  concerns  the  function  of 
advice, this catalogue should on the one hand aim to finish tasks the Commission has started 
already  (e.g.  the  issue  of  biobanks).  On  the  other  hand  it  will  be  interesting  to  determine 
which  other  issues  the  Commission  will  emphasize,  maybe  not  primarily  having  the 
‘beginning  of  life’  in  its  focus.  Simultaneously  the  Bioethics  Commission  and  its  members 
will further have to initiate and promote public debate. 

The EU presidency will probably bring some additional tasks for the Bioethics Commission 
too. Only two areas – on different levels of activity - can be touched here. 

Stem cell research 

Research  involving  stem  cells  derived  from human  embryos  and  its  funding  by  EU  sources 
(particularly under the auspices of the sixth EU research framework programme) has attracted 
a certain amount of attention in Austria. The Austrian minister at that time responsible for this 

8

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

area adopted a strong position regarding the observance of protection for human dignity and 
human  life  with  respect  to  genome  research  and  biotechnology  at  a  very  early  stage  (in 
December 2001). Furthermore, specific prohibition for funding certain types of research was 
demanded. In June 2002, Austria was the only EU Member Sate to vote against the adoption 
of  the  framework  research  programme:  A  programme  establishing  the  basis  for  funding 
research with human embryonic stem cells was not acceptable for Austria. As a consequence 
of  these  discussions,  comprehensive  guidelines  and  bioethical  principles  have  been 
implemented. A ban on funding certain areas of research (such as the cloning of humans for 
reproduction  or  the  production  of  human  embryos  exclusively  for  research  purposes)  and  a 
moratorium until 31 December 2003 on EU funding for research activities involving the use 
of human embryos and human-embryonic stem cells were resolved. After the termination of 
this  moratorium,  EU-funding  for  activities  in  the  latter  field  is  now  permitted  under  certain 
conditions, subject to exhaustive studies and ethical reviews, on a case-by-case basis. 

Domestic  debate  in  Austria  is  characterized  by  the  fact  that  no  research  with  human 
embryonic  stem  cells  has  yet  been  carried  out  in  Austria,  and  there  are  thus  no  research-
funding  applications  pending.  Significant  research  is  however  being  carried  out  with  stem 
cells from human adults. This suggests a substantial difference compared with the discussions 
in  other  countries.  Austria’s  legislation  prohibits  the  derivation  of  stem  cells  from  embryos 
(for research purposes) and the research using human embryonic stem cells or lines of stem 
cells (it has to be mentioned, that this position is not uncontested), while import of existing 
stem  cell  lines  is  not  forbidden  by  Austrian  law.  While  the  national  political  debate  was 
limited,  the  issue  of  stem-cell  research  attracted  (and  still  attracts)  a  comparatively  high 
amount  of  media-coverage  in  Austria.  In  the  public  debate,  it  was  again  the  Bioethics 
Commission and its opinion (see above), which was standing in the crossfire of criticism.  

This discussion seems to be revived in the context of the current negotiations concerning the 
seventh EU framework research programme (FP7). Austria had already published a position 
paper in November 2004 that asks for the setting of high ethical standards and maintains the 
opinion that adult stem cell research should take priority over research with embryonic stem 
cells. The EC´s proposal for a decision on FP7 (from April 2005) has included only recitals 
and articles with regard to the respect of fundamental ethical principles (not mentioning the 
controversial issue explicitly). In the proposal concerning Specific Programme ‘Cooperation’ 
(from September 2005) the European Commission has detailed some fields of research, which 
will not be financed under FP7, but has also suggested that (the funding of) research involving 
the use of human embryos and human embryonic stem cells will be similar to the procedure 
which  has  been  established  since  the  beginning  of  2004:  Proposals,  having  passed  the 
scientific  evaluation  and  the  ethical  review,  are  to  be  decided  in  a  regulatory  committee, 
where the Member Sates have to examine the projects case-by-case. Discussions at the latest 
Competitiveness  Council  (11 October  2005)  have  shown  resistance  of  some  Member  Sates 
(not  only  of  Austria).  As  regards  the  approach  of  the  European  Commission  they  have 
emphasized  the  principle  of  subsidiarity  (comparable  with  the  position  of  the  European 
Parliament in its resolution of 10 March 2005) and have advocated more restrictive rules. 

Primary  activities  of  the  Bioethics  Commission  while  Austria  holds  the  EU-

Presidency 

−  Forum  of  National  Ethics  Councils:  The  7th  Forum  NEC  will  be  held  in  Vienna  on  the 

evening of 9th March and all day on 10 March 2006.  

−  Conference  on  the  ‘European  Biopatent  Directive’:  As  emphasized  in  its  opinion  of 
March 2002 the Bioethics Commission wants to stay in contact with the discussions and 

9

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

advancements  of  the  issues  surrounding  the  patentability  of  biological  material  and 
especially its ethical questions. Therefore – in cooperation with the Austrian Patent Office 
and the European Law Academy Trier – a two-day conference is planned on this topic in 
Vienna on the 29-30 May 2006. 

− 

Improving  bilateral  contacts  in  the  European  context:  E.g.  a  second  symposium  on 
bioethical  issues  will  be  organized  together  with  the  Central  Ethics  Committee  of  the 
Ministry of Health in Slovakia. 

Further Information 

Dr Robert Gmeiner 
Head of the Secretariat of the Bioethics Commission 
Tel: + 43 1 53115-4319 
Fax: +43 1 53115-4307 
Email: robert.gmeiner@bka.gv.at 

Address 
Bioethics Commission 
Federal Chancellery 
Ballhausplatz 2 
AT-1010 Wien 

Website 

WWW.bundeskanzleramt.at 

10

 
 
 
 
International Ethics Committees 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
► News from 

the Council of Europe 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Draft Recommendation on Research on Human Biological Materials 

At its 29th plenary meeting held in Strasbourg (France) on 17 – 21 October 2005, the Steering 
Committee on Bioethics (CDBI) approved the text of the draft Recommendation on Research 
on  Human  Biological  Materials.  The  Recommendation  applies  to  the  full  range  of  research 
activities in the health field that involve: 

− 
− 

the removal of human biological materials to be stored for research use; or  
the  use  of  human  biological  materials  initially  removed  for  a  purpose  other  than 
research storage. 

Two chapters of the Recommendation are dedicated to collections of biological materials and 
to  population  biobanks.  The  draft  Recommendation  will  now  be  sent  to  the  Committee  of 
Ministers for adoption. 

Draft Additional Protocol on Genetic Testing 

The Steering Committee continued its discussion on the preliminary draft Protocol on genetic 
testing. It examined in particular the provisions related to the scope, genetic services, genetic 
counselling,  directly  accessible  tests  and  genetic  tests  on  person  not  able  to  consent  for  the 
benefit  of  family  members.  The  CDBI  agreed  that  the  elaboration  of  the  draft  Protocol  on 
genetic  testing  will  be  its  priority  in  2006  with  a  view  to  the  finalisation  of  its  first  part  on 
genetic testing in the health field. Discussions on genetic tests in the fields of employment and 
insurance,  which  are  to  be  addressed  in  the  second  part  of  the  Protocol,  should  then  be 
resumed at the level of the Working Party. 

Further Information 

Carlos de Sola 
Head of the Bioethics Department 
Secretary of the Steering Committee on Bioethics (CDBI) 
Tel: + 33 (0)3 88 41 24 38 
Email: carlos.desola@coe.int 

Laurence Lwoff 
Administrative Officer / Secretary of the Working Party on Human 
Genetics and of the Working Party on the Protection of the 
Human Embryo and Foetus 
Tel: + 33 (0)3 88 41 22 68 | Fax: + 33 (0)3 88 41 37 45 
Email: laurence.lwoff@coe.int 

Website 

WWW.coe.int/Bioethics 

12

 
 
 
                                                                 
 
 
 
 
► News from 

UNESCO 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

UNESCO’s activities in the Ethics of Science and Technology 

UNESCO  is  currently  reinforcing  its  mission  with  regard  to  the  ethics  of  science  and 
technology by promoting ethical principles and fostering the international debate concerning 
scientific  and  technological  progress.  In  this  context,  the  main  role  of  the  UNESCO  World 
Commission  on  the  Ethics  of  Scientific  Knowledge  and  Technology  (COMEST)  is  to 
formulate  ethical  principles  and  recommendations  to  guarantee  that  technological  progress 
and  the  sharing  of  scientific  knowledge  are  fully  consistent  with  human  rights  and 
fundamental freedoms. 

Joint efforts have being carried out and will be intensified in what concerns the involvement 
of UNESCO Sectors (Natural Sciences, Social Sciences, Education, Culture and Information 
and  Communication),  COMEST  and  other  relevant  international  and  regional  bodies.  A 
number  of  thematic  areas  are  addressed  with  a  view  to  playing  an  advisory  and  standard-
setting  role,  such  as:  studies  on  the  ethics  of  outer  space  and  emerging  technologies, 
nanotechnology,  studies  on  the  clarification  of  the  precautionary  principle  and  on 
environmental  ethics;  as  well  as  ethics  teaching.  It  was  also  deemed  necessary  to  improve 
UNESCO’s reflections in the context of the construction of the culture of peace and of human 
safety.  Therefore,  studies  on  the  possibility  of  elaborating  an  international  declaration  on 
science ethics to serve as a basis for an ethical code of conduct for scientists is being carried 
out, in accordance with to the mandate ascribed to COMEST and to the International Council 
for Science (ICSU) by the World Conference on Science held in Budapest in 1999. 

In  terms  of  pedagogical  and  capacity  building  actions,  two  main  activities  are  being 
developed.  The  Ethics  Education  Programme  aims  at  initiating  and  reinforcing  educational 
activities for the teaching of ethics to scientists and the development of a quality assessment 
and certification system. Schools of ethics (as networks of experts) are being established with 
pilot-programmes  in  the  teaching  of  ethics  of  science  and  technology,  in  order  to  promote 
education and to serve as a forum for the exchange of ideas between specialists, as well as to 
encourage  studies,  research  projects  and  diffusion  of  information  on  the  social,  ethical  and 
legal  implications  related  to  the  advancement  of  science  and  technology.  The  first  meeting, 
with experts from Central Europe, was held in Budapest on 21-22 October 2004, and a second 
meeting,  with  experts  from  East  Europe,  was  held  in  Moscow,  on  20-21 January 2005. 
Furthermore, specific model programmes will be facilitated in regard to ethics of sciences as 
well as assistance for UNESCO Member Sates in establishing national ethics committees for 
science  and  technology,  and  facilitating  the  work  of  existing  committees.  A  meeting  was 
convened in Paris in July 2005 with a group of experts to start a preliminary Advisory Expert 
Commission on the Teaching of Ethics. The report of the meeting was placed on the website 
www.unesco.org/shs/ethics.  The  second  Meeting  of  the  Advisory  Commission  on  the 
teaching of ethics will be held in March 2006. Furthermore, UNESCO and the Third World 
Academy of Science (TWAS)7 will organize a joint seminar in June 2006. 

Concerning  the  ethics  of  science  and  technology  research  programmes,  expert  groups  are 
being set up for the various topics of research (environmental ethics, science ethics, ethics and 
nanotechnology).  The  groups'  work  will  culminate  in  research  papers  that  will  be  made 

7 Editorial footnote: more information is available at http://www.twas.org 

13

 
 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

available and widely disseminated. By the end of the biennium, the research papers produced 
will  be  compiled  into  a  first  volume  of  a  UNESCO  series  on  the  Ethics  of  Science  and 
Technology  and  made  available  in  all  six  working  languages  –  Arabic,  Chinese,  English, 
French, Russian, and Spanish.  

Furthermore, in order to help Member Sates to build capacity in applied ethics, a system of 
databases has been created: the Global Ethics Observatory (GEO). Four databases will make 
up GEO: 

1. a database of experts in applied ethics, 
2. a database of ethics institutions and committees, 
3. a database of teaching programmes, and 
4. a database of relevant legislation. 

The information should be searchable online and available also in the six official languages of 
UNESCO. The development of the four databases is programmed in order to allow resources 
to be focused on the establishment of one at a time. The first database (ethics experts) is ready 
to  be  launched  online  via  the  UNESCO  website  in  English,  French  and  Russian  but  is 
awaiting  the  resolution  of  minor  technical  issues  before  it  becomes  publicly  available.  The 
second database (ethics institutions) is in its final stages of development and should be ready 
in English and French shortly. Preparation for the English version of the third database (ethics 
education curricula and programmes) is also nearing completion. UNESCO’s aim is to start to 
launch the databases by the end of 2005. 

Scientists,  philosophers,  jurists,  engineers,  education  specialists,  experts  with  the  best 
reputation  and  proficiency  in  their  respective  areas  were  invited  to  assist  UNESCO  and 
COMEST  in  this  effort.  They  are  helping  UNESCO  to  identify  the  state-of-the-art,  the 
significant  issues  and  potential  international  needs  and  activities  in  each  area.  Their 
conclusions  and  recommendations,  in  a  later  stage,  are  the  object  of  international 
consultations,  starting  with  their  submission  to  COMEST  and  approval  by  the  UNESCO 
governing  bodies.  The  composition  of  these  groups  of  experts  takes  into  due  account 
regional 
considerations  of  professional  excellence,  multidisciplinarity,  gender  and 
distribution.  The  diversity  of  views  is  indeed  the  very  raison  d’être  of  COMEST.  Any 
apparent difference between professionals with scientific training and those from a humanities 
or philosophical background represents a healthy reflection of this diversity and an attempt to 
reconcile the different perspectives between scientific and philosophical approaches. 

According to Auguste Comte, society should be analysed as ‘organisms’ with their own linear 
progress  (through  religious,  metaphysical  and  scientific  stages).  There  is  today  a  certain 
general distrust that we can be approaching to an overwhelming third stage. Fears on what the 
ineluctable predominance of science can cause: cloning, eugenics, new technologies for war, 
new panopticism... Perhaps Comte had reason in some measure; perhaps these three stages – 
religious, metaphysical and scientific – are in fact not successive, but concurrent. UNESCO, 
however,  guides  its  work  by  the  belief  that  we  are  at  the  threshold  of  a  better  and  deeper 
dialogue  between  philosophy,  religion  and  science.  It  is  enough  to  remember  the  classic 
Kant’s postulate: ‘Thoughts without content are empty; intuitions without concepts are blind 
(...)  The  understanding  can  intuit  nothing,  the  senses  can  think  nothing.  Only  through  their 
union can knowledge arise’. Only the harmonious integration between perception and reason 
produces  the  understanding,  the  knowledge  and,  finally,  the  agreement  among  men  and 
among countries. 

Simone Scholze8 

8 Senior Program Specialist, Ethics of Science and Technology Division, UNESCO HQs, Paris, October, 2005 

14

 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Further Information 

Henk ten Have 
Director – Chief of Bioethics Section a.i. 
Division of Ethics of Science and Technology 
Tel: +33 (0) 1 45 68 49 98 | Fax: +33 (0)1 45 68 55 15 
Email: h.tenhave@unesco.org 

Simone Scholze 
Social and Human Sciences Sector 
Division of Ethics of Science and Technology 
Tel: +33 (0) 1 45 68 45 94 | Fax: +33 (0)1 45 68 55 15 
Email: s.scholze@unesco.org 

Address 
UNESCO HEADQUARTERS 
1, rue Miollis 
FR-75732 Paris Cedex 15 

Website 

WWW.unesco.org/shs/bioethics 

► News from 

the World Health Organisation 

Ethics at the World Health Organization 

The Department of Ethics, Trade, Human Rights, and Health Law (ETH) implement activities 
collaboratively with departments in headquarters and the WHO’s regional offices. The efforts 
are concentrated in the following areas. 

Ethics of Health Systems 

ETH  is  engaged  in  the  policy  development  of  one  of  WHO’s  top  priorities  -  to  provide 
treatment to 3 million HIV/AIDS patients by 2005 (3x5 initiative). 

The  role  of  ETH  in  this  process  is  to  advise  the  3x5  initiative  on  ethical  issues  in  clinical 
ethics, standard of care, and equitable access, with a strong focus on the latter. The guidance 
document ‘Guidance on Ethics and Equitable Access to HIV Treatment and Care’ is available 
in  English9  and  French10:  Training  materials  are  to  be  elaborated.  A  case  study  entitled 
‘Equity and fair process in scaling up antiretroviral therapy: potentials and challenges in the 
United Republic of Tanzania’ has been elaborated in collaboration with the German Technical 
Cooperation  (GTZ),  and  the  Ministry  of  Health  of  Tanzania.  This  has  been  published 
jointly11. 

9 http://www.who.int/ethics/en/ethics_equity_HIVe.pdf 
10 http://www.who.int/ethics/en/ethics_equity_HIVfr.pdf 
11 http://www.who.int/ethics/en 

15

 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

ETH is a member of the Technical Advisory Group (TAG) for the development of the Guide 
for  Essential  Practice  in  Comprehensive  Cervical  Cancer  Control  at  WHO.  In  this  capacity, 
ETH is advising the TAG on issues ranging from clinical ethics to ethical considerations in 
cost-effectiveness analyses and equity for the development of this guidance document. 

ETH  is  also  a  member  of  the  WHO  Cancer  Control  Steering  Group,  which  advises  the 
Department of Cancer Control in implementing a WHO Executive Board resolution on cancer 
control. Among other activities, a ‘Global Report on Cancer Control’ is being developed, to 
be published in spring 2006. 

ETH  is  involved  in  an  initiative  to  promote  access  to  opioid  drugs  for  palliative  care  in 
developing countries. Partners include other WHO departments, collaborating centres and the 
International Narcotics Control Board in Vienna. The topics on the agenda for ETH include 
equity in access, informed consent, cultural perceptions and barriers, and end-of-life issues. 

Together  with  WHO’s  Department  of  Communicable  Disease  Surveillance  and  Response, 
ETH is engaged in a project on ‘The implications of life science research and development for 
global  health  security’.  The  aim  of  this  project  is  to  involve  Member  Sates  and  other 
stakeholders  regarding  the  health  implications  of  advances  in  the  life  sciences  and,  in 
particular,  the  potential  misuse  of  such  science  to  cause  harm.  The  project,  which  is  taking 
place in two phases, includes an analysis of ethical issues raised by such ‘dual use’ research 
and the potential role of codes of conduct in avoiding or mitigating harm. Next month we will 
jointly  publish  a  report,  entitled  Life  Science  Research–Opportunities  and  Risks  for  Public 
Health: Mapping the Issues, which marks the completion of the project’s first stage. The other 
main  output  of  phase  one  was  the  establishment  of  a  network  of  experts.  Phase  two  of  the 
project  is  now  under  way,  in  which  we  are  establishing  a  Study  Group,  engaging  Member 
Sates through regional meetings, and providing guidance and an evaluative framework. 

ETH  is  collaborating  with  WHO’s  Department  of  Medicines  Policy  and  Standards,  in 
analysing ethical practices in the pharmaceutical sector. A document is being prepared for use 
in  countries  involved  in  assessing  these  practices,  it  is  entitled  Measuring  transparency  to 
improve good governance in the public pharmaceutical sector. 

ETH is helping WHO’s Departments of HIV and of Mental Health, to elaborate a guidance 
document  entitled  ‘Basic  Principles  for  Treatment  and  Psychosocial  Support  of  Drug 
Dependent People Living with HIV/AIDS’. Its purpose is to promote equitable access to high-
quality HIV care for IDUs. Publication is expected in the beginning of 2006. 

Research ethics 

WHO has been engaged for many years in numerous activities in the field of research ethics, 
running workshops for Research Ethics Committees, promulgating guidelines and standards12. 
Based  on  collaborations  within  WHO,  ETH  contributes  to  a  number  of  training  activities. 
With  the  Moroccan  Association  of  Bioethics  and  UNESCO,  WHO  organized  a  training 
workshop  on  research  ethics  in  Fez  in  June  2005.  This  meeting  was  also  an  opportunity  to 
discuss different ethical issues such as the universal declaration on bioethics being prepared 
by UNESCO. A similar activity was held in Dakar (Senegal) in July 2005, with participants 
from  ten  African  countries.  Three  workshops  have  been  held  in  China  jointly  with  the 
Harvard  School  of  Public  Health.  Training  activities  are  planned  for  2006  based  on  the 
collaboration of ETH with WHO’s Department Initiative for research in vaccines (IVR) and 
WHO’s  research  ethics  committee  (ERC).  A  project  concerning  distance  learning  is  being 

12 http://www.who.int/ethics/research/ 

16

 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

prepared; training workshops and seminars will take place in Cyprus and Rumania, in the near 
future. 

ETH is part of the Steering Committee of the Global Forum for Bioethics in Research. The 
last forum, hosted in Blantyre (Malawi) in March 2005, was an occasion for 120 participants, 
most  of  them  from  developing  countries,  to  discuss  the  issue  of  post-trial  obligations  of 
researchers and sponsors. The next forum is schedule for 17 and 19 February 2006 in Karachi, 
Pakistan. More information is available at http://www.gfbronline.com/. 

ETH  is  a  partner  in  NEBRA  (Networking  for  Ethics  on  Biomedical  Research  in  Africa) 
collaborating with a group of African and European institutions. This project, funded by the 
European Commission (6th framework programme - science and society), started in February 
2005. After the 1st plenary meeting hosted by MRC-Gambia in Banjul in April 2005, the pilot 
phase of the survey was implemented. Preliminary results were presented during the second 
plenary  meeting  which  took  place  on  31 October  and  1 November  2005  in  Cotonou,  Benin, 
during  which  time  a long term  strategy was elaborated as a basis for future activities in the 
fifteen countries involved. 

Human organ and tissue transplantation 

In response to World Health Assembly Resolution, ETH is working with the Department of 
Essential  Technologies  to  update  the  1991  Guiding  Principles  on  Organ  Transplantation. 
Regional  consultations  were  held  in  November  2005  in  the  Western  Pacific  and  Eastern 
Mediterranean regions. 

WHO  participates  in  the  newly  formed  Global  Alliance  for  Transplantation  which  seeks  to 
improve  knowledge  and  good  practices.  Particular  emphasis  is  now  being  placed  on 
development  of  a  registry  for  transplant  outcomes  (with  regular  follow  up),  encompassing 
both organ recipients and living donors. 

ETH  collaboration  with  other  international  organizations,  regional  bodies  and 

academic centres. 

ETH maintains a collaborative relationship with the European Conference of National Ethics 
Committees (COMETH) and the Steering Committee on Bioethics of the Council of Europe 
(CDBI),  as  well  as  with  the  European  Commission.  As  a  member  of  UN  Interagency 
Committee  on  Bioethics  and  observer  for  the  International  Bioethics  Committee  (IBC)  of 
UNESCO,  ETH  participated  to  the  process  of  elaboration  of  UNESCO’s  draft  Universal 
Declaration  on  Bioethics  and  Human  Rights.  Collaboration  between  these  international 
organizations  is  particularly  relevant  to  activities  (capacity  strengthening  and  technical 
assistance) implemented in the countries. 

ETH  provides  the  permanent  secretariat  for  the  Global  Summit  of  National  Bioethics 
Commissions which will next meet in Beijing, China in August 200613. 

In  collaboration  with  the  University  of  Geneva,  ETH  participates  in  a  research  project  on 
Human  Genetic  Databases:  Toward  a  Global  Ethical  Framework  (funded  by  the  Geneva 
International Academic Network), interviews have been carried out, previous results collected 
and analysis under way. 

13 http://www.who.int/ethics/globalsummit/en/ 

17

 
                                                 
Other activities 

A large group of academics, healthcare professionals, and graduate students in bioethics have 
already  benefited  from  a  programme  for  internship  at  the  Department  of  Ethics,  Trade, 
Human Rights and Health Law and have contributed to activities of the different teams. 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Further Information 

Ethics and Health at WHO (ETH) 
Professor Alexander Capron 
Director 

Dr Marie-Charlotte Bouësseau 
Technical Officer/Ethicist 

Contact: Mrs Anne Newson 
Tel: +41 22 791 1207 | Fax: +41 22 791 1399 
Email: ethics@who.int  

Address 
WHO/SDE/ETH - World Health Organization 
20 Avenue Appia 
CH-1211 Genève 27 

Website 

WWW.who.int/ethics 

18

 
 
                                                           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contributed articles 

by Members of the EGE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Electronic implants in the body 

‘A minority with characteristics such that 

they could consider themselves superior could be created’ 

Article contributed by Pere Puigdomènech14 

We are connected to electronic systems in a multiplicity of ways, and the phenomenon is set 
to  increase  still  further.  Our  pockets  or  briefcases  contain  mobile  phones,  hand  held 
computers or electronic personal organisers, and other common devices include GPS systems 
and  a  variety  of  technologies  for  receiving,  storing  and  reproducing  music.  Other  items 
include the magnetic cards which identify us, open doors and provide access to ATMs. These 
objects  are  now  beginning  to  be  incorporated  into  the  human  body,  and  science  fiction  has 
latched  onto  the  idea  by  creating  beings  that  combine  human  nature  with  mechanical  or 
computerised  elements  (cyborgs  and  different  kinds  of  robot).  Although  we  have  not  yet 
reached  such  extremes,  the  situation  is  already  such  that  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in 
Science  and  New  Technology  felt  the  time  was  ripe  to  reflect  in  its  latest  opinion  on  the 
technical,  legal  and  ethical  issues  raised  by  these  applications  of  the  new  technologies 
(available at europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/docs/avis20en.pdf). 

One  might  well  ask  why  anyone  would  want  to  insert  an  electronic  device  into  their  body. 
The  most  obvious  answer  is  for  medical  reasons.  Tens  of  thousands  of  people  in  Spain  use 
increasingly  sophisticated  pacemakers  which  serve  to  regulate  the  heartbeat.  Over  3 000 
people  in  Spain  have  cochlear  implants  which  correct  deafness  by  means  of  an  electronic 
device  which  transforms  sound  into  an  electrical  current  that  stimulates  the  auditory  nerve. 
There  are  other  types  (less  used)  of  electronic  stimulating  devices  and  systems  which  are 
implanted to administer drugs or to monitor a clinically significant parameter such as blood 
pressure. A system of stimulation based on an electrode implanted in the brain, which could 
serve to limit the impact of conditions like Parkinson’s disease, has been approved. 

Intensive  research  is  in  progress  to  develop  new  kinds  of  prostheses  for  parts  of  the  human 
body  such  as  arms  and  legs.  It  has,  for  instance,  been  shown  that  an  individual's  nervous 
system can be connected to an artificial hand through a computer, enabling the individual to 
control its movement and even to receive sensory impressions via the system. Work is also in 
progress on systems which will encode images electronically and transmit them to the optic 
nerve.  Proposals  are  reaching  fantastical  extremes  such  as  devices  that  provoke  orgasm 
(patented  in  the  United  States  in  2003),  not  to  mention  those  that  combine  nanotechnology 
with  biotechnology  and  telecommunications.  If  we  confine  our  purview  to  what  already 
exists,  most  of  us  would  not  object  to  many  of  the  medical  applications  that  are  being 
proposed,  which  may  help  to  improve  people’s  health  or  wellbeing.  Clearly,  before  we  can 
reach  that  stage,  trials  are  needed  which  must  meet  the  same  criteria  as  regards  quality  and 
respect for the individual as any other medical application. 

14 CSIC-IRTA (Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas / Institut de Recerca i Tecnología 
Agroalimentaries - Higher Scientific Research Council / Catalan Agro-Food Research and Technology Institute), 
and European Group of Ethics of Sciences and New Technologies 

20

 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Another  major  field  of  applications  for  electronic  implants  concern  their  potential  for 
identifying or locating individuals. Radiofrequency systems have been approved which, when 
implanted  under  the  skin,  enable  individuals  to  be  identified  and  give  access  to  a  person’s 
clinical history or allow a payment to be made. Similar systems are used to identify pets and 
are  being  extended  to  farm  animals.  There  are bracelets  which  enable  people  to  be  located, 
which  have  been  approved  as  an  alternative  to  custody  in  some  countries.  Proposals  have 
been  put  forward  for  similar  systems  implanted  in  the  human  body,  thereby  enabling 
individuals  who  are  at  risk  of  being  kidnapped  or  getting  lost  to  be  located.  Nor  do  the 
objections to identification systems appear to be obvious. In fact, trendy bars in Barcelona and 
Rotterdam  offer  clients  –  as  a  VIP  privilege  -  an  implanted  chip  which  identifies  them  and 
obviates the need for money or a credit card. Surely it is the dream of any anti-terrorist agent 
to be able to detect any individual at any time, or at least when that individual goes through 
certain control points. 

In  this  context,  the  European  Group’s  Opinion  underlines  the  potential  significance  of 
medical  applications  of  electronic  implants,  but  recalls  that  our  societies  are  founded  on 
respect  for  human  dignity  and  the  inviolability  of  the  human  body.  Citing  principles  which 
should guide the development of applications of this type, it recalls that in the Preamble to the 
European Charter of Fundamental Rights, the European Union ‘place[s] the individual at the 
heart of its activities’ and that respect for the physical and mental integrity of the individual 
should  survive  the  advent  of  the  new  technologies.  The  Opinion  also  refers  to  the  right  to 
control  one’s  own  body  and  the  risk  of  external  control  over  bodily  capacities  and  draws 
attention to the fact that some of these devices are networked, which means there is a risk of 
the individual's losing control over the way in which they are used and the data generated. For 
all these reasons, the Opinion calls for these applications to be used within a clear legislative 
framework  -  which  is  non  existent  in  many  European  countries  -  and  argues  that  the 
authorisation  of  the  use  of  technologies  which  could  easily  be  misused  so  as  to  harm 
individuals  or  society  must  be  subject  to  precaution.  Similarly,  while  the  autonomy  of 
individuals  must  be  respected  as  regards  technologies  which  they  consider  to  be  useful  or 
which can open up new opportunities to them, the Opinion recalls that the new technologies 
should not be used in such a way as to widen existing disparities between individuals on our 
planet.  The  division  between  peoples 
to  food,  medical  care  or 
in 
telecommunications  and  information  systems  is  already  far  too  great,  but  it  could  be  even 
worse if individuals’ actual characteristics separated them further. 

their  access 

Indeed,  one  of  the  areas  where  discussions  arise  over  some  of  the  consequences  of  these 
applications is how we define the normal state of an individual. The purpose of a prosthesis, 
in  principle,  is  to  restore  a  characteristic  which  an  individual  has  lost.  However,  for  some 
people,  the  argument  that  deafness,  for  instance,  is  not  a  normal  state  constitutes  a  form  of 
discrimination against the deaf. Looking further into the future, there are people who suggest 
that the links between our bodies and electronic systems represent the beginning of an era of 
enhancement of the potential of our species. There are, in fact, advocates of what is known as 
transhumanism, based on the proposition that it is the destiny of the human race to transcend 
itself,  by  means,  in  particular,  of  close  links  with  electronic  systems.  Leaving  aside  the 
discussion  on  the  validity  of  these  positions,  it  would  seem  to  be  important  to  recall  that 
systems that significantly modify a bodily or mental function could end up creating a minority 
with  characteristics  enabling  them  to  consider  themselves  superior,  with  the  temptation  that 
implies for one group to lord it over others. 

It  is  clear  that  the  development  of  non  medical  implants  must  be  carefully  monitored.  The 
misuse of such implants represents a threat to human dignity and could violate the principles 
underpinning  democratic  society,  such  as  the  right  to  privacy  or  the  individual’s  right  of 
control  over  his  or  her  own  body:  just  consider  the  difficulties  which  people  with  such 

21

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

implants may encounter in controlling the data generated by such devices. The need to keep 
individual  data  to  a  minimum  is  a  principle  which  must  be  constantly  reiterated  in  a  world 
where  such  data  are  generated,  exchanged  and  stored  in  exponential  fashion.  It  must  be 
stressed  that  where  circumstances  absolutely  require  their  use,  this  must  be  done  after 
regulation by Parliament and subject to judicial control. The normalisation of such implants 
and the use of devices to seek solutions to issues which society should resolve in a responsible 
manner represent paths which our society should tread only with  care and awareness  of the 
direction  in  which  it  is  moving.  This  field  offers  such  a  wide  range  of  possibilities  in  the 
future  that  we  need  to  remind  ourselves  -  to  quote  the  newly  published  Opinion  -  that  ‘not 
everything  that  is  technically  possible  is  also  ethically  admissible,  socially  acceptable  and 
legally approved’. 

Further Information 

Professor Pere Puigdomènech 

Address 
Institut de Biologia Molecular de Barcelona 
Parc Científic de Barcelona 
Campus Diagonal. Universitat de Barcelona 
Edifici Modular 
C/ Josep Samitier 1-5 
ES-08028 Barcelona 
Tel: +34 93 403 46 68 
Fax: +34 93 403 49 79 
Email: lcabmc@cid.csic.es 

Website 

WWW.ibmb.csic.es 

22

 
                                 
 
 
 
 
National and Regional 

Ethics Committees 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

► News from AUSTRALIA 

the Australian Health Ethics Committee15 

The Australian Health Ethics Committee 

The  Australian  Health  Ethics  Committee  (AHEC)  is  one  of  the  principal  committees  of 
Australia’s  National  Health  and  Medical  Research  Council  (NHMRC).  NHMRC  is 
Australia’s  leading  expert  body  promoting  the  development  and  maintenance  of  health 
standards  through  the  provision  of  evidence  based health  advice,  investment  in  high  impact 
health  and  medical  research  and  the  consideration  of  ethical  issues  in  health.  AHEC  was 
established under an Act of Parliament with the Minister for Health appointing members from 
a broad range of stakeholder groups including ethics & medical research, philosophy, social 
science research, clinical medical practice, nursing/allied health/ law, religion, consumers and 
people with understanding of the concerns of people with disabilities.  

The key roles and responsibilities of AHEC are: 

− 
− 
− 
− 
− 

to advise the NHMRC on ethical issues relating to health, 
to develop guidelines for the conduct of medical research involving humans, 
to promote community debate on health ethics issues, 
to monitor the work of Human Research Ethics Committees (HRECs), and 
to monitor and advise on international developments in health ethics. 

Key Events in Australian Health Ethics for 2005. 

Human Genetic Information 

In March 2003, the Australian Government, through the Australian Law Reform Commission 
and  AHEC,  produced  a  report  Essentially  Yours:  the  Protection  of  Human  Genetic 
Information  in  Australia.  In  line  with  the  principal  recommendations  of  the  report,  the 
Government has now established the Human Genetics Advisory Committee, as an additional 
Committee of the NHMRC. The report is available at http://www.alrc.gov.au 

Review  of  the  Prohibition  of  Human  Cloning  Act  2002  and  the  Research  Involving 
Human Embryos Act 2002. 

The  two  Acts  came  into  operation  in  2003  and  led  to  the  establishment  of  the  Embryo 
Research  Licensing  Committee  of  the  NHMRC.  As  provided  for  in  the  legislation,  the 
Government has commissioned a review of these Acts and the details of the review will be 
available  shortly.  Both  Acts  are  available  at  http://www.comlaw.gov.au  and  information  on 
the committee is available at www.nhmrc.gov.au. 

Ethical  Guidelines  on  the  Use  of  Reproductive  Technology  in  Clinical  Practice  and 
Research. 

Following a review of the 1996 Ethical guidelines on assisted reproductive technology, new 
guidelines  came  into  effect  in  September  2004  to  reflect  the  rapid  developments  in  science 
since the original guidelines were developed. The new guidelines, entitled Ethical guidelines 

15 Copyrights notice: This Article may be reproduced only in the context of this Newsletter 

24

 
 
 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

on the use of assisted reproductive technology in clinical practice and research, form part of 
the  legislative  framework  to  regulate  research  involving  excess  embryos  obtained  through 
assisted reproductive technology embryos under the Research Involving Human Embryos Act 
2002. The revised ethical guidelines are available at  
http://www.nhmrc.gov.au/publications/synopses/e56syn.htm. 

Guidelines for Research Involving Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders. 

In  2004,  NHMRC  released  revised  guidelines  entitled  Values  and  Ethics:  Guidelines  for 
Ethical  Conduct  in  Aboriginal  and  Torres  Strait  Islander  Health  Research.  The  new 
guidelines followed extensive consultation with indigenous communities and were developed 
by a working party with majority indigenous membership. The new guidelines can be found 
at http://www.nhmrc.gov.au/publications/synopses/e11syn.htm. To aid in the implementation 
of the guidelines, a series of workshops were held across Australia and were accompanied by 
an interactive process to develop a handbook designed to assist communities to participate in 
research consistent with the guidelines. It is envisaged that the handbook will be available in 
early 2006.  

Revision of the National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Research Involving Humans.  

AHEC has commenced a detailed revision of the 1999 National Statement on Ethical Conduct 
in Research Involving Humans. The review is being undertaken by AHEC, together with the 
Australian Research Council and the Australian Vice-Chancellors Committee. AHEC released 
a  first  consultation  draft  on  18  December  2004.  Further  information  on  the  review  can  be 
found at http://www.nhmrc.gov.au/ethics/human/ahec/projects/statement.htm 

Second National Research Ethics Conference. 

Over two days in May 2005, the NHMRC hosted the second National Human Research Ethics 
conference  in  Canberra.  The  Conference  provided  a  national  forum  for  researchers,  Human 
Research  Ethics  Committee  members,  ethicists,  researchers  and  institutional  administrators, 
sponsors,  students  and  community  members  to  discuss  a  range  of  ethical  practical  issues 
pertaining  to  research  involving  humans,  focussing  on  the  theme  Conflicts  of  interest  in 
human research. Over 400 participants attended the Conference. Preceding the conference a 
continuing  education  day  was  held  for  members  of  Human  Research  Ethics  Committees 
(HRECs) and researchers.  

Review  of  Australian  Arrangements  for  Clinical  Trials  and  Access  to  Unapproved 
Therapeutic Goods. 

The  independent  review  into  clinical  trials  and  access  to  unapproved  therapeutic  goods, 
jointly  commissioned  by  the  Therapeutic  Goods  Administration  and  the  NHMRC,  has  been 
completed. The report is available at http://www.tga.gov.au/docs/html/cltrialrev.htm 

New Ethical Guidelines Being Developed. 

The NHMRC is currently embarking on the development of two new ethical guidelines: 

1.  Ethical Guidelines on Cadaveric and Living Organ Donation, and  
2.  Ethical  Guidelines  on  the  Management  of  People  Diagnosed  with  Post  Coma 

Unresponsiveness (Post Vegetative State). 

25

 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Further Information 

Address 
Secretariat of the Australian Health Ethics Committee 
NHMRC (MDP 24) 
GPO Box 9848 
CANBERRA ACT 2601 
Tel.: +61 2 6289 9575 
Fax: +61 2 6289 9580 
Email: ahec.nhmrc@nhmrc.gov.au 

Website 

WWW.nhmrc.gov.au/ethics/human/ahec/overview/index.htm 

► News from QUEBEC, Canada 

the Science and Technology Ethics Committee 

Commission de l’éthique de la science et de la technologie 

Publications and events 

Opinion Statement on electronic plagiarism in schoolwork. This opinion statement results 
from the work done by the CEST Jeunesse 2005 (CEST Youth 2005) – presented in the 5th 
issue of Ethically Speaking – and its content is supported by CEST. The students present the 
subject under four headings: 

1.  What is electronic plagiarism in schoolwork; 

2.  What  is  education  supposed  to  be  in  Quebec  (education  goals  and  measures 

concerning plagiarism); 

3.  Some solutions to put forward and values to promote; and finally, 

4.  Some other issues to investigate and about which further thinking should be pursued: 
for example, the presumption of innocence principle, reasons causing plagiarism, and 
intellectual property. 

One important observation for the CEST Jeunesse 2005 is the fact that, although the practice 
of electronic plagiarism in schoolwork is known to exist, there are almost no rules about how 
to  prevent  or  sanction  it  in  the  field  of  education.  Having  defined  electronic  plagiarism  in 
schoolwork as the fact of copying in one’s schoolwork, in its entirety or in part, the content of 
another  production  from  an  electronic  source  (Web,  computer,  emails,  etc.)  without  any 
appropriate mention of the source, the CEST Jeunesse proposes four recommendations: 

26

 
                                                                                     
 
 
 
 
1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

That the Minister of Education provides clear and uniform guidelines on how to use 
documentary or other information sources in schoolwork and post them on the Web; 
but  also,  that  he  makes  sure  that  students  are  duly  informed  about  the  nature  and 
consequences of plagiarism at all education levels; 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

teachers  be  offered  continuing  education  related 

information  and 
That 
communication  technologies,  particularly  about  facilitating  methods  for  plagiarism; 
but  also,  that  teachers  themselves  require  schoolwork  and  adopt  evaluating  methods 
that make plagiarism impossible or unprofitable and, besides, that encourage curiosity 
and the pleasure to learn; 

to 

That  learning  institutions administer penalties known  to everybody, constructive and 
adapted to the various levels of education; 

That all learning institutions, and at all levels of education (from the first school years 
to  graduate  studies),  adopt  guidelines  about  electronic  plagiarism  in  schoolwork 
(namely  a  definition  and  penalties  to  be  applied)  that  will  be  adapted  to  the  various 
levels of education, widely spread and evenly implemented. 

This position statement is available in French on the CEST Website. 

Issues Paper and Consultation Paper on the use of biometric data for security purposes: 
ethical  issues  to  consider.  The  issues  paper  has  been  prepared  to  provide  a  survey  of  the 
subject  and  to  propose  a  series  of  questions  concerning  a  certain  number  of  ethical  issues 
raised  by  the  applications  of  biometrics  in  a  democratic  and  pluralistic  society.  The 
consultation paper is a summary of the issues paper in its factual elements on biometrics, but 
with all the ethical issues presented in the main paper. The consultation paper was distributed 
to all the participants at a public forum held on the 13 October 2005. 

Both papers are available in French on the CEST Website. 

Public Forum on ethics and biometrics. This forum convened experts to explore the various 
facets of the subject: public security, biometric technology, legislation, individual rights and 
freedoms and other ethical issues. The general population was also invited to attend the forum 
and participate in the discussions. Moreover, everyone can respond to the consultation paper 
and  present  commentaries  and  opinions  to  the  CEST  by  email,  fax  and  post.  The  program, 
papers and a summary of the debates are available on the CEST Website.  

Issues Paper on neuroscience and neuroethics. This paper is a preliminary work on a future 
position  statement  by  the  CEST.  Its  main  purpose  is  to  offer  a  description  of  the  field  of 
neuroscience and its applications, and to propose a series of ethical questions on the subject. 
The CEST intends to publish its opinion statement in May 2007. 

CEST work in progress 

Opinion statement on ethical issues related to nanotechnology. This opinion statement will 
present  the  field  of  nanoscience  and  its  applications  related  to  nanomaterials  (including 
nanoparticles),  nanoelectronics,  nanobiotechnologies  and  nanometrics.  Following  a 
presentation on laws and regulations that can be used for nanotechnologies, CEST discusses 
ethical  issues  in  health,  environment,  work  organization,  economy,  governance,  etc.  and 
formulates recommendations to public and institutional leaders for the benefit of a responsible 
management of these new technologies. CEST opinion statement is planned for publication in 
April 2006.  

27

 
Opinion  statement  on  ethics  and  biometrics.  Following  the  forum,  a  working  group  has 
been created to elaborate an opinion statement scheduled for release in October 2006. 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Further Information 

Diane Duquet, Ph.D. 
Commission coordinator 

Address 
Commission de l’éthique de la science et de la technologie (CEST) 
1200 route de l’Église, 3rd Floor - Office 3.45 
CA - Sainte-Foy (Québec) G1V 4Z2 
Tel: +1-418-528-0965 
Fax: +1-418-646-0920 
Email: ethique@ethique.gouv.qc.ca 

Website 

WWW.ethique.gouv.qc.ca 

► News from GREECE 

the Hellenic National Bioethics Commission 

Most recent recommendation 

Recommendation  on  the  establishment  of  Ethics  Committees  that  review  biomedical 
research (22 April 2005) 

Abstract 

Currently, the law provides a system of ethical review in biomedical research only for clinical 
trials of medicinal products. 

In  addition,  the  law  provides  for  Research  Ethics  Committees  (RECs)  within  the  Regional 
Health and Welfare System (RHWS) (art. 2 Act 2889/2001) with general jurisdiction but only 
for NHS hospitals. These committees are entrusted specifically with a potential ‘first instance’ 
review of clinical trials of medicinal products, issuing an opinion for the NOM Committee. 

Finally,  legislation  was  passed  some  time  ago  stipulating  that  Ethics  Committees  in  Health 
Sciences must be created in all hospitals either public or private (art. 61 (4) Act 2071/1992). 
However, these are delegating provisions that have remained idle. Pursuant to Act 2889/2001 
(art. 5), specifically as regards the NHS, the tasks of these committees are performed by the 
Scientific  Boards  of  NHS  hospitals.  Scientific  Boards,  however,  are  not  suitable  for  ethics 
review  because  they  include  only  professionals  from  health  sciences  in  violation  of  the 
principle  of  pluralism,  on  the  one  hand,  and  because  board  members  are  elected  to  office, 
which  leaves  them  exposed  to  pressure  and  undue  influence  against  the  principle  of 
independence, on the other hand. 

28

 
                                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

As  of  now  the  law  does  not  provide  for  RECs  in  clinical  trials  of  other  –  than  medicinal 
products  –  means  or  methods  of  treatment  neither  for  research  requiring  the  processing  of 
biological human samples or biological personal data. 

Moreover, it does not set down rules for the structure and operation of RECs, except for the 
NOM Committee. 

In the Regional Health and Welfare System (RHWS) only 23,5% of the RECs stipulated by 
law are actually implemented. Of the hospitals under the National Health System (NHS), 15% 
have separate RECs, distinct from Scientific Boards, while in 65% the Scientific Board also 
doubles as an REC. A number of big hospitals set up as private law corporations (in either the 
public or the private sector) also have RECs. 

At  all  events,  regardless  of  the  public  or  private  character  of  hospitals,  more  than  90%  of 
ethics boards are comprised exclusively of physicians with one pharmacist and one nurse or 
midwife.  Law  experts,  clergy  members  or  representatives  of  local  authorities  sit  only 
exceptionally. 

In research centres carrying out biomedical research, the establishment and operation of RECs 
is  the  exception  given  that  only  20%  of  such  centres  have  one.  Among  higher  education 
institutions, one University has adopted a code of conduct for researchers which provides for 
a REC while at least two others are in the process of adopting a similar code. 

Clinical  research  involving  human  subjects  –  testing  either  medicinal  products  or  other 
treatments – and biomedical research involving the processing of human biological samples 
or  personal  data  must  meet  certain  ethical  norms  on  the  protection  of  participants.  Ethics 
review should be efficient and safeguard the rights of participants whilst offering appropriate 
solutions in order not to discourage research. 

In this spirit, the Commission proposed the following. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Any  form  of  biomedical  research  (clinical  or  involving  processing  of  human 
biological samples or personal data – in higher education institutions or private/ public 
hospitals) should be subject to ethics review by a REC at least on one level to ensure 
certification of suitability. 

RECs  must  be  independent,  they  should  be  established  and  they  should  operate  in 
accordance with fixed and internationally accepted rules, compliance to which should 
possibly  be  attested  by  the  appropriate  body  of  the  supervising  authority  of  each 
research unit (e.g. the National Board of Medical Ethics of the Ministry for Health, the 
Bioethics Commission of the General Secretariat of Research and Technology). (The 
National Bioethics Commission provided draft guidelines in an attached Annex.) 

Clinical research conducted in hospitals or in higher education institutions should be 
reviewed on a geographical division level – within the respective geographical district; 
RECs  should  be  created  by  law  specifically  for  research  in  the  relevant  regional  or 
local sections of  the Ministry for  Health. The ethics committees provided within the 
RHWS  are  probably  inadequate  because  their  jurisdiction  extends  only  to  NHS 
hospitals. (Therefore, research should be exempted from their responsibilities.) 

In the context of clinical trials of medicinal products, the approval granted by a REC 
should be considered as an opinion to assist the NOM Committee in the performance 
of its tasks. 

29

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

The review of non-clinical research conducted by research agencies supervised by the 
General  Secretariat  for  Research  and  Technology  (GSRT)  should  come  under  the 
jurisdiction of the GSRT Bioethics Commission.  

The review of non-clinical research conducted in higher education institutions should 
be  entrusted  to  RECs  whose  establishment  and  operation,  in  accordance  with  the 
guidelines specified in the provided Annex, are to be encouraged by the Ministry for 
Education. 

By  way  of  supplementary  measures,  the  Ministry  for  Health  and  the  GSRT  should 
encourage (via relevant information campaigns) the establishment of ethics boards in 
research units (hospitals or other). Review by such boards enhances the credibility of 
research  proposals  and  facilitates  the  work  of  the  responsible  RECS  as  specified 
above. 

Legislation  should  be  cleared  of  unnecessary  (and  idle)  provisions.  In  particular,  the 
jurisdiction of Scientific Boards in NHS hospitals to consider ethical issues causes a 
typical confusion of duties which is incompatible with international norms. 

Special remarks: 

After the publication of the recommendation, the Ministry of Health invited the Commission 
to have a detailed discussion concerning whether there is a necessity to establish Committees 
on a local or regional level.  

In  addition,  the  Commission  was  asked  to  provide  consultation  to  specific  faculties  of  the 
University  about  the  procedure  that  should  be  followed  in  order  to  create  a  Research 
Committee. 

Current work 

The  Commission  is  currently  dealing  with  specific  issues  (i.e.  advanced  directives,  living 
wills) related to the issue of euthanasia. 

Future Agenda 

The Commission intends to comment on the Draft Code of Medical Ethics (elaborated on the 
initiative of the Ministry of Health). 

Follow-up of training activities 

The Commission keeps offering to students, mostly postgraduates, both from human and life 
sciences, the possibility of training on issues related to bioethics. Training period can last up 
to three (3) months without recompense.  

The scientific officers support the trainees for accomplishing their diploma, while the students 
carry out documentation and other library-related tasks. 

This initiative received immediately the attention of the students, who are accomplishing their 
tasks with eager and high interest. 

30

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Composition of the Commission  

Chairman 
George Koumantos, Emeritus Professor of Civil Law, University of Athens 

Deputy Chairman 
George Maniatis, Emeritus Professor of Medical Genetics, University of Patras 

Members  
Savas Agouridis, Emeritus Professor of Theology, University of Athens 
Myrto Dragona-Monachou, Emeritus Professor of Philosophy, University of Athens 
Costas  Krimbas,  Member  of  the  Academy  of  Athens,  Professor  Honoris  causa  of  Genetics, 
Agricultural  University  of  Athens,  and  Emeritus  Professor  of  History  and  Philosophy  of 
Biology, University of Athens  
Dimitrios Roupakias, Professor of Plant Breeding, Agricultural University of Thessaloniki 
Pavlos Sourlas, Professor of Philosophy of Law, University of Athens 
Constantinos Tsoukalas, Professor of Sociology, University of Athens  
John Vlahoyiannis, Professor of Medical Pathology and Nephrology, University of Athens 

Further Information 

Ms Marianna Dracopoulou 
Executive Head Secretary 
Tel.: +30 210 88 47 700 
Fax: +30 210 88.47 701 
Email: Secretariat@bioethics.gr, 

Address 
Evelpidon 47. T.K., GR-11362 Athens 

Website 

WWW.bioethics.gr 

► News from ITALY 

the National Bioethics Committee 

2005 Activity report of the Italian National Bioethics Committee 

(Comitato nazionale per la bioetica CNB) 

Opinions 
Bioethical considerations concerning the ‘ootid16’, 15 July 2005 

The  Minister  for  Health  asked  the  CNB  for  a  specific  opinion  on  this.  The  problem  is 
important  with  reference  to  Section  14  of  Act 40/2004  (on  medically  assisted  pregnancy), 

16 Editorial footnote: Ootid is a mature ovum after penetration of a sperm but before the formation of a zygote. 

31

 
               
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

paragraph 1  of  which  expressly  prohibits  the  cryopreservation  of  embryos,  except  in  cases 
referred to paragraph 3, which allows for freezing for reasons of ‘force majeure’ concerning 
the health of the woman. Paragraph 8 of Section 14 also recognises the possibility of freezing 
the  gametes  only,  after  obtaining  the  informed,  written  consent  of  the  couple.  Since  Act  40 
uses  exclusively  the  terms  ‘embryo’  and  ‘gametes’,  never  the  term  ‘ootid’,  the  question  is 
whether the freezing of ‘ootids’ is or is not an infringement of Act 40. The full Committee of 
the CNB voted by a clear majority that the cryopreservation of ‘ootids’ is not lawful. 

Bioethics and odontoiatry, 24 June 2005 

The  CNB  notes  that  there  are  medical  ethics  which  cover  specialists  in  odontoiatry  (i.e. 
dentists).  The  CNB  regrets  the  lack  of  attention  paid  by  successive  governments  to  dental 
pathology, particularly among the elderly and with regard to preventive measures for children 
and other vulnerable groups. The CNB also notes the lack of dentistry research.  

Opinion on cell therapy for Huntington’s disease following the grafting of neurons from an 
aborted foetus, 20 May 2005 

The  CNB  recognises  the  ethical  value  of  research  into  foetal  tissue  obtained  following 
abortion or miscarriage, provided that the medical team carrying out the abortion and the team 
carrying out the research are quite separate.  

Alternative medicine and the problem of informed consent, 18 March 2005 

The  CNB  has  looked  at  the  question  of  alternative  medicine  from  a  strictly  ethical  point  of 
view,  without  touching  on  the  epistemological  aspects.  Having  reiterated  the  principle  of 
autonomy, which gives adults complete freedom of choice in the use of alternative medicine, 
the  CNB  nevertheless  regretted  the  use  of  alternative  medicine  for  minors,  as  their 
vulnerability  and  the  fact  that  alternative  medicine  is  not  publicly  recognised  could  expose 
them to undue risk. 

Motion:  on  the  assistance  to  newborn  babies  and  children  suffering  from  an 
extremely  serious  disease  or  handicap  and  on  paediatric  euthanasia,  28  June 
2005 

Following  the  announcement  that  a  European  country  has  authorised  euthanasia  for  young 
children  (handicapped  children  in  particular),  the  CNB  stated  that  it  was  opposed  to  this 
practice. Having distinguished the prolongation of life by medical means from euthanasia, the 
CNB stressed that the ending of a human life on the grounds of the supposed poor quality of 
that life was not ethical. 

Seminar and conference 

Biometry (Rome, 21 October 2005). Research seminar with F. D’Agostino (President CNB), 
E. Mordini, K. Wadhwa, D. Grondin, M. Savastano, C. Caporale, R. Chadwick, L. Marini 

Conference on 15 years of the CNB (Rome, 30 November - 3 December 2005) 

32

 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Further Information 

Dr Stéphane Bauzon 
CNB scientific expert 
Email: s.bauzon@governo.it 

Address 
Comitato Nazionale per la Bioetica 
Via della Mercede, 96 
Rome 00187 
ITALY 

Website 

WWW.governo.it/bioetica/ 

► News from MALTA 

the Bioethics Consultative Committee 

The DNA Essence 

I of course fully agree that our DNA alone does not constitute new life. If I were to believe 
that, I would be a genetic reductionist which I am not. However one cannot agree that a new 
human  life  exists  without  the  existence  of  a  first  definite  normal  genetic  constitutional 
template which is human. This is analogous to stating that a silicon chip is not a computer, but 
believe  me,  there  is  no  computer  without  the  silicon  chip!  The  argument  that  an  individual 
zygote is more than his DNA complement is usually used by many to justify research up to 
the 14th day after fertilisation, as they imply that due to environmental reasons there must be 
implantation  for  the  human  individual  to  exist.  I  have  rarely  seen  this  argument  used  to 
rationalize the logic that there is an individual human being from penetration, when there is 
not yet any final DNA template.  

A definite genetic constitutional template occurs at syngamy at the time of pronuclear fusion 
(amphimixis or karyogamy are the better terms) and as she correctly points out although there 
is  no  fusion  as  we  originally  understood  it  to  mean,  it  is  the  first  instance  when  the  two 
genetic messages from the two parents first come together. Prior to that point all development, 
including  the  totally  maternally  inherited  mitochondrial  DNA,  is  controlled  by  the  mother’s 
genes in the fertilised egg and there is not any protein synthesis linked to the new genome. It 
is  only  after  syngamy  that  new  protein  translation  from  the  new  constituted  genome  finally 
takes  place,  and  it  is  significant  that  up  to  a short  period  beyond  syngamy,  the  whole  cell 
may  develop  without  any  nuclei  at  all!  It  is  also  interesting  to  keep  in  mind  that  the 
development  of  the  new  genome  only  becomes  autonomous  and  active  after  syngamy 
(Zygotic  Genome  Activation),  and  the  fact  that  it  does  not  occur  before  that  point  in  time, 
means that both gene sets must be together for normal functioning to occur. Before syngamy, 
it is the mother's gene products which are in charge and the new genetic constitution of the 
embryo does not begin to take control of development until at least two days after that (at the 
four- to eight- cell stage). 

33

 
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

It  is  important  to  accept  that  for  a  human  life  to  exist  de  facto,  both  the  mother's  and  the 
father's  genomes  must  come  together  for  the  first  time.  This  is  one  of  the  first  principle 
conditions  for  life  to  exist,  not  only  human  life.  It  is  also  interesting  to  recall  Loeb’s  and 
Lillie’s  experiments  where  fertilisation  was  initiated  very  easily,  without  any  sperm  at  all, 
simply  by  changing  the  ionic  concentration  of  the  medium  around  the  egg.  This  is  a  very 
common  occurrence  in  the  animal  kingdom  and  this  shows  that  sperm  is  not  essential  for 
initiating fertilisation. In humans, the sperm's genome is essential for normal development and 
is important in delivering half the coded message, for the computer to work properly, however 
the computer only works  at all after syngamy! ‘There is no rest for the messenger until the 
message  is  delivered  –  Joseph  Conrad  1920’.  It  seems  that  ‘Once  fertilisation  is 
accomplished, development and inheritance may be left to look after themselves’.17  

Even Cardinal Ratzinger, in a summary document of the Consistory of Cardinals on the threat 
to  life  written  for  the  preparation  of  the  Encyclical  Letter  Evangelium  Vitae,  recalling  the 
definition of the zygote in Donum Vitae as the ‘moment of the fusion of the two pronuclei’, 
reaffirms that ‘from the time that the ovum is fertilised, a new life is begun which is neither 
that of the father nor of the mother; it is rather the life of a new human being with its own 
growth’ and ‘in the zygote resulting from fertilisation the biological identity of a new human 
individual is already constituted’18. Fertilisation is a process that has a beginning and has an 
end, and it is not accomplished before it is complete. There cannot be an individual human 
being until fertilisation is complete. 

Having settled the deontological argument in this issue, I must now turn to other issues which 
also exist side by side. I must look at other arguments so as to dispel the Dubium Facti. Even 
well respected theologians accept this reasoning. I particularly call to mind Karl Rahner SJ, 
who  needs  no  introduction  and  who  goes  on  to  say  in  the  IX  volume  of  his  Theological 
Investigations  (p.  236,  note  37)  that  ‘It  would  be  conceivable  that  given  a  serious  positive 
doubt  about  the  human  quality  of  the  experimental  material,  the  reasons  in  favour  of 
experimenting, might carry more weight, considered rationally, than the uncertain rights of a 
human being whose very existence is in doubt’. This is also the opinion of John Mahony SJ in 
his Bioethics and Belief.19 What would in effect recognising the human embryo or zygote at 
amphimixis imply? Two effects in particular come to mind, but there are other possibilities. 
The  first  being  second  polar  body  testing  to  prevent  serious  genetic  diseases  such  as 
Huntington's  Chorea  or  Muscular  Dystrophy.  These  are  serious  genetic  diseases  which  are 
fatal  or  at  best  severely  debilitating.  They  can  be  prevented  by  a  simple  polar  body  biopsy. 
There is also the possibility to change the genetic composition of the defective gene. Another 
important possibility is to allow freezing of the penetrated egg at this stage.  

I  am  against  the  freezing  of  embryos  because  it  results  in  the  production  of  supernumerary 
embryos  in  suspended  animation  which  then  end  up  with  nobody  knowing  what  to  do  with 
them.  Usually  they  end  up  as  research  material.  However,  eggs  at  this  stage  of  fertilisation 
may be frozen in the pronucleate stage so that if IVF is not successful or a temporary pause in 
the  process  itself  is  necessary  for  whatever  reason,  then  other  eggs  in  the  process  of 
fertilisation are available for the IVF to continue, without again putting the patient through the 
agony of hyperstimulation and egg retrieval which is associated with an increased mortality 
and morbidity.  

17 Farley, J., Gametes and Spores: Ideas about sexual Reproduction 1750 – 1914. 
http://zygote.swarthmore.edu/fert4a.html 
18 The Problem of Threats to Human Life, Vatican City, April 4-7, 1991. 
19 Mc Cormick, R.A., The First 14 Days, The Tablet 10 March 1990, p. 302. 

34

 
                                                 
As for cloning and stem cell research, I have already referred in a previous article to the fact 
that  defining  the  human  embryo  from  penetration  will  create  problems  for  the  human 
definition of cloned human beings as there is no fertilisation there at all! This would also be 
the  case  with  stem  cell  research.  I  have  personally  talked  to  many  of  my  colleagues  in  the 
field of molecular genetics, and other fields and most of  them single  out amphimixis  as  the 
first instance of human individual ontological development. 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

‘Between the conception and the creation. 
Between the potency and the existence. 
Between the essence and the descent, falls the 
shadow.’ 

T.S.Eliot (1936). 

Further Information 

Dr Michael Asciak MD. M.Phil. MP. 
Chairman of the Bioethics Consultative Committee 
Email: michael.asciak@gov.mt 

Address 
Palazzo Castellania 
15 Merchant's Street 
MT - Valletta 

Website 

WWW.sahha.gov.mt 

► News from the NETHERLANDS 

the Health Council of the Netherlands 

The 2005 Ethics and Health Monitoring Report on embryonic stem cells and 

other topics 

The Centre for Ethics and Health (Dutch abbreviation CEG) is a joint venture of the Health 
Council  of  the  Netherlands  (Gezondheidsraad)  and  the  Council  for  Public  Health  &  Health 
Care  (Raad  voor  de  Volksgezondheid  en  Zorg).  Under  the  aegis  of  the  CEG,  both  councils 
produce short ‘alerting’ reports, identifying developments that, from an ethical point of view, 
merit  the  government’s  attention.  The  CEG’s  annual  Ethics  and  Health  Monitoring  Report 
provides  a  compilation  of  these  alerts.  They  are  meant  to  serve  as  building  blocks  for  the 
Health Ministry’s annual ‘Ethics and Health’ policy agenda, which is appended to the national 
budget  each  year  in  September.  Via  its  website  www.ceg.nl  the  CEG  also  functions  as  a 
source of information on ethical issues in the field of (public) health. 

On 29 June 2005, the third CEG Monitoring Report was presented to the State Secretary of 
Health. It contains alerts on six topics, of which the first three were prepared by the Health 

35

 
                             
 
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Council and the last two by the Council for Public Health & Health Care. The fourth section, 
on screening in GP practice, was prepared jointly by the two councils cooperating in the CEG. 
A brief summary of all six sections is given below. The report is in Dutch, but the section on 
embryonic stem cells is separately available in English.  

1. Embryonic stem cells without moral pain? 

This  spring,  Korean  researchers  announced  that  they  had  succeeded  in  obtaining  stem  cells 
from  embryos  produced  by  cloning.  This  involved  introducing  the  nucleus  of  human  skin 
cells into egg cells from which the nucleus had been removed. It is hoped that in the long term 
this method can be used to culture patient-specific cell material for autologous transplantation 
that  might  prove  effective  in  the  treatment  of  a  wide  range  of  complaints.  At  present,  the 
research  is  still  in  its  initial  stages.  However,  this  research  and  its  possible  applications  are 
controversial. Firstly because human embryos are produced that will only be used as a source 
of stem cells. And secondly because (a large number of) human egg cells are required for the 
cloning  procedure.  The  question  is  whether  these  can  be  obtained  by  morally  acceptable 
means.  While  the  discussion  is  still  under  way,  research  of  this  kind  is  forbidden  in  many 
countries, including the Netherlands.  

Against this background, interest has recently arisen in the possibility of obtaining the same 
result  (patient-specific  pluripotent  stem  cells)  without  the  necessity  of  producing  human 
embryos or asking women to donate (mature) egg cells for this purpose. The ethically most 
attractive approach is the ‘direct reprogramming’ of body cells without the intermediate step 
of embryo production and without the need to use egg cells. This approach, however, seems 
to  be  the  one  that  lies  furthest  in  the  future.  Moreover,  it  may  prove  to  be  necessary  to 
produce human embryos in the development of this approach too. 

Many  of  the  other  ‘embryo-saving’  proposals  presented  in  the  literature  are  based  on  the 
assumption  that  non-viable  embryos  are  not  strictly  speaking  embryos  at  all,  so  that  the 
harvesting of their contents does not raise any moral issues. It may be asked whether this is 
not  an  unduly  facile  approach  to  the  problem.  What  is  in  fact  the  status  of  the  non-viable 
embryo? It seems undesirable to incorporate an answer to this into the formal definition of an 
embryo. This is however precisely what is done in the current Dutch Embryos Act. 

One  of  the  proposed  ways  of  getting  round  the  egg-cell  problem  is  to  culture  the  egg  cells 
required from embryonic stem cells. This approach, however, still raises ethical issues when 
one  considers  that  genetic  material  cultured  from  stem  cells  could  also  be  used  for 
reproductive  purposes.  This  (still  speculative)  scenario  might  make  it  possible  to  provide 
better  support  for  couples  with  fertility  problems,  but  would  in  its  turn  represent  a  major 
challenge to our traditional ideas about the natural limits of reproduction and parenthood. 

However, the primary policy context for this report is the impending evaluation of the Dutch 
Embryos Act and the discussion of the desirability of rescinding the (temporary) ban on the 
creation  of  embryos  for  other  purposes  than  pregnancy.  Far  from  making  this  discussion 
unnecessary,  the  quest  for  ‘embryo-saving’  sources  of  tissue-matched  stem  cells  only 
underlines the fact that this discussion can no longer be postponed. The evaluation of the Act 
must also include consideration of what precisely is to be understood by the term ‘embryo’. 

36

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

2. Ethical aspects of cost-utility analysis 

Monitoring  the  expenditure  on  health  care  involves  the  need  to  make  choices  about  which 
treatments are to be included in the health-care package made available to the public. Specific 
cost-utility  analysis  (CUA)  methods  have  been  developed  to  provide  a  uniform  quantitative 
basis for the making of such decisions over the whole range of health services. An important 
criterion in this connection is the QALY (quality-adjusted life year). 

Ever  since  its  introduction  in  the  1970s,  there  has  been  a  great  deal  of  discussion  about 
whether  this  decision-making  approach  leads  to  an  equitable  distribution  of  health-care 
resources. For example, older people with their shorter expectation of life would by definition 
gain  fewer  QALYs  from  successful  treatment  than  younger  ones,  and  people  with  chronic 
complaints or disabilities would gain fewer QALYs than those for whom complete recovery 
may be expected. The CUA system does not take into account the severity of complaints or 
other factors that might be expected to play a role in the allocation of health-care resources. 

This  charge  of  possible  unfairness  has  received  attention  in  the  recent  literature  on  health 
economics.  Two  approaches  have  been  used  in  an  attempt  to  correct  this  unfairness.  In  the 
first,  the  arsenal  of  CUA  instruments  is  extended  by  quantification  of  ‘equity  preferences’ 
existing  in  the  population.  This  is  technically  ambitious  and  is  moreover  ethically 
questionable. The second approach is precisely to limit the use of the CUA methodology. The 
argument here is that while CUA data can provide a basis for decision-making, other aspects 
such  as  considerations  of  fairness  should  also  be  taken  into  account.  The  second  approach 
would  appear  to  raise  fewer  problems  than  the  first  when  it  comes  to  making  morally 
acceptable decisions. But one factor that is still not taken into account here is the fact that the 
various  uncertainties  and  imperfections  of  the  CUA  system  itself  can  lead  to  all  kinds  of 
(hidden)  allocation  effects.  Acceptance  of  this  last-mentioned  point  means  that  the  CUA 
system can at most be considered as an aid in a meticulous decision-making procedure based 
on democratic principles. 

Discussion  of  this  issue  is  highly  relevant  at  present,  now  that  CUA  is  being  used  in  the 
United  Kingdom  as  a  basis  for  the  approval  of  new  health-care  procedures  in  the  National 
Health Service (NHS). There are also plans to set up a ‘national assessment structure’ in the 
Netherlands, explicitly modelled (at least in part) on the British example, for decision-making 
about the content of the health-care package. The present report urges caution in the use of the 
CUA methodology in this context.    

3. Now with extra bacteria! Food products with health claims 

Unhealthy eating habits damage the health of the public. People eat too much and they eat the 
wrong  kinds  of  foods,  which  leads  to  a  growth  in  the  prevalence  of  many  diseases.  A  new 
trend in supermarkets is the stocking of food products that come with health claims, such as 
bread  with  added  fish  oil  to  reduce  blood  cholesterol  levels  or  yoghurt  drinks  containing 
healthy  bacteria  which  are  supposed  to  promote  healthy  intestinal  flora.  It  is  possible  that 
these new food products do help to combat the problem of food-related disease. 

However, a number of questions arise in this connection. Are the additives used safely? Do 
they  really  work?  How  well  founded  are  the  health  claims  made?  Do  these  ‘healthy’  foods 
contribute to widening the health gap between the affluent and those who are less well off? 
Can consumers make a choice from the wide range of new foods on offer in a way that will 
contribute  to  their  health?  Is  there  a  danger  that  the  importance  of  food  for  health  is  being 
blown up out of all proportion? 

37

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Current  Dutch  legislation  does  not  have  the  powers  needed  to  ban  products  with  vague  or 
inadequately  based  health  claims  from  the  market. A proposed European directive promises 
improvement  on  a  number  of  points,  but  it  is  not  yet  certain  whether  this  proposal  will  be 
accepted  and  if  so  in  what  form.  It  is  definitely  open  to  question  whether  the  average 
consumer is fully able to estimate the importance of food for his or her health. This makes it 
important  for  the  consumer  to  receive  information  about  this  new  food  trend  and  to  be 
educated  about  the  relevant  issues.  It  is  worth  mentioning  in  this  connection  that  food  has 
other legitimate values apart from the contribution it makes to the health of the consumer. 

4. Tracking down threats to health: screening in GP practices 

More  and  more  methods  are  becoming  available  for  early  detection  of  diseases,  aimed  at 
prevention  of  these  complaints  by  timely  treatment  or  changes  in  lifestyle.  This  report 
considers  the  role  of  the  GP  in  this  development.  The  GP’s  practice  would  seem  to  be  the 
ideal place for early detection of diseases or risk factors. Early detection (screening) targets 
people  who  do  not  yet  experience  any  specific  complaints.  Furthermore,  the  GP  is  the  only 
doctor  with  whom  people  from  this  group  already  have  an  ongoing  relationship.  Screening 
offered by the GP is therefore accessible, which avoids imposing a threshold. In addition, the 
GP’s information system is in theory an ideal tool for screening and risk selection. 

Screening in the GP’s practice can occur in different ways: in ‘population screening’ people 
from  the  target  group  are  actively  approached  and  invited  to  undergo  the  appropriate  test, 
while in ‘case-finding’ the investigation is offered at the moment when the client happens to 
visit  the  GP.  Both  approaches  differ  in  one  important  respect  from  normal  medical  care,  in 
that  the  investigation  is  offered  on  the  initiative  of  the  doctor  and  does  not  form  a  medical 
answer  to  a  medical  complaint  or  question  from  the  side  of  the  patient.  This  makes  it  even 
more important that the offer should have a proven added value for the person approached. It 
may be mentioned in this connection that the GP is better equipped than anyone else to take 
account of personal issues such as other risk factors applying to the person in question, his or 
her attitude concerning the condition screened for and the family circumstances. 

The  fact  that  screening  is  offered  without  an  initial  request  means  that  extra  care  must  be 
taken to present the offer in a way which does not worry the patient unduly or put him or her 
under undue pressure. This is particularly important in the ‘case-finding’ context. There is a 
real risk that the offer may be presented in such a way that the person in question feels more 
or less forced to accept it. Care must also be taken to ensure that the offer of screening does 
not  induce  or  exploit  unnecessary  anxiety.  Here  again,  the  GP  is  ideally  placed  to  provide 
balanced information about conditions and risks, so as to avoid undue worry. This makes high 
demands, not only on medical knowledge and communicative skills, but also on organization 
and time scheduling at the GP’s practice. 

While some variation in the offer need not be ruled out, the impression of arbitrariness must 
be avoided. If GPs aim at a limited screening package that is offered to a wide target group 
and  organized  on  a  national  scale,  that  simplifies  the  training  required  (in  particular  in  the 
field  of  information  and  communication)  for  GPs  and  supporting  staff  in  the  practice.  This 
also  avoids  making  priorities  dependent  on  arbitrary  factors  such  as  support  from  the 
pharmaceutical industry. 

Prevention of disease has long been seen as one of the GP’s tasks. The question is how much 
extension of this task is desirable. Many people are in favour of GPs playing a bigger role in 
this field, but GPs themselves are often hesitant to go along with this idea. This hesitation is 
partly  to  do  with  their  available  capacity  and  priorities,  but  is  also  related  to  different 
perceptions of the role of the GP. Should the GP adopt a pro-active stance in monitoring the 

38

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

health  of  patients,  or  should  he  or  she  be  a  provider  of  medical  care  who  only  comes  into 
action when called for? Investigation of various scenarios for the relationship between GP and 
patient could help to avoid tensions between demand-based care and pro-active screening in 
the future.  

5. Health care professional and police informant? 

Imagine  that  shortly  after  the  murder  of  the  controversial  Dutch  politician  Pim  Fortuyn, 
Volkert  van  der  G.  (the  person  charged  and  ultimately  convicted  of  the  crime)  was  not 
arrested, but sought the assistance of a psychiatrist to deal with his feelings of guilt. Should 
the psychiatrist pass this information on to the police? According to current Dutch legislation 
he  should  not.  He  is  bound  by  his  duty  of  confidentiality  towards  his  patients.  The  present 
report, however, reflects a shift in opinion concerning this legislation. Health care workers are 
increasingly  being  asked  to  pass  on  patient  information  in  the  public  interest,  e.g.  for  the 
detection  of  crime.  The  boundaries  between  the  detection  of  health  risks,  the  avoidance  of 
professional anomalies and the detection of crimes seem to be getting blurred. 

The  professional  duty  of  confidentiality,  however,  serves  a  public  interest  as  well  as  the 
interest of the individual patients, since it guarantees a climate in which each patient or client 
can discuss his or her case openly with the therapist without the fear that personal details will 
be released indiscriminately. But there are limits to the duty of confidentiality. There may be 
weighty arguments in favour of a doctor revealing details of a case if this is the only way of 
preventing (future) harm to a third party. The views about the boundary between the duty to 
confidentiality  and  the  obligation  of  public  reporting  seem  to  be  shifting  in  the  direction  of 
making  public  reporting  obligatory.  There  seems  also  to  be  a  growing  desire  for  legislation 
that will make it obligatory to report (suspected) crimes, as is already the case for e.g. child 
abuse  and  female  circumcision.  It  is  hoped  that  such  changes  will  simplify  the  moral 
dilemmas associated with the professional duty to confidentiality. 

These  shifts  can  have  consequences  for  the  trust-based  relationship  between  patient  and 
therapist and the accessibility of health care. But they also raise questions about the boundary 
between confidentiality and public reporting. Will it soon be obligatory for clinical geneticists 
to  report  possible  genetic  risks?  And  will  matters  other  than  child  abuse  and  female 
circumcision move from the private domain into the public domain? It would seem to be time 
for  a  fundamental  debate  about  the  boundary  between  the  duty  of  confidentiality  and 
obligatory public reporting, in order to find a new balance between the interests protected by 
professional confidentiality and the need to detect and prevent crime. This search for a new 
balance will  inevitably touch on  the question of what degree of cooperation with the police 
and the courts, in the exercise of their professional duties, should become incorporated in the 
package of tasks expected of the health care professional. 

6. Ethics in health-care institutions and in the education of care professionals 

The CEG generally reports on ethical questions arising in health-care or scientific practice. It 
goes without saying, however, that health-care practitioners also encounter moral questions in 
their  daily  work.  These  may  be  major  issues  about  which  there  has  already  been  much 
discussion, such as abortion or euthanasia, but there may be more down-to-earth issues such 
as  professional  confidentiality  or  the  patient-therapist  relationship.  Since  health-care  work 
involves  so  many  moral  questions,  it  is  important  that  health-care  professionals  should 
possess  the  skills  needed  to  deal  with  these  questions.  The  present  report  reveals,  however, 
that many health-care workers lack the necessary basic knowledge of ethics and ethical skills. 
Moreover, many health-care workers are not aware of the moral implications of such simple 

39

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

activities  as  washing  and  dressing  patients.  This  can  lead  in  practice  to  misunderstandings, 
moral and communication problems and a less than optimal quality of care. 

In order to address this problem, a number of health-care institutions are actively involved in 
projects  in  the  field  of  ethics,  such  as  regular  group  discussions  on  moral  issues  between 
members of staff. And practically every student in a health-care educational or training course 
receives  some  kind  of  ethical  instruction.  However,  the  involvement  of  health-care 
institutions with ethical matters is still extremely limited; and the institutions that are actively 
involved often find it difficult to maintain these activities on a stable basis – largely because 
there  is  generally  no  basis  for  these  activities  in  the  institution’s  policy.  In  the  educational 
field, there is particularly little interest in the teaching of ethics at secondary vocational level 
(Dutch  abbreviation  MBO)  –  the  route  normally  followed  for  the  training  of  laboratory 
technicians, nurses and middle hospital management among others. There further appears to 
be practically no external monitoring of how much MBO graduates have learnt about ethics. 
This suggests that it is doubtful whether the existing educational programmes can deliver all 
the statutory learning outcomes – which explicitly include some training in ethics.  

The 2005 Ethics and Health Monitoring Report (in Dutch: Signalering ethiek en gezondheid 
2005) and an English translation of the section on Embryonic stem cells without moral pain? 
can be downloaded  from www.healthcouncil.nl or www.ceg.nl 

Further Information 

Dr Wybo Dondorp 
Tel.: +31 70 340 6575 | Fax: +31 70 340 7523 
Email: wj.dondorp@gr.nl 

Address 
Health Council of the Netherlands 
PO Box 16052 
NL-2500 BB The Hague 

Websites 

Centrum voor ethiek en gezondheid 
WWW.ceg.nl 

Gezondheidsraad 

WWW.healthcouncil.nl 

40

 
 
                          
  
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

► News from POLAND 

the Bioethics Commission 

of the Ministry of Health 

Published output on bioethics – closing the US-EU gap 

The Lisbon strategy, a developmental plan for the EU put forward by the European Council in 
2000,  established  the  goal  that  by  2010  the  EU  will  be  ‘the  most  competitive  and  dynamic 
knowledge-driven economy’. However, there is increasing concern that this ambitious target 
will not be met. In fact, President Barroso stated recently that ‘We need to get Europe back to 
work’ (press conference in Brussels, September 2005). Similar statements have been made by 
former President Prodi. Since knowledge, and therefore science, has been recognized as the 
prime  driving  force  behind  the  possible  success  of  the  EU,  it  is  of  interest  to  examine  the 
current position of biomedical sciences - and thus bioethics - compared with that of the USA. 
The EU and USA are the two leaders in these disciplines, so such a comparison could provide 
useful information on the current trends at the midpoint of the Lisbon strategy. 

Recently,  two  articles  which  address  this  problem  in  some  detail  were  published.  Lennart 
Philipson, who has been a scientific manager on both continents, compared research funding, 
activity,  and  creativity  in  the  EU  and  the  USA  (1).  Research  funding  in  Europe  is  roughly 
10%  of  that  in  the  US,  with  comparable  proportions  of  scientists  in  their  populations. 
Moreover, private and industry donations are much higher in  the US than elsewhere. These 
differences are also visible when the data are expressed as percentages of the respective gross 
domestic products (GDP): in the US, 2.7% of GDP is allocated to research and development, 
while in the EU it is 1.93%. These figures are from before the admission of new members in 
2004,  whose  spending  is  even  lower  (in  Poland,  for  example,  0.75%).  Thus  it  could  be 
expected  that,  as  a  result  of  EU  enlargement,  this  gap  has  even  widened.  However,  when 
scientific  creativity  was  compared  (Nobel  prizes,  citation  indices,  impact  factors),  the  data 
suggested that science has expanded in Europe, although it is probably still lagging behind the 
USA. 

Soteriades and Falagas recently examined biomedical research output during the past 10 years 
(1994-2004),  retrieving  the  necessary  data  from  the  databases  of  the  Institute  for  Scientific 
Information.  Their  search  focused  on  biology  and  biochemistry,  clinical  medicine, 
immunology, microbiology, molecular biology, neuroscience, psychiatry and psychology, and 
pharmacology. Altogether, almost 1.5 million articles published by EU and American authors 
were  included.  The  research  productivity  of  the  EU  (adjusted  for  population)  was 
approximately  70%  of  the  US  productivity.  However,  inclusion  of  the  ten  new  members  in 
2004  caused  a  marked  decline  in  that  productivity  (to  60%).  What  is  more,  the  predicted 
productivity following a possible further enlargement of the EU (Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania, 
and Turkey) is 55%. Interestingly, after adjustment for funding, it could be expected that the 
number  of  published  articles  should  even  exceed  the  output  in  the  US,  even  though  this 
calculation includes the productivity of the four candidate countries listed above (2). 

Given the leading position of American biomedical science, one would expect greater activity 
there in bioethics, as progress in biomedicine necessitates addressing the consequential ethical 
issues (e.g. stem cell research, the ethics of clinical research, which is much more widespread 

41

 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

in the US than in the EU, industry support of academic medicine and the resulting problems 
of conflict of interest, etc.). Therefore, it would be of interest to compare the published output 
in the field of bioethics (or medical ethics) in the EU and the USA. 

I  have  retrieved  articles  from  three  international  journals:  Bioethics,  Journal  of  Medical 
Ethics (JME) and Ethics & Medicine. All of them are international in scope with international 
editorial  boards  representing  both  the  EU  countries  and  the  USA.  JME  describes  itself  as  a 
leading  international  journal  covering  the  whole  field  of  medical  ethics,  the  highest  ranked 
journal globally in medical ethics (IF = 1.35). Over the past five years, the mean ratio of EU-
derived to US-derived articles in the journal was 3.2:1 (adjusted for population). In addition, 
among the top ten most read articles, the EU/US ratio was 2:1. By contrast, in the same period 
of time the number of American items in Bioethics (IF = 0.83) exceeded the EU output by a 
factor of almost two (1.96:1). A similar trend was observed when the 100 most recent articles 
published over the past 10 years in Ethics & Medicine were examined. The journal states that 
‘for  two  decades  (it)  has  offered  guidance  to  a  perplexed  world  from  the  Judeo-Christian 
worldview  and  its  Hippocratic  medical  vision’  and  ‘gained  international  prominence  and 
moved  to  address  the  developing  bioethics  agenda  from  the  perspective  of  Hippocratic 
tradition’. Its adjusted US/EU ratio was 2.67:1, with only one article from a new EU Member 
Sate.  The  Lancet  is  a  leading  international  biomedical  journal  with  a  high  emphasis  on 
problems relevant for bioethics. Therefore it was of interest to examine the balance between 
the  EU  versus  American  publications  in  bioethics  in  this  journal.  The  search  of  all  Lancet 
journals  for  the  term  ‘bioethics’  yielded  255  positions;  interestingly,  the  US/EU  ratio  when 
full articles were compared was identical to that for Bioethics (1.96:1).  

It should be emphasized that my search in all three journals revealed only a few articles from 
the ten countries that joined the EU in 2004. In fact, their contribution to articles published in 
Journal  of  Medical  Ethics  and  Bioethics  was  approx.  0.6%  and  1%  in  Ethics  &  Medicine 
(none were published in The Lancet). 

Finally,  I  retrieved  records  from  Pubmed-covered  literature  in  response  to  the  term 
‘bioethics’. Of the 100 most recent articles in this field, the US/EU ratio was 3.2:1. Among 
them  were three articles from the newly admitted states; however, only one of them was in 
English.  A  similar  search  for  the  term  ‘medical  ethics’  yielded  an  adjusted  US/EU  ratio  of 
1.5:1 (with only 2 articles, neither of them in English, from newly admitted states).  

Obviously,  the  results  of  my  analysis  are  very  preliminary  and  restricted,  including  only 
limited  data,  so  drawing  definite  conclusions  would  be  premature.  On  one  hand,  the  data 
derived from a highly specialized journal of medical ethics would suggest that the output in 
the  EU  is  even  higher  than  that  of  the  US.  However,  it  has  been  noted  that  although  some 
peer-reviewed  bioethics  journals  present  themselves  as  international  in  scope,  they  remain 
mainly European or American (3). This provision seems to apply to JME. In contrast, when 
the  data  from  Pubmed  and  the  highest  ranking  journal  (The  Lancet)  were  adjusted  for 
population,  the  published  output  of  the  US  was  apparently  approximately  twice  that  of  the 
EU. In addition, there was a rather very low contribution from the ten countries that recently 
joined the EU (May 2004). In this sense, the situation of these countries may be similar to that 
of developing countries, as pointed out by Borry et al. (3).  

Recently, these authors examined whether there is any under-representation of contributions 
from the developing world in this field. When the authors retrieved research articles from nine 
peer-reviewed,  international  journals  (Bioethics,  The  Cambridge  Quarterly  of  Healthcare 
Ethics, The Hastings Center Report, The Journal of Clinical Ethics, The Journal of Medical 
Ethics,  The  Kennedy  Institute  of  Ethics  Journal,  Nursing  Ethics,  Christian  Bioethics,  and 
Theoretical  Medicine  and  Bioethics),  96%  of  all  articles  were  submitted  by  authors  from 

42

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

high-income economies, while only 4% were from developing economies. Thus, economics 
clearly  affects  publishing  in  bioethics.  In  the  case  of  the  newly  admitted  EU  countries,  the 
lower  output  of  bioethical  articles  is  also  caused  by  the  decades  of  totalitarian  domination, 
when sending scientific papers abroad was not always welcomed (and during martial law in 
Poland subject to official censorship). While it is clear that the latest EU enlargement resulted 
in a dilution of biomedical and bioethical published output, this effect should be transient. In 
fact, the economic growth of the countries in this region suggests that lower science funding - 
a major cause of lower EU productivity - will hopefully be increased. In addition, there are 
deep  and  excellent  traditions  of  medical  ethics  and  bioethics  in  this  region,  especially  in 
Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic, which should be revived and enhanced. This could 
be accomplished by several actions, such as: 

−  Allocating more funds for bioethics at the EU level - an obvious condition; 

−  Organizing international bioethics conferences addressing the most important current 

issues related to advances in biomedicine - see below; 

−  Changes  in  university  curricula  to  include  bioethics  in  the  teaching  programmes, 
modifying existing programmes, and adjusting them to current developments (e.g. in 
clinical  research  and  related  problems,  such  as  the  current  ethical  requirements  in 
medical research, placebo, conflict of interest, etc.); 

−  Establishing  fellowships  in  bioethics  fostering  international  exchange  of  young 

scientists interested in this field; and, 

−  Establishing networks of excellence in bioethics which could allow for more intensive 

interaction and cooperation between the Western and Eastern parts of the EU. 

In fact, in the past ten years, Warsaw has already become a centre of such events, in that we 
have organized six major conferences: 

Scientific integrity – 1995 
http://www.iitd.pan.wroc.pl/events/integrity.html  
Scientific misconduct: an international perspective – 1998 
http://www.iitd.pan.wroc.pl/events/misconduct.html  
Conflict of interest and its significance in science and medicine – 2002 
http://www.iitd.pan.wroc.pl/events/coi.html  
Placebo: its action and place in health research today – 2003 
http://www.iitd.pan.wroc.pl/events/placebo.html  
The ethics of intellectual property rights and patents - 2004 
http://www.iitd.pan.wroc.pl/events/patents.html  
The responsible conduct of research - 2005 
http://www.iitd.pan.wroc.pl/events/RCR.html 

In 2006, we are planning the next event: 

The Ethics of Research in Emergency Medicine - 2006 
http://www.iitd.pan.wroc.pl/events/EmergMed.html  

Each of these conferences was associated with the publication of a special issue of Science & 
Engineering Ethics. 

43

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

This confirms the assumption that there is a significant potential for creativity among the ten 
new  EU  members  and  that  more  investment  in  bioethics  would  be  rewarded  with  further 
increases  in  publishing,  conferences,  and  teaching,  as  well  as  in  attracting  young  scientists 
and physicians to this rapidly expanding field. Therefore, closing the existing EU/US gap is a 
realistic  venture  which  requires  coordinated  actions,  including  decisions  to  be  taken  in 
Brussels and adequate response from the governments and responsible institutions of the EU 
Member Sates. 

(1). Philipson L. Medical Research Activities, Funding, and Creativity in Europe. Comparison with research in 
the United States. JAMA 2005, 294, 1394-1398. 

(2). Soteriades ES, Falagas ME. Comparison of amount of biomedical research originating from the European 
Union and the United States. Br Med J 2005, 331, 192-194. 

(3).  Borry  P,  Schotsmans  P,  Dierickx  K.  Developing  countries  and  bioethical  research.  New  Eng  J  Med 
2005,353,852-853. 

Andrzej Gorski 

Further Information 

Professor Andrzej Gorski 
Chair, Bioethics Commission, Ministry of Health 
Department of Science and Higher Education 

Address 
ul. Miodowa 15 
PL 00-952 Warszawa 
Tel.: +22 634-94-00, 634-94-65, 831-15-53 
Fax: +22 634-9465 
Email: agorski@ikp.pl 
           dep-nk@mz.gov.pl 

Website 

WWW.kb.mz.gov.pl 

44

 
                            
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

► News from POLAND 

the Committee of Medical Ethics of the 

Supreme Medical Council of the Polish 

Chamber of Physicians and Dentists 

Report on the activities of the Committee of Medical Ethics of the Supreme 

Medical Council of the Polish Chamber of Physicians and Dentists 

during the 2002-2005 term of office 

The  current  term  of  office  of  the  Supreme  Medical  Council  and  the  Committee  of  Medical 
Ethics of the Polish Chamber of Physicians and Dentists (‘the Committee’) came to an end in 
December 2005. At the beginning of January 2006 new authorities of the Chamber and a new 
Committee were elected. Therefore, this report provides a brief review of the activities of the 
Committee during its 2002-2005 term of office. 

In summary, during the years 2002-2005, the Committee amended the Polish Code of Medical 
Ethics; 
it  organised  a  conference  entitled  Ethical  Questions  Concerning  Prenatal 
Biotechonology in Warsaw and held a debate dedicated to this matter; published articles on 
bioethics; issued its opinion on legislative projects concerning bioethical problems in Poland 
and  Europe;  and  also  worked  on  some  specific  ethical  and  deontological  problems. 
Moreover,  the  Committee  issued  its  opinion  on  some  documents  for  the  Polish  Parliament. 
The Committee co-operated with the EU’s EGE (European Group on Ethics in Science and 
New  Technologies),  and  with  COMETH  (the  European  Conference  of  National  Ethics 
Committees of the Council of Europe). 

The amendment of the Polish Code of Medical Ethics 

The  VIth  National  Meeting  of  Physicians  held  on  19  December  2001  adopted  resolution 
number 14 on the need to amend the Code of Medical Ethics, justifying this with the fact that 
the  rapid  development  of  biotechnology  creates  new  ethical  problems.  In  execution  of 
resolution number 14, the Committee published consecutive versions of the Draft Code three 
times on the basis of proposals that had been received. The public debate on the amendment 
continued for one year and all those concerned had an opportunity to submit their proposals 
and to participate in the discussion. The final draft was presented to the VIIth Extraordinary 
National Meeting of Physicians in Torun, on 19 September 2003. The process of amendment 
was successful and it can be regarded as a success of the Polish physicians and dentists. The 
Holy Father John Paul II sent a telegram to the Delegates.  

Co-operation with the EGE 

On 19 April 2004, the Chairman of the Committee was invited to co-operate with the EGE. 
The  Chairman  visited  Brussels  and  met  Professor  Göran  Herméren,  the  Chairman  of  EGE, 
providing detailed information on the Committee’s work and accepting further co-operation – 
particularly, publications in the EGE’s Newsletter Ethically Speaking. 

45

 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Co-operation with COMETH 

The Chairman of the Committee has attended plenary sessions of the European Conference of 
the  National  Ethics  Committees  of  the  Council  of  Europe  (COMETH)  since  the  Polish 
Chamber of Physicians and Dentists was established. In the Committee’s first term of office, 
the  Committee  was  represented  by  Professor  Zbigniew  Chłap.  Since  1994  it  has  been 
represented  by  Dr  Jerzy  Umiastowski.  In  the  current  term  of  office,  the  Chairman  of  the 
Committee attended a session entitled Bioethics Education and Biobanks in Strasbourg, on 1 
and  2 December  2003.  The  Chairman  was  not  able  to  attend  the  next  session  held  in 
Dubrovnik on 25-26 April 2005 due to unexpected health complications. 

The Chairman of the Committee co-operated with the Polish Ministry of Justice in the field of 
the Ministry’s contacts with COMETH. 

Conference Ethical Questions on Prenatal Biotechnology 

This conference was organised by the Committee in the headquarters of the Supreme Medical 
Council in Warsaw, on 25 November 2004. The purpose of the conference was to formulate 
questions and to initiate a debate on prenatal biotechnology, including artificial procreation in 
particular.  There  is  no  provision  concerning  ethical  problems  of  in  vitro  fertilisation  in  the 
Code of Medical Ethics, therefore we invited the Polish Gynaecological Society to attend the 
conference.  Numerous  important  problems  were  discussed  during  the  conference  and 
essential  ethical  questions  were  formulated.  The  conference  materials were  published  in  the 
Gazeta  Lekarska  magazine,  starting  from  issues  number 2-  2005.  Besides,  ethical  questions 
formulated  during  the  conference  were  published  in  Ethically  Speaking  number 5- 
August 2005,  and  they  will  be  made  available  to  members  of  the  Parliament  with  regard  to 
legal loopholes in this field in Poland. 

A  representative  of  the  Committee  attended  a  conference  entitled  The  European  Code  of 
Medical  Ethics  –  Utopia  or  Reality  held  in  San  Remo  on  15  and  16 April  2005.  This 
conference  was  organised  by  the  Italian  Federation  of  Medical  and  Deontological  Councils 
(FNOMCEO)  and  the  Medical  and  Deontological  Council  of  the  Province  of  Imperia.  The 
conference  was  held  under  the  auspices  of  the  President  of  the  Republic  of  Italy  among 
others.  Poland  was  represented  by  Professor  Zbigniew  Chłap,  who  made  a  speech  entitled 
Comments on the Rules of the Polish Code of Medical Ethics with Reference to the Problems 
of  the  San  Remo  Conference.  The  conference  organisers  presented  a  draft  of  the  San  Remo 
Charter to be discussed in the European Union Member Sates. A summary of the conference 
report was published in Gazeta Lekarska (N° 6/2005). 

Other activities of the Committee during the term of office 2002-2005 

Amendment of the Code of Medical Ethics 

On 14 December 2001, the VIth National Meeting of Physicians adopted resolution N° 14 on 
appointing a commission to amend the Code of Medical Ethics. 

On 9 February 2002, the Committee of Medical Ethics was appointed for the 2002-2005 term 
of office, on the basis of resolution N° 9/02/IV of the Supreme Medical Council. 

On  16  September  2002,  the  Committee  of  Medical  Ethics  of  the  Polish  Chamber  of 
Physicians and Dentists appointed its team for the Code of Medical Ethics amendment. The 
Committee invited all Polish physicians and doctors’ organisations to submit their proposals 
of amendments to the Code of Medical Ethics. 

46

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

On  8  January  2003  the  Committee  carried  out  a  preliminary  analysis  of  the  proposed 
amendments of the Code. 

On 31 January 2003, during the first working meeting of the Team for the Code of Medical 
Ethics amendment, the first working draft of the amendment was elaborated. 

On 14 February 2003, the Committee accepted the first draft of the amendment prepared by 
the Team for the Code of Medical Ethics amendment. 

On 21 February 2003, the Committee presented the draft to the Supreme Medical Council. 

April  2003  –  the  draft  Code  of  Medical  Ethics  was  presented  in  the  April  issue  of  Gazeta 
Lekarska  periodical,  where  all  those  concerned,  including  associations  and  organisations  of 
physicians were addressed to submit their further comments and proposals of amendments by 
30 April 2003. 

On  27  May  2003,  the  Team  for  Code  amendment  met  again  to  prepare  the  next  draft 
amendment. 

On 25 June 2003 a joint meeting of the Team for Code Amendment and the Supreme Medical 
Council’s Committee of Medical Ethics was held and a uniform text of the draft was prepared 
with new proposals of amendments covered. 

On 27 June 2003, the up-to-date draft was presented at the meeting of the Supreme Medical 
Council. The Supreme Medical Council took the approving cognizance of the draft Code. 

The draft code was published in the July (7) issue of Gazeta Lekarska, with an address to all 
those concerned to submit their further comments and proposals by the end of July. 

On 6 August  2003,  members of  the Team for the Code of Medical Ethics amendment were 
invited  to  attend  the  meeting  of  the  Supreme  Medical  Council.  Analyses  and  opinions 
received  by  the  Team  were  presented.  The  Supreme  Medical  Council  took  its  approving 
cognizance of the uniform text of the amended Code and recommended publication of the text 
in materials for delegates to the VIIth Extraordinary Meeting of Polish Physicians to be held in 
Torun on 19-20 September 2003.  

On  19  September  2003  a  telegram  was  received  from  the  Holy  Father,  John  Paul  II 
concerning 
the 
the  amendment  of 
VIIth Extraordinary Meeting of Polish Physicians. 

the  Polish  Code  of  Medical  Ethics  during 

Other significant opinions and standpoints of the Committee 

Beside  the  Code  amendment  related  activities  listed  above,  the  Committee  presented  its 
standpoint and issued its statements concerning – among others – the following issues:  

−  A draft statement of 23 January 2003 on the World Health Day; 

−  Numerous  opinions  concerning  Recommendations  of  the  Council  of  Europe’s 

Parliamentary Assembly on the Human Genome; 

−  An opinion concerning the Draft Statement on Sick Professional Physicians; 

−  An opinion entitled On Detailed Requirements Concerning Good Clinical Practice; 

47

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

−  An opinion concerning the media campaign on physicians in Poland; 

−  An opinion concerning transsexualism; 

−  An opinion on the Polish Republic’s standpoint concerning respect for human life; 

−  An  opinion  concerning  the  need  to  establish  a  National  Council  for  Bioethics  in 

Poland; 

−  A standpoint on using physicians’ images for commercial purposes. 

Moreover, the Committee issued a number of opinions concerning other issues in the field of 
medical ethics and bioethics. 

the  plenary  session  of  COMETH 

Before 
the 
comprehensive Questionnaire on the Functioning of National Ethics Committees which was 
thereafter published in COMETH material. 

the  Committee  submitted 

in  2003, 

During  the  reporting  period,  nine  ‘plenary’  sessions  of  the  Supreme  Medical  Council’s 
Committee  of  Medical  Ethics  were  held  and  numerous  meetings  of  working  groups  took 
place. 

The  Committee  published  information  about  its  activities  in  such  medical  periodicals  as 
Gazeta  Lekarska,  Ethos  quarterly,  Medycyna  Praktyczna  monthly,  Medycyna  Praktyczna 
Położnictwo i Ginekologia and other periodicals. Moreover, the Chairman of the Committee 
released information to TV and radio. 

Jerzy Umiastowski 

Further Information 

Jerzy Umiastowski 
Chairman of the Committee of Medical Ethics of the Polish Supreme 
Council of the Polish Chamber of Physicians and Dentists 
Email: j.umiastowski@hipokrates.org 

Website 

WWW.nil.org.pl 

48

 
 
                                          
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

► News from SERBIA and MONTENEGRO 

the Christian Cultural Centre, 

Centres for Bioethics  

The Centre for Bioethics (CCC-BC) was established under the aegis of the Christian Cultural 
Centre in Belgrade on 10 February 2005. 

First  inaugurated  in  2001,  as  a  non-government  organisation,  the  Christian  Cultural  Centre 
(CCC)  includes  several  other  Centres:  The  Centre  for  Christian  Studies,  The  Centre  for 
Ecumenism,  the  Media  Centre,  the  Business  Centre,  and  the  Centre  for  Peace  and  Social 
Issues. 

Following a long period of keen interest in bioethics among the CCC members and friends, 
we recognised a deep wish to become active in this particular domain and provide a sincere 
contribution according to the ethical principles based on the Eastern Orthodox Christianity, as 
the main faith amongst us. 

The  Centre  for  Bioethics  (CCC-BC)  wants  to  provide  its  contribution  by  taking  part  in  the 
analysis of at actual bioethics problems, providing help in different projects in research work, 
editorial  engagement,  publicity  and  media  presentation,  also  through  help  in  organising 
dialogues or seminars. 

According to the CCC Statute, The Director of CCC-BC, is elected as an expert person by the 
CCC  Council  on  the  proposal  of  the  President  of  CCC.  The  Director  chooses  the  members 
according to their personal qualities and preferences in science and faith. 

Further Information 

Ms Vesna Vujovic 

Address 
Christian Cultural Centre (CCC) 
Centres for Bioethics (CCC-BC) 
Kraljice Natalije 45 
CS-11000 Beograd 
Tel: +381 11 656 460 
Fax: +381 11 361 91 23 
Email: bioetika@ccc.org.yu 

Website 

WWW.ccc.org.yu 

49

 
 
 
 
                      
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

► News from SWITZERLAND 

the Swiss Ethics Committee 

on Non-Human Gene Technology (ECNH) 

The COMMITTEE 

Legal basis and mandate 

The  ECNH  was  commissioned  by  the  Federal  Council  by  the  decree  of  27 April  1998  to 
monitor and evaluate developments and applications in the field of non-human biotechnology 
and gene technology from an ethical perspective. As such, its mandate covers all applications 
of biotechnology and gene technology on animals, plants and other organisms and the effects 
of  such  applications  on  human  beings  and  the  environment.  The  ECNH  issues  statements 
regarding forthcoming legislation, projects and concrete permit applications of exemplary or 
fundamental  relevance.  The  advice  on  enforcement  covers  projects  aimed  at  the  creation, 
release  and  commercialisation  of  genetically  modified  as  well  as  pathogenic  organisms. 
However,  the  ECNH  also  independently  addresses  issues  in  the  field  of  non-human 
biotechnology  with  a  view  to  assessing  the  ethical  aspects  of  future  legislation  and  drafting 
recommendations. 

The ECNH mandate comprises three main tasks: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

It advises the Federal Council and the offices which report to it on ethical matters in 
the preparation of laws on non-human biotechnology, and makes recommendations on 
future legislation; 

It  advises  the  federal  and  cantonal  authorities  on  the  enforcement  of  federal 
regulations; 

It  informs  the  public  about  the  questions  and  topics  it  addresses,  and  promotes 
dialogue on the benefits and risks of the use of biotechnology. 

Since 21 March 2003 the ECNH is enshrined under the new Gene Technology Law (in force 
since 1 January 2004) as a permanent advisory committee. The decree by the Federal Council 
will soon be replaced by an ECNH-ordinance. 

Statements issued by the ECNH are of an advisory nature and are drawn up for submission to 
the  federal  office  responsible  for  the  relevant  legislative  project  or  permit  application.  As  a 
rule,  the  statements  are  also  communicated  to  the  public,  with  the  exception  of  approval 
procedures  which  are  still  in  progress  or  advisory  statements  within  the  framework  of  an 
internal administrative procedure based on confidential documents. 

ECNH  statements  are  not  necessarily  unanimous,  and  minority  opinions  are  registered  as 
such. The main focus of statements of position is on the argumentation. The aim of internal 
Committee  discussions  is  to  determine  where  and,  in  particular,  why  opinions  differ. 
Experience has shown that the significance of the arguments is normally undisputed, and the 

50

 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

differences generally arise in the evaluation of the various arguments. Despite their different 
ethical standpoints, however, members often arrive at consensus on concrete issues. 

Composition of the Committee 

The  ECNH  comprises  a  maximum  of  12  members  representing  different  professions  and 
disciplines.  At  least  half  of  these  members  must  be  professionals  in  the  fields  of  ethics, 
philosophy or theology. Scientific ethics covers a multiplicity of different approaches which 
produce a wide variety of ways of addressing issues on non-human biotechnology. Hence, not 
interest groups but these disparate ethical approaches must be equally represented within the 
Committee  in  order  to  ensure  a  balanced  analysis  of  the  various  standpoints,  criteria  and 
standards.  

Currently,  7  members  represent  the  fields  of  philosophical  and  theological  ethics,  3  the 
natural sciences, 1 medicine and 1 jurisprudence. The chair of the Committee is Klaus Peter 
Rippe,  philosopher  in  Zurich.  The  chair  and  the  members  are  appointed  by  the  Federal 
Council ad personam for a four-year period with the possibility of re-election. The third term 
of office lasts until the end of 2007. 

The ECNH regularly convenes on 8-10 occasions for full-day regular meetings. In addition, it 
holds around one public meeting per year. 

Secretariat 

The  secretariat  is  responsible  for  preparing  Committee  meetings,  drafting  statements  of 
position and supporting the Committee Chair and members scientifically and administratively 
in  the  performance  of  their  tasks.  It  organizes  ECNH  publicity  activities  and  maintains 
contacts with agencies and organizations in Switzerland and abroad which are active in fields 
related to biotechnology and non-human gene technology. 

The  secretariat  is  run  by  Ariane  Willemsen.  It  reports  to  the  chair  of  the  Committee.  For 
administrative purposes the Committee’s secretariat is  attached  to the Biotechnology unit at 
the Federal Office for Environment. 

Recently and currently discussed issues 

ACTIVITIES 

The  complete  list  of  publications  and  position  statements  of  the  ECNH  can  be  downloaded 
from its website www.ekah.ch or requested at the secretariat. 

Gene Technology and Developing Countries  

While  supporters  of  green  gene  technology  welcome  its  promotion  as  a  means  of  fighting 
hunger in developing and newly industrialized countries, detractors warn against the negative 
consequences  of  this  technology  in  such  countries.  Both  camps  regard  themselves  as 
advocates of people in the ‘South’. To assess the claims of both sides the ECNH discussed the 
effects of this technology from an ethical point of view. 

Switzerland  has  entered  diverse  international  obligations  vis-à-vis  countries  in  the  South. 
These  agreements  guarantee  the  citizens  of  these  countries  a  certain  degree  of  protection. 
From  an  ethical  standpoint,  such  obligations  are  a  commitment  to  justice.  All  technological 

51

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

applications must therefore be examined from the standpoint of justice. A key factor in this 
context is the manner in which the use of such technologies impacts the extent to which the 
following four fundamental rights are upheld: 

−  Food security. The basic right to life and personal integrity imply a moral right to food, 

i.e. access to an adequate, healthy diet; 

−  Food sovereignty. The principle of human dignity implies the right to self-determination 
(autonomy). This includes the concept of food sovereignty on the level of the individual as 
well as on a collective level, i.e. the right of countries to decide, on their own, how they 
wish  to  govern  trade  in  agricultural  products  and  to  feed  themselves  in  accordance  with 
their own traditions and cultures; 

−  Protection  of  biodiversity.  The  concept  of  justice  also  means  ensuring  that  future 
generations enjoy the same life opportunities as are currently in place. To this end there is 
a  moral  obligation  to  provide  a  sustainable  lifestyle.  The  protection  of  biodiversity 
constitutes an integral part of this obligation; 

−  Social peace. The right to social peace as an essential requirement for food security, food 

sovereignty and the long-term securing of natural resources. 

The  majority  of  ECNH-members  doubt  that  the  potential  of  green  gene  technology  can  be 
assessed comprehensively today. It concludes that not only this path of technology should be 
pursued.  Other  possible  solutions  for  the  urgent  problems  in  these  countries  should  be 
promoted  equally.  The  ECNH  demands  to  intensify  as  well  as  to  improve  coordination  of 
public  research,  particularly  of  risk  research,  which  includes  the  ecological,  social  and 
economic  context.  It  stresses  the  importance  to  also  promote  other  than  gene  technological 
research,  especially  since  other  technologies  have  proven  more  efficient  and  have  delivered 
better results with respect to solving the problems of food shortages. To support only one type 
of  technological  research  is  considered  to  be  ethically  unacceptable  by  the  ECNH.  The 
developing  countries  should  additionally  be  supported  to  strengthen  their  sovereignty  with 
regard to assessment and approval procedures of new technologies. Furthermore, all attempts 
to guarantee free exchange  of genetic resources for breeding and research should be upheld 
with regard to securing food security worldwide. 

Patenting of biotechnological inventions 

The ECNH has been examining the ethical aspects of patenting in the field of biotechnology 
ever since the Swiss Institute for Intellectual Property submitted an initial internal draft on the 
revision of the patent law in 1999. The first stage of this examination focused on patents on 
animals and plants and the implications of such patents. At the second stage the patentability 
of genes was addressed. 

The  members  of  the  ECNH  unanimously  agree  that  intellectual  efforts  in  the  field  of 
biotechnology  are  worthy  of  protection.  The  rationale  behind  this  standpoint  is  the  ethical 
and, in the ECNH’s opinion, justifiable objective of the patent law to promote research in the 
interests of all members of society and to achieve a balance of interests.  

Moreover,  the  members  unanimously  agree  that  the  difference  between  a  discovery  and  an 
invention is relevant for normative and ethical reasons and is of major importance. While this 
distinction is enshrined under law, in practice it appears to become increasingly blurred.  

52

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Genes  are,  according  to  the  opinion  of  the  ECNH,  even  if  they  are  isolated,  not  inventions. 
Even if they were considered as inventions, they lack other criteria in order to be patentable 
(lack  of  novelty,  insufficient  level  of  inventions,  no  commercial  application).  In  case  that 
nevertheless the political intention is to allow the patenting of genes, the ECNH recommends 
to protect such patents only to an extent as limited, concrete and precise as possible. The core 
of  an  invention  is  the  technical  use.  Since  genes  are  multifunctional  it  follows  that  gene 
patents are only to be allowed on limited claims for the production and use of gene sequences 
and  proteins  with  precisely  declared  functions.  An  absolute  protection  of  a  gene  or  gene 
sequence is not justified from an ethical point of view. 

Additional  important  factors  for  the  ECNH  are  the  enshrinement  and  assurance  of  farmers’ 
and  breeders’  privileges.  These  privileges  are  founded  on  ethical  grounds  and  are  based  on 
considerations of justice. In the opinion of the ECNH, the traditional right of passing on small 
quantities  of  seeds  at  no  charge  must  also  be  included  in  farmers’  privileges.  An  additional 
key  element  of  the  law  on  patents  is  the  beneficial  impact  which  the  patent  system  has  on 
research. To ensure this positive effect, the ECNH recommends a broad interpretation of the 
research  privilege,  particularly  in  view  of  the  fact  that  researchers  were  increasingly 
criticizing the obstacles which the law on patents posed to research. 

Research on primates 

Currently  the  ECNH  is  discussing  the  ethical  implications  of  research  on  primates.  The 
general  discussion  has  been  initiated  by  an  application  to  study  the  long-term  effect  of 
deprivation on young primates to develop a primate model for depression. If such a study is 
successfully  validated,  it  could  pave  the  way  for  additional  studies  to  enable  a  better 
understanding of depression. Additionally, it could also increase the number of primates used 
for research. In co-operation with the Swiss Committee on Animal Experiments, the ECNH 
sets up a working group to discuss not only the specific question of the use of primate models 
in depression research, but the permissibility of experiments involving primates in general. 

Outlook 

The  ECNH  will  continue  its  discussion  on  research  on  primates  with  the  intention  of 
publishing  a  statement.  Also  launched  is  a  project  to  evaluate  the  ethical  aspects  of 
nanobiotechnology. Furthermore, the committee will keep on being involved in the discussion 
on the revision of the patent law. 

53

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Further Information 

Ms Ariane Willemsen 
Executive Secretary ECNH 
Tel: +41 (0)31 323 83 83 
Email: Ariane.Willemsen@buwal.admin.ch 

Address 
Swiss Ethics Committee on Non-Human Gene Therapy 
c/o Swiss Federal Office for Environment 
SW-3003 Berne 
Fax: +41 (0)31 – 323 83 83 
Email: ekah@buwal.admin.ch 

Website 

WWW.ekah.ch 

► News from SWITZERLAND 

the Swiss National Advisory Commission 

on Biomedical Ethics (SNACOBE/NEK-CNE) 

Legal basis and mandate 

The  NEK-CNE  is  appointed  by  the  Federal  Council  (i.e.  the  executive  government  of 
Switzerland, a college of seven members covering all major political parties of the country) 
and has an advisory function to the parliament, the federal government and to the Cantons in 
all  fields  of  human  medicine.  The  mandate  of  the  NEK-CNE  is  to  identify  and  highlight 
ethical  dilemmas  emerging  from  developments  in  medicine  and  the  biomedical  sciences,  to 
make these issues amenable to debate, to provide guidance and to formulate opinions pointing 
the way to possible solutions. 

The  legal  basis  for  the  NEK-CNE  is  provided  by  Art.  28  of  the  Law  on  Reproductive 
Medicine of 18 December 1998 and the Ordinance on the National Advisory Commission on 
Biomedical Ethics of 4 December 2000. In carrying out its tasks, and especially in forming its 
opinions, the NEK-CNE is obliged to remain independent of political, industrial and scientific 
interests. 

The mandate conferred on the NEK-CNE (in accordance with Article 28 of the Reproductive 
Medicine Law and the NEK-CNE Ordinance) requires it to clarify the ethical background of 
major decisions concerning human medicine through a process of differentiated preliminary 
work leading to specific recommendations. It should also draw public attention to new ethical 
issues  that  may  emerge  due  to  new  developments  in  medicine.  The  work  done  by  the 
Commission is of a consultative nature. It does not decide on research projects. This task is 
fulfilled by Cantonal ethics committees. The NEK-CNE identifies and tackles ethical issues 
with a broader societal dimension and seeks to contribute a sound and sustainable basis to the 

54

 
                                 
  
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

decisions  and  rules  at  different  levels  of  the  society  and  of  the  institutions  involved  in 
medicine. 

The  rapid  developments  that  are  taking  place  in  biomedical  research  and  practice  and  the 
changing social and cultural context repeatedly raise new and sometimes urgent questions. It 
is  not  generally  possible  to  provide  an  adequate  response  to  these  questions  from  the 
standpoint of a single discipline. They  demand an  interdisciplinary  and culturally pluralistic 
approach which is open to public scrutiny and which takes the different ethical concerns into 
account. 

The  recommendations  made  by  the  NEK-CNE  on  regulating  research  with  embryonic  stem 
cells and the public debate that has led to the adoption of a Stem Cell Research Law by public 
voting in November 2004 was the first topic dealt with by the NEK-CNE after it was set up in 
2001.  This  advisory  function  in  the  political  arena,  in  addition,  naturally,  to  opinions  on  a 
number  of  other  topics,  helped  to  define  the  Commission’s  role  as  an  independent  voice 
within the political process. 

Since 2001 it has issued nine major recommendations: 

1/2001 

Research involving imported embryonic stem cells; 

2/2002 

First-trimester abortion; 

3/2002 

Research involving embryonic stem cells; 

4/2003 

Reproductive human cloning; 

5/2003 

Living-donor partial liver transplantation: the question of financing; 

6/2003 

On the regulation of living donation in the transplantation law; 

7/2004 

On the sterilization of individuals incapable of making decisions; 

8/2005  Medical care is an obligation; 

9/2005 

Assisted suicide. 

Last year most of the Commission’s time was spent on work relating to end-of-life decisions. 
The  focus  was  especially  on  assisted  suicide  (see  below).  The  results  are  available  to  the 
public in the form of an extensive opinion and have been acknowledged by the authorities and 
in Parliament. 

Composition of the Commission 

The  commission  was  assembled  on  an  interdisciplinary  basis  to  represent  all  sections  of 
society.  Its  members  are  all  appointed  as  experts  ad  personam,  not  to  represent  their 
institutions  or  faith.  According  to  the  Ordinance,  the  Commission  may  comprise  18  to  25 
members; it currently consists of 23 members (11 women and 12 men). Around one third of 
them  have  expertise  in  ethics,  one  third  in  medicine  and  nursing,  and  one  third  in  biology, 
law,  psychology  and  patient  organizations.  The  various  language  regions  are  represented  as 
follows:  15  members  from  German-speaking,  6  from  French-speaking  and  2  from  Italian-
speaking Switzerland. Its second term of office, which lasts until the 47th legislative period, 
will be concluded at the end of 2007. 

Chair: Christoph Rehmann-Sutter 

Members:  Christiane  Augsburger,  Ruth  Ella  Baumann-Hölzle,  Annette  Boehler,  Alberto 
Bondolfi,  Jean-Claude  Chevrolet,  Kurt  Ebeneter-Fässler,  Johannes  Fischer,  Carlo  Foppa, 

55

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Sabina  Gallati,  Olivier  Guillod,  Daniel  Hell,  Sylvia  Huber,  Silvia  Käppeli,  Bertrand  Kiefer, 
Margrit  Leuthold,  Jean  Martin,  Alexandre  Mauron,  Carola  Meier-Seethaler,  Hansjakob 
Müller, Judit Lilla Pók Lundquist, Franziska Probst, Brigitte Weisshaupt 

The Commission normally holds 8 plenary meetings during the year, 6 one-day and 2 two-day 
conferences.  They  are  organized  mostly  as  closed-door  meetings.  Additionally  however  it 
organizes  also  public  events,  cafés  philosophiques,  symposia  or  seminars.  Twice  a  year  the 
meetings  are  organized  in  the  capital  of  one  of  the  Swiss  Cantons,  which  provides 
opportunities to establish valuable and fruitful contacts with the Cantonal Directors of Public 
Health, specialists from the Departments of Health and the Cantonal Ethics Committees. This 
is  important  because  the  Swiss  health  care  system  is  organized  to  a  great  extent  at  the 
Cantonal level. 

Office 

The  NEK-CNE  Office  reports  to  the  Chairperson  of  the  Commission.  For  administrative 
purposes the Commission’s office is attached to the Human Research and Ethics unit at the 
Swiss  Federal  Office  of  Public  Health  (SFOPH).  The  Office  is  run  by  the  Executive 
Secretary,  Georg  Amstutz,  and  his  deputy,  Csongor  Kozma.  The  Secretariat  provides 
scientific and technical support to the Commission, maintains contacts with official agencies 
and organizations in Switzerland and abroad, and acts as a press office and public information 
centre. It performs administrative tasks and assists the Commission particularly in organizing 
the meetings, public events and in providing information for the public. 

A new publication on assisted suicide 

The Swiss legal system is exceptional in so far as it considers assistance with suicide legal if 
it  is  not  motivated  by  selfish  motives.  This  is  the  only  exception  that  could  create  a  crime. 
Assisted suicide is legal also for persons who are not terminally ill, the help is not restricted to 
medical professionals and is accessible also for persons from other countries. About 20-30% 
of  all  suicides  occurring  in  Switzerland  involve  the  assistance  from  a  right-to-die 
organization, in most cases by application of a deadly dose of a barbiturate. In most cases the 
persons requesting assisted dying suffer from a serious disease. The last recommendation of 
the NEK-CNE, published in July 2005, may be of interest also for other countries, because it 
discusses this special situation from an ethical point of view. 

The Commission views assisted suicide as a deeply ambivalent matter which presents other 
people  and,  more  particularly,  healthcare  professionals  with  conflicting  objectives.  The 
ethical  dilemmas  that  arise  in  practice  are  correspondingly  difficult.  The  Commission  feels 
that a general, theoretical approach will not supply a solution to the ethical dilemmas, and that 
a  solution  can  only  be  sought  in  the  complexity  of  the  individual  case.  Accordingly,  the 
individual who is asked to assist with a suicide must allow his or her personal conscience to 
decide.  Assisted  suicide  must  never  be  allowed  to  become  routine.  There  is  no  general  rule 
that could be applied simply in practice to justify assisted suicide. However, two fundamental 
values have been identified that apply to this personal aspect of the ethics of assisted suicide 
and to any measures taken on a legislative or institutional level, yet at the same time these two 
values  represent  two  opposing  ideas:  concern  for  the  welfare  of  a  suffering  fellow  human 
being who is in a hopeless position (in the sense of keeping her or him alive), and respect for 
his  right  of  free  self-determination.  This  includes  also  competence  for  assessing  her  or  his 
situation.  Recommendations  and  regulations  must  not  only  give  precedence  to  one  of  these 
ideas; they must also take due account of the conflict between them. 

56

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

A  frequently  asked  question  is  how  it  could  ever  be  possible  to  distinguish  the  action  of 
providing  assistance  to  suicide  by  sophisticated  technical  means  (like  optimized  medication 
combined  with  a  device  that  allows  to  trigger  an  infusion)  from  euthanasia.  According  the 
opinion of the NEK-CNE, participation in a suicide needs to be distinguished from an ethical 
point  of  view  from  killing  on  request,  even  if  the  actions  may  be  similar  in  practice.  The 
Commission believes that ethical reasons support the liberal regulation provided for in Article 
115 of the Swiss Criminal Code, which states that assistance with suicide is legal, provided 
that  it  is  not  given  for  selfish  motives.  The  Commission  does  not  recommend  changing  the 
way  this  point  is  handled  under  criminal  law,  but  feels  that  action  is  required  in  order  to 
secure a supervision of the activities of right-to-die organizations by the State. It asks for the 
introduction of new legislation that ensure compliance with proper criteria for due diligence 
in examining decisions to assist suicide by right-to-die organizations. 

The  Commission  is  also  considering  a  number  of  special  problems,  such  as  the  question  of 
whether individuals with mental disorders should be allowed assistance with suicide. It takes 
a cautious approach on this question and calls for psychiatric and psychotherapeutic treatment 
to  be  given  precedence  in  all  cases.  If  the  desire  to  commit  suicide  is  an  expression  or 
symptom of a mental illness, then no assistance should be given with suicide. This means that 
mentally ill people will generally, with rare exceptions, not be given assistance with suicide. 
Other  problems  under  consideration  include  adolescents  who  are  not  yet  legally  competent 
but  nonetheless  able  to  make  decisions  concerning  their  well-being,  assisted  suicide  in 
hospitals  and  homes,  the  implications  for  members  of  the  healthcare  professions,  and  the 
phenomenon referred to as death tourism. 

The Commission draws attention to the social risks that will arise as assisted suicide becomes 
more  common.  The  means  of  caring  for  people  who  require  nursing  or  who  are  dependent 
must be organized in such a way, and palliative medicine must be so easily available, that the 
wish to commit suicide is not encouraged. Suicide should not be viewed as an easy way out of 
the  spiralling  costs  of  providing  healthcare.  Society  has  a  responsibility  to  prevent  suicide 
which  goes  beyond  the  establishment  of  legal  limits;  it  also  includes  support  for  carers  and 
nursing staff. 

Outlook for 2006 – 2007 

Opinions concerning research on human embryos and foetuses and pre-implantation genetic 
diagnosis will be published in the following months. The Commission just began work on the 
consultation procedure for the law on research in human subjects, and it also launched a major 
project on equality and health. Its intention is also to continue work on ‘end-of-life-decisions’. 

57

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Further Information 

Mr Georg Amstutz 
Executive Secretary NEK-CNE 
Tel: +41 (31) 324 93 65 
Email: Georg.Amstutz@bag.admin.ch 

Address 
NEK-CNE 
c/o Swiss Federal Office of Public Health 
SW-3003 Berne 
Fax +41 (31) – 322 62 33 

Website 

WWW.nek-cne.ch 

► News from the UNITED KINGDOM 

the Nuffield Council on Bioethics 

CURRENT WORK 

The ethics of research involving animals 

In May 2005, the Nuffield Council on Bioethics published a Report on The ethics of research 
involving animals, which seeks to clarify the debate and aims to help people think through the 
scientific  and  ethical  issues.  It  also  makes  practical  recommendations  for  future  policy  and 
practice, and concludes that improving the quality of the debate and promoting the ‘Three Rs’ 
(Refinement,  Reduction  and  Replacement)  are  crucial  to  reducing  disagreement  on  research 
involving animals. The Working Party that produced the Report was comprised of academic 
and  industry  scientists,  philosophers,  members  of  animal  protection  groups,  and  a  lawyer. 
Since publication, the report has been well received by a wide range of organisations and has 
been downloaded from the Council’s website over 38,000 times. An electronic version of the 
Report is available at www.nuffieldbioethics.org/animalresearch  

The ethics of prolonging life in foetuses and the newborn. 

The Council established a Working Party in October 2004 to consider the ethical, social, legal 
and  economic  issues  involved  in  making  decisions  about  care  in  extremely  premature  or 
critically ill babies. Six meetings of the Working Party have taken place and a series of fact 
finding meetings continues. A visit to the neonatal unit at Homerton Hospital in Hackney took 
place  in  July.  A  meeting  with  parents  and  others  involved  with  the  premature  baby  charity 
BLISS took place in August, and an inter-faith workshop was held in September. Further fact-
finding meetings will be held later in the year, including a meeting with representatives of the 
Council  for  Disabled  Children  and  visits  to  special  schools  for  severely  disabled  children. 
Visits  to  France  and  the  Netherlands  are  being  planned  for  early  next  year.  The  Council 

58

 
                                 
  
 
 
 
 
expects  to  publish  a  Report  on  the  topic  towards  the  end  of  2006.  Further  information  is 
available at www.nuffieldbioethics.org/go/ourwork/prolonginglife/introduction.html  

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Genetic screening 

A  Discussion  Paper  on  the  ethics  of  genetic  screening  has  been  produced  by  a  Steering 
Committee to follow up the Council’s popular 1993 Report on the same topic. It is envisaged 
that  the  Paper,  which  will  provide  an  update  on  policy  and  scientific  developments,  will  be 
published in the first half of 2006.  

FUTURE WORK 

The ethics of public health 

A new Working Party on the ethics of public health will commence work in early 2006. The 
focus will be on the appropriate balance between individual autonomy and community benefit 
when designing measures to improve the health of individuals and populations. 

PREVIOUS PUBLICATIONS: 

•  The ethics of research involving animals (May 2005) 

•  The  ethics  of  research  related  to  healthcare  in  developing  countries:  a  follow-up 

Discussion Paper (March 2005) 

•  The  use  of  genetically  modified  crops  in  developing  countries:  a  follow-up  discussion 

paper (December 2003) 

•  Pharmacogenetics: ethical issues (September 2003) 

•  Genetics and human behaviour: the ethical context (October 2002) 

•  The ethics of patenting DNA: a discussion paper (July 2002) 

•  The ethics of research related to developing countries (April 2002) 

•  Stem cell therapy: the ethical issues – a discussion paper (April 2000) 

•  The ethics of clinical research in developing countries: a discussion paper (October 1999) 

•  Genetically modified crops: the ethical and social issues (May 1999) 

•  Mental disorders and genetics: the ethical context (September 1998) 

•  Animal-to-human transplants: the ethics of xenotransplantation (March 1996) 

•  Human tissue: ethical and legal issues (April 1995) 

•  Genetic Screening: ethical issues (December 1993) 

All  the  Council’s  publications  are  available  to  download  from  the  Council’s  website  at 
www.nuffieldbioethics.org/publications  

59

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

MEMBERS OF COUNCIL 

Chairman 

Professor Sir Bob Hepple QC, FBA 

Deputy Chairman 

Professor Catherine Peckham CBE 

Members 

Professor Tom Baldwin 
Professor Margot Brazier OBE 
Professor Roger Brownsword 
Professor Sir Kenneth Calman KCB FRSE 
Professor Peter Harper 
Rt Reverend Richard Harries DD FKC FRSL 
Professor Peter Lipton 
Professor Lord Raymond Plant 
Professor Herbert Sewell 
Professor Peter Smith CBE 
Professor Dame Marilyn Strathern DBE FBA 
Dr Alan Williamson FRSE 

Secretariat 

Director: Professor Sandy Thomas 
Deputy Director: Dr Catherine Moody 
Assistant Director: Harald Schmidt 
PA to Secretariat: Carol Perkins 
Communications & External Affairs Manager: Catherine Joynson 
Research Officer: Caroline Rogers 
Secretary: Clare Stephens 
Information Assistant: Julia Trusler 

60

 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Further Information 

Ms Catherine Joynson 
Communications & External Affairs Manager 

Address 
Nuffield Council on Bioethics 
28 Bedford Square 
London WC1B 3JS, UK 
Email: bioethics@nuffieldbioethics.org 
Tel: +44 207 681 9619 
Fax: +44 207 637 1712 

Website 

WWW.nuffieldbioethics.org 

► News from the UNITED KINGDOM 

e-JUSTICE 

eJustice is an independent, deliberative, multi-disciplinary and multinational body Ethics and 
Technology  Committee.  It  was  set  up  in  2004  under  a  framework  six  research  programme 
called eJustice. Its role is to explore the challenging ethical issues raised by the expansion of 
the possibilities of applying Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) within the 
sphere  of  judicial  cooperation  inside  and  across  states  and  authorities.  It  is  committed  to 
disseminating work on its findings on its own initiative and in response to others.  

The  Committee  represents  an  innovation  and  expansion  of  the  scope  of  ethical  inquiry.  It 
focused initially on the ethical issues associated with the practice and potential for exchanging 
information among legal and law enforcement agencies, including those at the European level 
and  government  and  private  partners  in  the  EU  Member  Sates.  Its  work  is  of  broader 
relevance to the range of issues arising from the roll-out of eGovernance in general. 

eJustice  has  developed  ICT  tools  that  offer  a  secure  way  of  exchanging  information  within 
and across authorities and jurisdictions involved in processing and administering legal papers. 
The tool offers a secure means of tracking legal processes and procedures within and across 
states,  and  verifying  and  authenticating  users’  identity  in  line  with  robust  identity 
management  requirements.  It  potentially  offers  a  way  of  allowing  not  just  lawyers  to 
communicate  and  check  the  progress  of  papers  within  their  own  systems  but  also  to  verify 
their  counterparts,  counterpart  procedures  and  place  in  the  system  in  any  cross-authority, 
cross-jurisdictional or cross-country case. Beyond the simple tracking of documents, eJustice 
tools also offer the potential to view part or whole documents in line with appropriate access 
rules.  

61

 
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

The ethics of availability 

The EU has agreed that information should be exchanged across frontiers and jurisdictions in 
line  with  the  principle  of  availability.  This  raises  numerous  concerns  of  a  politico-legal, 
ethical, societal and civil rights nature. 

The  eJustice  Ethics  and  Technology  Committee  goal  is  to  understand  the  tensions  between 
competing  objectives  with  a  view  to  discerning  the  parameters  of  a  European  standard  for 
tracking  and  processing  material  that  could  contain  sensitive,  personal  information.  This 
means  that  it  is  concerned  both  with  some  of  the  traditional  ethical  questions  examined  by 
medical  ethics  and  bioethics  committees,  and  with  some  issues  that  are  peculiar  to 
eGovernance and politics 2020 in general. 

eJustice is more than an administrative tool. Its application, potentially within the sphere of 
the  Hague  Action  Programme  2005  beyond  international  organised  crime  to  civil  litigation, 
including family law, means that it is a tool that potentially brings eGovernance to the heart of 
the household. Judicial cooperation itself potentially brings the EU closest to the citizen in a 
way that arouses the greatest misunderstanding, suspicion and distrust.  

The eJustice Committee is therefore aware of the imperative of fostering understanding and 
trust  by  demonstrating  the  responsible  route  to  applying  eGovernance  tools  in  an  open, 
ethical, transparent and accountable way. 

Hearings 

Members of the eJustice team have engaged regularly with different bodies, and discussions 
with legal professionals from across the world including magistrates, practising lawyers, law 
enforcement  bodies,  and  within  the  context  of  UK  Presidency  JHA  presentations.  It 
contributed  to  the  EU  Commission  Joint  Research  Centre  report  on  biometrics20.  It  also 
submitted  a  report  to  the  European  Parliament’s  LIBE  Committee  this  summer21  and  made 
presentations during UK Presidency events. 

The eJustice Committee has held a number of hearings in France and the UK. The most recent 
meeting  engaged  participants  from  the  current  and  future  EU  Presidencies.  It  reached  a 
number of conclusions. 

Information and cooperation 

Information on the eJustice programme is available on the website www.ejustice.eu.com. 

eJustice partners contribute to other research programmes and pilots in eGovernance. Of note 
is  the  FP6  Challenge  programme  where  a  particular  effort  is  being  made  in  respect  of 
understanding  the  limitations  of  reconciling  liberty  with  security.  Further  information  is 
available on the website www.libertysecurity.org 

Cooperation  with public and  private sector agencies and with the EU institutions continues. 
The  eJustice  Ethics  and  Technology  Committee  has  invited  and  enjoyed  inputs  from  the 
Commonwealth and local authority representatives. It will contribute to the new R4eGov FP6. 

20  Institute  for  Prospective  Studies,  Biometrics  at  the  Frontiers:  Assessing  the  Impact  on  Society,  Seville, 
February 2005, EU21585. 
21  eJustice:  Quality  and  Ethics  for  eGovernance:  2015  :  Making  the  Hague  Programme  Work:  Principles  and 
Practice for Quality, Acceptability and Action , July 2005. 

62

 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Future Agenda 

eJustice  ETC  seeks  collaboration  with  cognate  bodies  and  programmes.  Key  issues  to  be 
addressed  include:  ethical  eGovernance  2020  –  beyond  ‘blogoply’;  and  developing  an 
ethically  inspired  European  gold  standard  of  eGovernance  based  on  identifiable  and 
understood  criteria  of  accuracy,  proportionality,  data  quality  and  minimisation,  purpose 
specification,  simplicity,  relevance,  finality,  contemporaneity,  the  precautionary  principle, 
respect for human rights and human dignity. 

Further Information 

Professor Juliet Lodge 
Email: j.e.lodge@leeds.ac.uk 

Address 
eJustice and Challenge 
Jean Monnet European Centre of Excellence 
University of Leeds 
Leeds LS2 9JT 

63

 
 
 
 
 
European Commission 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

The European Commission’s Dialogue 

with Religions, Churches and 

Communities of conviction 

Since the time of President Jacques Delors, the European Commission has benefited from an 
Advisor  especially  entrusted  with  conducting  a  dialogue  with  Religions,  Churches  and 
Communities of Conviction. The Advisor is a member of the policy advisory group set up by 
President Delors, which is currently entitled the ‘Bureau of European Policy Advisers’. The 
dialogue function has a large remit and comprises several strands of action.  

First of all, Religions and Churches constitute – in all the EU Member Sates – key factors in 
public and social life, both in national and EU terms. It is therefore of crucial importance to 
inform  them  at  first  hand  about  the  policy  of  the  European  Commission.  In  practice,  this 
information  action  takes  various  forms,  such  as  a  debriefing  session  for  the  Brussels  based 
representatives of Religions, Churches and Communities of Conviction  after each European 
Council.  Experts  explain  the  decisions  taken  at  the  summit  and  are  available  for  questions. 
From 2006, two more briefing sessions will be organised for the religious representatives, one 
on the Commission’s annual working programme and one on topics of common concern, such 
as  the  social  dimension  of  the  renewed  Lisbon  strategy.  Moreover,  the  Advisor  regularly 
gives lectures on the dialogue and acts as a contact person for religious and non-confessional 
representatives. 

Importantly, the EC in its everyday policy deals with a large variety of issues which influence 
Religions,  Churches  and  Communities  of  conviction  directly.  For  a  successful  policy,  it  is 
imperative to bring the problems of the Religions, Churches and Communities of Conviction 
to the attention of the different Commission Services and vice versa – internal networking and 
EC-coordination.  Making  the  voices  of  the  Religions,  Churches  and  Communities  of 
Conviction heard during the process of policy formulation inside the European Commission is 
thus another element of the dialogue. 

A further aim of the dialogue is promoting the Commission’s policy in order to create a better 
and detailed knowledge of Europe’s policy and support from some of the key multipliers in 
public affairs. Last, but not least, the President and other Commissioners receive advice on all 
affairs related to religion and with regard to civil society. 

Susanne Kiefer22 

22 Editorial footnote: Trainee at the European Commission for the Bureau of European Policy Advisers (BEPA). 
During her Traineeship Susanne Kiefer has namely been assisting Michael Weninger, adviser in BEPA in charge 
of questions related to Dialogue with Religions, Churches and Humanisms. 

66

 
 
                                                 
Training Proposals 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

The Ethics Teaching Office in Montreal 

Activities of the Bureau d’enseignement de l’éthique in post-doctoral studies 

For a number of years the University of Montreal Faculty of Medicine has been running an 
ethics teaching programme during ‘residence’ (doctors undergoing specialisation), in response 
to  the  demands  of  the  Quebec  College  of  Physicians,  the  Royal  College  and  the  College  of 
Family Physicians of Canada, and, in particular, to provide input into the debate on the ethical 
issues  raised  for  medical  practice  by  the  technical  and  scientific  developments  of  recent 
decades, the question of costs and access to treatment. 

The  programme  is  organised  by  the  Bureau  d’enseignement  de  l’éthique,  under  the 
responsibility of Professor Danielle Laudy, and consists in compulsory formal learning in the 
form of two three-hour structured workshops each year for all the residents. Ms Laudy and the 
professors  of  each  clinical  department  do  the  teaching.  The  CEÉR  (Comité  d’Enseignement 
de  l’Éthique  à  la  Résidence),  the  advisory  committee  made  up  of  Ms Laudy  and  professors 
representing  each  of  the  departments,  is  responsible  for  developing  the  programme  and 
harmonising it with what is done in the first cycle of medical studies. 

Ethics  teaching  programme  during  residence:  aiming  for  an  ethics  of 

discussion and shared responsibility 

The  teaching  of  ethics  during  residence  is  designed  to  instil  ethical  thinking  into  everyday 
practice  and  to  develop  skills  in  ethics.  During  the  time  in  residence,  residents  put  into 
practice  and  integrate  the  knowledge,  attitudes  and  aptitudes  they  have  learnt  and  they 
establish in as many cases as possible an ever closer patient/doctor relationship in which they 
feel  genuinely  concerned.  For  some  patients  it  is  the  resident  who  has  the  privileged 
information concerning, for example, the patient’s aims, desires, beliefs, values. 

The aptitudes for communication and the attitudes necessary for a high-quality doctor/patient 
relationship are pre-requirements for the ethical dialogue. In order to identify and to be able to 
analyse  a  conflict  of  values  or  an  ethical  problem,  a  doctor  must  know  how  to  explore  the 
reality  of  the  patient,  the  family  and  the  environment,  situating  the  facts  on  the  scientific 
plane, the clinical plane, the biographical plane covering the field of values and beliefs, and 
on  the  social  plane.  These  psychomotor  and  affective  objectives  should  have  been  attained 
during the pre-doctoral level studies. 

Teaching in residence comprises a common programme based on issues of clinical ethics and 
ethics of research, which concern all specialisms, and on an initiation in questions of public 
and  social  ethics  (e.g.  legalised  euthanasia,  investing  as  a  society  in  research  on  the  human 
genome), followed by a second, more specific strand concerned with the particular needs of 
each specialism. 

Aim of the programme 

At the end of the residence, the doctor will have developed the ethical competence required to 
practice  in  the  profession.  In  medical  practice  the  doctor  will  interpret  situations  from  the 
angle  of  the  ethical  issues,  judging  what  ought  and  ought  not  to  be  done,  giving  special 
attention to ethical values and being able to implement the decisions adopted. 

68

 
General objectives 

(cid:131) 

Integrate the ethical dimension in everyday practice; 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

(cid:131)  Acquire  a  command  of  the  knowledge  required  to  analyse  the  ethical  problems 

encountered in medical practice; 

(cid:131)  Resolve  the  conflicts  encountered  in  medical  practice  allowing  for  the  values 

involved; 

(cid:131)  Demonstrate  systematically  the  relational  skills  necessary  for  taking  decisions  of  an 

ethical nature; 

(cid:131)  Demonstrate the ability to take part in or direct the decision-making process on ethical 

issues; 

(cid:131)  Develop one’s own thinking on the major bioethical issues; 

(cid:131)  Spell out one’s own social commitment. 

Specific cognitive objectives 

The ethics teaching programme in residence allows for the doctors’ various activities and the 
diversity of their tasks and roles. The areas covered will be the ethical issues connected with 
clinical  medicine,  research,  management  and  allocation  of  resources,  health  promotion, 
participation in public policies and the socio-political role of the doctor. 

The teaching programme has been divided into different subjects. Some of these subjects have 
been  grouped  together  to  form  a  common  programme  for  a  majority  of  specialisms.  Other 
subjects have been assigned to certain specific programmes. The specific objectives presented 
are being devised or introduced. Some subjects simply refer to a potential content and may be 
changed. A great deal still has to be clarified. 

Common ethics teaching programme in residence 

For paediatrics, medicine, family medicine, psychiatry, surgery, obstetrics and gynaecology, 
ophthalmology,  pathology  and  cellular  biology,  microbiology,  anaesthesia  and  social  and 
preventive medicine. 

1. 

Introduction to bioethics 

General objective 

Convince students of the importance of ethics in their professional life and in the practice of 
medicine in general. 

Specific objectives 

(cid:131)  Discuss  the  influence  of  the  values  conveyed  during  medical  studies  on  the 

development of ethical conduct; 

(cid:131)  Describe the stages of analysis of a problem of clinical ethics; 

(cid:131)  Explain the rules of ethical discussion; 

69

 
(cid:131)  Provide a comprehensive reply to questions on the nature of ethics, law, bioethics; 

(cid:131)  Find the resources to deal with difficulties of an ethical nature encountered in practice. 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

2. 

The appropriate treatment 

General objective 

Build  a  dynamic  representation  of  ‘appropriate  treatment’  through  the  various  concepts 
underlying the subject. 

Specific objectives I 

(cid:131)  Revise  the  definition  of  various  concepts:  acharnement  thérapeutique  (maximum 
life-prolonging  care),  futile  treatment,  refusal  or  withdrawal  of  treatment,  quality  of 
life, proportionality criteria; 

(cid:131)  Revise the definition of various concepts; 

(cid:131) 

Identify the ethical issues underlying these concepts; 

(cid:131)  Undertake a critical analysis of these concepts; 

(cid:131)  Exchange  of  views  on  the  application  of  these  concepts  in  the  reality  of  medical 

practice. 

Specific objectives II 

(cid:131)  Understand the structure of medical decision-making; 

(cid:131)  Know  and  situate  the  reference  markers  influencing  the  decision-making  process: 

patient-doctor relationship, medical/clinical judgment, aims; 

(cid:131)  Know the arrangements applying where opinions diverge. 

3. 

End of life and euthanasia 

General objective 

To  enable  residents  to  think  about  the  ethical  issues  raised  by  euthanasia  at  micro-  and 
macro-ethical level. 

Specific objectives 

(cid:131)  Be aware that the term ‘euthanasia’ has various definitions; 

(cid:131)  Agree on one definition; 

(cid:131)  Differentiate between what euthanasia means in practice when applied at the bedside 
and what it means when public pronouncements are made in favour of euthanasia; 

(cid:131)  Produce arguments for and against the legalisation of euthanasia. 

70

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

4. 

Relations with industry: ethics and conflict of interests 

General objective 

Equip residents to deal with potential conflicts of values and interests in their relations with 
representatives of the health care industry during their professional life. 

Specific objectives 

(cid:131)  Understand the terms conflicts of values and conflicts of interests; 
(cid:131) 
Identify potential sources of conflicts; 
(cid:131)  Reflect on the ethical issues involved; 
(cid:131)  Realise the consequences of these conflicts; 
(cid:131)  Adopt preventive measures where a situation might develop into conflicts of values or 

interests. 

5. 

Management and allocation of resources 

General objectives 

(cid:131)  Be aware of one’s way of reacting on issues of resources; 
(cid:131) 

Identify ethical indicators to help with reflection in this field. 

Specific objectives 

a) 

On the basis of clinical experience: 

Identify the criteria of choice in allocation of resources; 

(cid:131) 
(cid:131)  Define the subject: allocation of resources; 
(cid:131)  Situate the doctor in everyday practice in relation to resources and the various levels 

of decision-making. 

b) 

On the basis of reading and exchanges of views: 

(cid:131)  Distinguish the various interpretations of case law; 
(cid:131)  Discuss the concept of responsibility; 
(cid:131)  Apply ethical principles in the context of allocation of resources. 

6. 

Ethics of research 

Objectives 

(cid:131) 

Integrate the ethical issues of experimenting on human subjects; 

(cid:131)  Discuss  the  differences  between  recognised  treatment,  experimental  treatment  or 

innovative treatment; 

(cid:131)  Understand and apply the essential prerequisites for consent when recruiting patients 

in a research project; 

(cid:131)  Comply with the concepts of copyright and scientific integrity. 

71

 
Specific programmes for certain specialisms. 

Paediatrics,  genetics,  gynaecology  –  obstetrics,  family  medicine,  pathology,  radiology  and 
psychiatry programmes: 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

New reproduction techniques 

(cid:131) 
Illusion of the perfect child; 
(cid:131)  Medicine to satisfy wishes; 
(cid:131)  Production of embryos to obtain tissues for transplant; 
(cid:131)  Sexing and cloning; 
(cid:131)  Meaning of procreation and the family; 
(cid:131)  Status of the embryo. 

Prenatal diagnostics 

(cid:131)  Risk of eugenism; 
(cid:131)  Marginalisation of the disabled; 
(cid:131)  Normality and normativity; 
(cid:131)  Genetic counselling; 
(cid:131)  Abortion/status of the foetus. 

For the genetics programme 

(cid:131)  Ethical issues of the human genome project; 
(cid:131)  Risks of stigmatisation and exclusion; 
(cid:131)  Confidentiality. 

For the psychiatry programme 

(cid:131)  Sterilisation of the disabled; 
(cid:131)  Ethical issues relating to suicide; 
(cid:131)  Ethics and internment. 

Specific objectives of a psychomotor and affective nature 

These  aspects  are  covered  in  the  integrated  training  programme  in  clinical  ethics,  whose 
general and specific objectives are as follows. 

General and specific objectives of the programme 

(1) 

Develop the necessary skills and attitudes for discussions involved in clinical decision-
making on ethical matters 

(cid:131)  Take  into  account  the  specific  aspects  of  discussion  meetings  with  the  patient,  the 
family,  health  care  workers  and  the  interdisciplinary  team  where  appropriate. 
(Objectives and content of the discussion, level of language, venue and time, etc.); 

(cid:131)  Recognise the ‘position’ of the interlocutor; 

(cid:131) 

Identify the reasons and the values underlying this position by getting the interlocutor 
to explain them; 

(cid:131)  Adjust the reply accordingly; 

72

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

(cid:131)  Apply  communication  skills  in  the  various  discussion  meetings  for  clinical 
decision-making  on  ethical  matters:  ask  open  questions,  allow  silence,  check 
interlocutor’s understanding, sum up the meeting; 

(cid:131)  Develop a self-critical attitude to the discussion process and decision-making. 

(2)  When confronted with ethical problems in medical practice, ensure clinical decision-

making which takes into account all relevant aspects 

(cid:131)  On  the  basis  of  real  clinical  situations,  identify  the  ethical  problem(s),  analyse  the 
components  of  the  problem,  i.e.  the  clinical  and  psycho-social  facts,  the  values 
involved, the model dilemmas and the legal aspects, identify all possible alternatives 
and give reasons for the decision; 

(cid:131)  Apply certain concepts to the analysis of ethical problems encountered in the practice 
of medicine such as autonomy and self-determination, consent, quality of life, rule of 
equivalence, futility (utility), justice – equity, etc. 

(3) 

Be aware of the resources available to shed ethical light on clinical decision-making 

(cid:131)  The institutional resources, resources in Quebec and documentary resources. 

Conduct of the programme 

The common programme covers the first three years of residence with about 15 hours a year, 
made  up  of  six  hours  of  workshops  and  nine  hours  of  integrated  activities  (Table  1).  The 
workshops last three hours and involve small groups of 15. The integrated activities take the 
form of guided reading, specialist learning, journal club, ethical discussions during ward visits 
or self-teaching modules. This is a major challenge. On the one hand, specific teaching tools 
must be continually developed to cover these activities; and secondly there must always be a 
critical mass  of  professors capable of directing them, which requires systematic  training for 
the teaching staff. 

Formal workshops - 6 hours per year 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

R1.1 Introduction to bioethics  
R1.2 Appropriate treatment  
R2.1 End of life/euthanasia R3  
R2.2 Ethics and industry  
R3.1 Management/allocation of resources  
R3.2 Ethics of research  
R4 - R5 Specific workshops for the various programmes  

Integrated teaching - 9 hours per year  

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

R1 Discussion of clinical cases  
R2 Reading club  
R3 Discussions/lectures  
R4 Ethics committees, conflicts of values and interests  
R5 Supervision of interviews, role playing, etc. 

73

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Training of professors 

We saw above that we require a critical mass of able and well-trained professors to run these 
workshops, which has prompted us to draw up a training programme for them. Two training 
days have been devised either as one full day or two half days to fit in with work schedules. 

Aims of the programme 

1. 

2. 

to meet certain needs of professors who have to integrate ethics teaching in their 
everyday clinical activities; 

support professors so that they can more easily fulfil their function as role models 
(serve as a model doctor expressly incorporating the ethical dimension in 
decision-making). 

Specific objectives for the day 

At the end of the day participants will be able to: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

describe the broad lines of the ethics programmes of the Royal College of Physicians 
and Surgeons of Canada, the College of Family Physicians of Canada and the Medical 
Council of Canada; 

describe the guidelines of the Faculty of Medicine for teaching ethics in the first and 
second cycles and the organisational arrangements for attaining them; 

spell out their teaching role as part of their clinical activities; 

refer to usable indicators; 

discuss a clinical case systematically from an ethical angle; 

analyse a patient/doctor interview from an ethical angle; 

plan continuing education activities in ethics adapted to their needs; 

find resources to help them in difficult clinical situations from an ethical angle. 

74

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°6 

Further Information 

Dr Nguyen Hung Phong 
Bureau de l'Enseignement de l'éthique 
Faculté de médecine 
Tel: +1 (514) 343-7799 
Fax: +1 (514) 343-7590 
Email: hung.phong.nguyen@umontreal.ca 

Address 
Université de Montréal 
C.P.6128, Succ.Centre-ville 
Montréal (Qc) H3C 3J7 
Canada 

Website 

WWW.med.umontreal.ca/etudes/ethisue.htm 

75

 
                              
 
 
European Commission 

Ethically speaking — Issue N°6 

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities 

2006 — 75 pp. — 21 x 29.7 cm 

ISSN 1725-5562 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
