The European Group on Ethics in Science and New  
Technologies to the European Commission 

Ethically speaking 

Issue N°5 

European Commission 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers  
to your questions about the European Union 

Freephone number (*): 
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11 

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers or these calls 

may be billed. 

A great deal of additional information on the European Union is available on the Internet. 
It can be accessed through the Europa server (http://europa.eu.int). 

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication. 

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, 2005 

ISSN 1725-5562 

© European Communities, 2005 
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. 

Printed in Luxembourg 

PRINTED ON WHITE CHLORINE-FREE PAPER 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  

Editorial 

Göran Hermerén, President of the EGE 2000-2005..............................................................   5 

EGE Activities 

Michael D. Rogers, Head of the Secretariat of the EGE, Editor Ethically Speaking ..............   7 

International Ethics Committees 

Council of Europe ........................................................................................................   10 
UNESCO International Bioethics Committee..............................................................   11 
Nordic Committee on Bioethics...................................................................................   13 
World Health Organisation ..........................................................................................   15 

National and Regional Ethics Committees 

Science and Technology Ethics Committee (CEST), Quebec, Canada .......................   20 
National Consultative Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (CCNE), 
France ...........................................................................................................................   22 
German National Ethics Council, Germany.................................................................   25 
Hellenic National Bioethics Commission, Greece.......................................................   32 
Bioethics Consultative Committee, Malta ...................................................................   34 
Committee of Medical Ethics of the Polish Chamber of Physicians and Dentists, 
Poland...........................................................................................................................   37 
Bioethics Commission of the Ministry of Health, Poland ...........................................   40 
National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences (CNECV), Portugal ........................   41 
Central Ethics Committee of the Ministry of Health, Slovakia ...................................   44 
Swedish National Council on Medical Ethics, Sweden ...............................................   47 
Nuffield Council on Bioethics, the United Kingdom...................................................   50 
Scottish Council on Human Bioethics, Scotland, the United Kingdom.......................   53 

European Commission Science and Technology Representation 
in external EU-Delegations 

News from the United States of America 

1. Can God and Darwin co-exist in the USA in the 21st Century?..............................   56 
2. Guidelines for Stem Cell Research ..........................................................................   59 

Training proposals 

Ethics Training Proposal ..............................................................................................   62

 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Editorial 

Göran Hermerén, President of the EGE 2000-2005 

EGE: four years in retrospect 

The European Group of Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE), has now served 
its  second  four-year  mandate.  On  24  April  2001  the  Commission  appointed  the  twelve 
Members  for  the  coming  four  years  and  amended  the  EGE  remit  in  order  to  strengthen  the 
role of the Group. The members are selected on the basis of their professional qualifications, 
they come from the Member States but do not represent their countries. 

During the current mandate, some administrative changes have taken place in the EGE. The 
secretariat of the Group is now an integral part of the Bureau of European Policy Advisers 
(BEPA), previously GOPA. Dr Michael D. Rogers has succeeded Dr Christiane Bardoux as 
Head of the Secretariat. 

The EGE is an independent, pluralist and multidisciplinary body, which advises the European 
Commission  on  ethical  aspects  of  science  and  new  technologies  in  connection  with  the 
preparation  and  implementation  of  Community  legislation  or  policies.  The  role  of  the  EGE 
has  been  increasingly  recognised  in  community  legislative  acts,  for  instance  in  several 
directives. 

The  Group  has  operated  by  discussing  problems  at  internal  meetings,  by  inviting  leading 
experts  from  different  countries  to  present  scientific,  legal  or  other  relevant  background 
information to the EGE, by commissioning special studies on problems relevant to what the 
Group  is  working  on,  and  by  organising  roundtables  on  themes  to  be  dealt  with  in  the 
opinions.  The  latter  meetings,  to  which  stakeholders  and  interest  groups  are  invited,  have 
been especially important because they have provided a meeting place between the EGE and 
a wider audience. 

The Opinions of the Group are available in English, French and German. During the second 
mandate period, the  EGE  widened  the scope of its ethical analyses producing,  either at the 
request  of  the  Commission  or  on  its  own  initiative,  Opinions  on  such  diverse  topics  as 
patenting  inventions  involving  human  stem  cells,  clinical  research  in  developing  countries, 
genetic  testing  in  the  workplace,  umbilical  cord  blood  banking,  and  ICT  (information  and 
communication  technologies)  implants  in  the  human  body.  Thus  in  addition  to  more 
traditional  issues  in  the  fields  of  bioethics  and  biotechnology,  the  Group  has  taken  steps  to 
meet  some  of  the  challenges  coming  from  new  technologies  in  other  areas,  such  as 
information and communication technologies and to call attention to issues which lawmakers 
in the EU will have to address in the near future. In the future other challenges are likely to 
be presented also by nanotechnologies and by new technologies in farming, agriculture and 
the food industries. 

The Newsletter, “Ethically Speaking”, published by the EGE, provides the National Ethics 
Committees and similar bodies in the member states with a forum where information can be 
exchanged between these committees. It facilitates contacts between committees  working on 
similar  problems.  It  is  printed  and  distributed  in  large  numbers  and  distributed  free  of 
charge,  like  the  texts  of  the  Opinions.  The  Newsletter,  the  Opinions  and  the  preparatory 
studies can be downloaded free of charge from the website of the EGE. Over 1500 copies of 

5

 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

each  publication  are  mailed  to  individuals  and  organisations,  and  they  are  reprinted 
whenever this is necessary. 

The  website  provides  easy  access  to  information  about  the  recent  activities  of  the  EGE,  as 
well as about previous texts  published by the Group. It also contains information about the 
remit  and  the  history  of  the  EGE  and  its  predecessor  –  as  well  as  about  its  members.  The 
website is frequently visited; it had more than 104 thousand visits from the citizens from “EU-
15” Member States during 2004; and more than 23 thousand have so far visited the text of the 
Opinion on cord blood banking. 

Against the background of the EU enlargement and to prepare the future co-operation with 
the  new  member  states,  the  EGE  invited  the  chairs  of  the  national  ethics  committees  or 
similar bodies in the new member states to meetings before the enlargement had taken place. 
The  purpose  of  these  meetings  was  to  discuss  the  working  methods  of  these  committees,  to 
identify points of common interest as well as to discuss problems and  possible areas where 
the EGE could assist. These meetings resulted in the publication of a report entitled Ethics in 
the New Member States. 

During this period steps have also been taken to clarify the relations between the EGE and 
the Forum of National Ethics Committees. A document prepared jointly by the Secretariats 
of these bodies was discussed and agreed at a meeting in Amsterdam (2004). This document 
stresses the complementary roles of the two organisations and the ground has been laid for 
fruitful future cooperation between the Forum and the EGE. 

In addition to these activities, members of the group have been asked to attend conferences by 
various  European  Commission’s  services,  as  well  as  by  organisations  outside  Brussels.  A 
general  report  on  the  Activities  of  the  EGE  during  the  last  four  years  will  be  available 
shortly, in English and French, in print and on the EGE website. 

6

 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

EGE Activities 

Michael D. Rogers, Head of the Secretariat of the EGE 

Opinion N° 20 on the Ethical Aspects of ICT Implants in the Human Body1 

This Opinion was adopted by the EGE and presented to the President of the Commission on 
16  March  2005.  Although  some  ICT  implants  have  existed  for  several  years  (e.g.  heart 
pacemakers since the 1960s) rapid developments are in train in this field both in terms of the 
range of applications and in the complexity of the devices. It was these rapid developments, 
particularly  in  non-medical  applications,  that  persuaded  the  EGE  to  initiate  an  ethical 
analysis. Not surprisingly, the Opinion is essentially prospective in nature and will certainly 
need reviewing in the future. 

The  Group  divided  its  Opinion  between  implants  for  health  and  implants  for  non-medical 
purposes. On the former the EGE emphasised the importance of a clear understanding of the 
benefits and risks of implants and of the need for full and informed consent, particularly when 
the  ICT  implant  may  be  irreversible  and  may  form  part  of  a  computer  network.  Medical 
implants involve specialised surgical techniques and are expensive. 

Consequently,  the  Group  insisted  that  access  to  such  treatments  should  be  based  on  health 
care needs and not on the individual’s economic position. 

For  the  first  time,  the  Group  made  explicit  reference  to  the  Precautionary  Principle  –  a 
principle which “entails the moral duty of continuous risk assessment with regard to the not 
fully  foreseeable  impact  of  new  technologies  as  in  the  case  of  ICT  implants  in  the  human 
body”. 

Two recent reports in the media highlight the importance of this principle. 

(cid:139) 

(cid:139) 

The  first  of  these  concerned  deep  brain  implants  (a  “brain  pacemaker”)  which  have 
been successfully applied in Canada for hitherto untreatable clinical depression. This 
information was published under the title “Brain ‘Pacemaker’ can lift depression” in the 
UK Sunday Times of 27 February 2005. 

The  second  report  recorded  the  growing  use  of  implanted  automatic  cardiac 
defibrillators  (ICD)  in  the  US  (in  2004  150  thousand  were  implanted).  Here  the 
expense of the treatment (the cost of the device alone being about 40 thousand US$) 
raises the equity principle, which the EGE also highlighted in its Opinion. However, 
there is also a need to exercise precaution as the procedure involves significant risks 
and many patients will not benefit from the implant. 

“Some  cardiologists  argue  that  more  research  should  be  done  to  distinguish  between  the 
patients at the highest risk of heart failure, and those who are unlikely ever to need a shock 
from  an  ICD.  In  the  trial  published  earlier  this  year,  for  instance,  only  one  in  three  of  the 
devices delivered a shock over the five-year study. “Probably the large majority of those with 
ICDs  will  never  have  therapy”,  says  Adrian  Almquist,  a  cardiologist  at  the  Minneapolis 
Heart Institute.” 
Quotation from Nature, News Feature, 5.05.2005 pages 15-16 

1 available at: http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/docs/avis20en.pdf 

7

 
 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

The EGE Opinion covers a great deal of ground and is likely to remain topical for some time 
to  come.  One  of  the  most  contentious  areas  in  the  Opinion  concerned  non-medical 
applications,  and  in  particular  the  use  of  ICT  implants  for  surveillance  purposes.  The  EGE 
insisted that “surveillance applications of ICT implants may only be permitted if the legislator 
considers that there is an urgent and justified necessity in a democratic society (Article 8 of 
the  Human  Rights  Convention)  and  there  are  no  less  intrusive  methods”.  They  went  on  to 
stress  that  in  any  event  they  did  not  favour  such  uses  but  that  if  essential  the  applications 
should  be  specified  in  legislation  (see  Opinion  N°20  Section  6.5.6.  for  further  details).  The 
growing  use  of  the  Verichip®  (an  implantable  radio-frequency  identification  device)  raises 
concerns in this connection. (Although currently the scanner must be within a few feet of the 
device so that it cannot be used for remote surveillance.) (Opinion N° 20 Section 3.1.1.) 

Implants for medical purposes (for example monitoring chronic conditions such as diabetes) 
which can be interrogated remotely via the mobile phone network raise the problem of dual 
use technologies (medical plus surveillance). This aspect has also been highlighted recently in 
the  media.  In  an  article  dated  12  June  2005  (“Patients  Get  9992  Chip  Implants”)  the  UK 
Sunday  Times  reported  the  development  of  such  implanted  sensors,  which  would  enable 
doctors  to  monitor  their  patients  from  considerable  distances.  As  the  EGE  noted  (Section 
6.3.1. of the Opinion), where an ICT implant becomes part of a network the operation of the 
whole network, not just the ICT implant, needs to be considered. 

Further Information 

Dr Michael D. Rogers 
Head of the EGE Secretariat 
Editor Ethically Speaking 
Cécile Delgrange 
Editorial Assistant 

EGE SECRETARIAT 
Tel: +32 (0)2.295.06.41 | Fax: +32 (0)2.299.45.65 
Email: bepa-ethics-group@cec.eu.int  
Address 
European Commission - Office: BERL 8/261, B-1049 Brussels 
Website 

http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/secret_en.htm 

2 “999” is the emergency telephone number in the United Kingdom. 

8

 
 
                                                                                   
 
                                                 
 
International Ethics Committees 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
► News from the 

 

Council of Europe 

 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Recommendation Concerning the Protection of the Human Rights and Dignity 

of Persons with Mental Disorders 

On  22  September  2004,  the  Committee  of  Ministers  of  the  Council  of  Europe  adopted  its 
Recommendation  (2004)  10  concerning  the  protection  of  the  human  rights  and  dignity  of 
persons with mental disorders3. 

Draft Recommendation on Research on Stored Human Biological Materials 

One  of  the  two  main  topics  discussed  by  the  CDBI  Plenary  in  April  2005  was  the  draft 
Recommendation on Research on Human Biological Materials, with a view to its adoption. It 
is expected to be finalised during 2005. The draft Recommendation addresses the research use 
of residual biological materials "left over" from other interventions and research on biological 
materials in the framework of population biobanks. 

Draft Additional Protocol on Human Genetics 

The second main topic addressed by the CDBI in April 2005 is the draft Protocol on human 
genetics.  The  Steering  Committee  will  continue  its  examination  of  the  part  of  the  draft 
Protocol  which  concerns  genetic  tests  for  health  purposes.  Genetic  tests  in  the  field  of 
employment  and  insurance  which  are  to  be  addressed  in  the  second  part  of  the  Protocol, 
should then start being dealt with at the level of the Working Party in 2006. 

VIIITH Conference of National Ethics Committees (COMETH)4 

The European Conference of National Ethics held its 8th Conference in Dubrovnik (Croatia). 
The Chairs of the numerous National Ethics Committees, as well as the Chair of the European 
Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies, participated in this Conference. 

Preimplantation  diagnosis  for  HLA  compatibility  and  ethical  implications  for  an  ageing 
society as well as the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine was at the centre of the 
first  day  of  the  Conference.  The  second  day  focused  on  National  Ethics  Committees  their 
functioning and the presentations of recent National Ethics Committee opinions respectively 
on surrogacy, prenatal screening for cystic fibrosis, assisted reproduction, disputed memories 
and  a  survey  on  informed  consent  in  genetic  research.  Intergovernmental  activities  in 
bioethics worldwide and the 2004 Global Summit of National Ethics Committees were also 
addressed. 

3 The text of the Recommendation and Explanatory Report can be found on the Internet at: 
http://www.coe.int/Bioethics  
4 The Declaration adopted at the end of the Conference can be consulted at the following web address: 
http://www.coe.int/Bioethics  

10

 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Further Information 

Carlos de Sola 
Head of the Bioethics Department Secretary 
of the Steering Committee on Bioethics (CDBI) 
Tel: + 33 (0)3 88 41 24 38 
Email: carlos.desola@coe.int 

Laurence Lwoff 
Administrative Officer / Secretary of the Working Party on Human 
Genetics and of the Working Party on the Protection of the 
Human Embryo and Foetus 
Tel: + 33 (0)3 88 41 22 68 | Fax: + 33 (0)3 88 41 37 45 
Email: laurence.lwoff@coe.int 

Website 

WWW.coe.int/Bioethics 

► News from 

 

UNESCO 

 

Towards a Declaration on Universal Norms on Bioethics 

For  just  over  a  year  now,  UNESCO  has  been  drafting  a  declaration  on  universal  norms  on 
bioethics. According to the timetable, which was approved by UNESCO’s Executive Board at 
its 169th session held in April 2004, the International Bioethics Committee (IBC) would spend 
the  first  year  drawing  up  the  draft,  with  the  following  year  being  given  over  to 
intergovernmental negotiations.  

Wide-ranging consultations and hearings have been held since the outset of the process with a 
view to involving States, other specialised UN bodies and other intergovernmental and non-
governmental  organisations  (in  particular  via  the  Interinstitutional  UN  Committee  on 
Bioethics), appropriate national bodies and specialists. The IBC was keen for the process to 
be  participative  and  transparent.  To  this  end,  in  one  year  it  held  three  sessions  on  the 
declaration  and  organised  two  written  consultation  exercises.  The  first,  which  took  place 
between January and April 2004, focused on the structure, scope and possible content of the 
future declaration and the second took place during the drafting of the third version at the end 
of 2004. The Intergovernmental Bioethics Committee (IGBC) was also involved, first by way 
of an information meeting and exchange of views on the second draft of the text in July 2004 
and  then  at  its  fourth  ordinary  session  and  at  a  joint  session  with  the  IBC  in  January  2005. 
Several itinerant conferences held in a dozen countries throughout the process also provided 
the opportunity to consult national and regional experts. Lastly, the IBC used the internet to 
send  out  an  open  invitation  for  ideas,  remarks,  observations  and  comments  on  the  various 
versions of the text. This tool also enabled the results of all the meetings and consultations to 
be  posted  on  a  daily  basis.  The  IBC  submitted  the  preliminary  draft  declaration  to  the 
Director-General in February 2005. 

11

 
                                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

The purpose of the future declaration is to define the universally acceptable norms, principles 
and  procedures  in  the  field  of  bioethics.  It  does  not  aim  to  resolve  all  the  current  issues  on 
bioethics,  which  are  evolving  all  the  time.  Its  objective  is  instead  to  identify  a  number  of 
principles  and  procedures  that  will  assist  countries  in  drafting  legislation  or  policies  on 
bioethics.  It  also  aims,  where  possible,  to  underpin  scientific  practice  and  decisions  with 
respect  for  certain  universally  acceptable  general  principles.  Lastly,  the  declaration  aims  to 
promote  a  lively  public  debate  on  bioethical  issues  and  the  sharing  of  scientific  and 
technological expertise. 

After a year of intense work within the IBC, the second stage in the process of drafting the 
future  declaration  has  begun,  with  the  first  intergovernmental  meeting  of  experts  held  on 
4-6 April  2005  to  finalise  a  draft  declaration.  The  second  intergovernmental  meeting  of 
experts will be held during the week of 21 June 2005, after which the draft declaration will be 
submitted to the 33rd session of UNESCO’s General Conference in October 2005. 

Further Information 

Henk ten Have 
Director 
Chief of Bioethics Section a.i. 
Division of Ethics of Science and Technology 
Tel: +33 (0) 1 45 68 49 98 | Fax: +33 (0)1 45 68 55 15 
Email : h.tenhave@unesco.org 

Address 
1, rue Miollis 
F-75732 Paris Cedex 

Website 

WWW.unesco.org/shs/bioethics 

12

 
                                                                
 
 
 
 
► News from the 

  Nordic Committee on Bioethics   

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Looking into the bioethics future 

Neurobiology,  relations  between  the  private 
individual  and 
the 
society, 
freedom  of  research,  nanomedicine  and  the 
combination  of  biology  and  information 
technology are some of the many challenges 
for bioethics in the coming decade. 

solidarity, 

ability  to  concentrate.  Aggressivity  can  be 
controlled, patience promoted etc. As one of 
the  experts  said:  “We  all  love  our  children. 
Who  is  to  judge  what  kind  of  medicine  is 
good  or  bad  and  what  is  normal  and 
abnormal?” 

This  was  the  conclusion  of  a  think  tank  on 
bioethics  and  biotechnology  that  the  Nordic 
Committee  on  Bioethics  organised 
in 
November 2004. The committee had invited 
external  experts  from  different  fields  to  try 
together to see where science is headed and 
what the new issues in bioethics will be.  

As  a  starting  point  it  was  agreed  that 
technological  developments  tend  to  affect 
also  our  ethical  standards.  It  is  not  easy  to 
look  into  the  crystal  ball  of  the  future  with 
today’s eyes, but we have to try. 

Neurobiology 
is  a  field  of  very  rapid 
development and our knowledge of how the 
human  brain  works  is  increasing  quickly. 
Genetic  research  makes 
to 
produce  tailor  made  substances  that  can  be 
used  to  improve  a  person’s  intelligence  or 

it  possible 

Preimplantation genetic diagnosis 

in 

increase 

society  when 

The  participants  in  the  Bioprophecy  think 
tank  also  thought  that  the  effects  of  the 
biotechnological  research  on  society  as  a 
whole  should  come  more  into  focus.  The 
technologies  are  not  necessarily 
new 
the  gap 
democratic  but  might 
between  groups 
the 
availability  of  treatments  and  remedies  is 
distributed 
economical 
standards.  The  Nordic  welfare  societies  will 
not  be  able  to  handle  the  rapidly  increasing 
costs  of  these  treatments  on  an  equal  basis. 
And  the  problem  of  unequal  distribution  is 
even  greater  with  regard  to  rich  and  poor 
countries in the world. We need to deal with 
this  problem  with  justice  and  solidarity,  but 
this requires political initiatives and decision 
making. 

according 

to 

An  International  Conference  on  Preimplantation  Genetic  Diagnosis  and  Embryo  Selection 
was organised by the Nordic Committee on Bioethics in 2004, attracting participants from 21 
countries in Europe, the Middle-East, Africa and North America. Sixteen excellent speakers 
from different disciplines presented important topics in this field from ethical, medical, legal, 
social,  cultural,  religious  and  feminist  views.  The  conference  proceedings  will  be  published 
this summer5. 

5 The proceedings, as well as reports from previous events, can be obtained through the committee’s website 
www.ncbio.org 

13

 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Bioethics of the Sea 

Ecosystem  based  fisheries  management,  fishing  communities  and  welfare  questions  and 
responsible  utilization  of  ocean  resources  are  questions  on  the  agenda  for  the  next  seminar 
organised by the Nordic Committee on Bioethics in September 2005.  

This, so far unexplored, area of bioethics will be discussed in a seminar entitled Bioethics of 
the  Sea  in  September.  This  will  be  the  first  time  when  issues  in  relation  to  the  use  of  sea 
resources will be looked at from a bioethical perspective. External experts will be invited for 
two days of discussions. The aim of the seminar is to formulate the bioethical questions that 
modern use of the sea resources raise and to encourage discussion of these issues. 

Renewed mandate for the Nordic Committee on Bioethics 

The  Nordic  Council  of  Ministers  has  renewed  the  mandate  for  the  Nordic  Committee  on 
Bioethics for the three year period 1.01.2005 - 31.12.2007. 

The  committee  has  two  members  from  each  of  the  Nordic  countries:  Denmark,  Finland, 
Iceland, Norway and Sweden and an observer from the Faeroe Islands. The Chairman of the 
committee in 2005 is Dr Ingileif Jónsdóttir from Iceland. 

The  task  of  the  committee  is  to  promote  Nordic  cooperation  and  exchange  of  information 
between  scientists,  parliamentarians  and  opinion 
leaders  on  ethical  aspects  of 
biotechnological research, development and application. The Nordic Committee on Bioethics 
was formed in1989. 

Further Information 

Helena von Troil 
Secretary of the Nordic Committee on 
Bioethics 
Tel: + 358-40-5449981 | Fax: +358 9 68231811
Email: secretary@ncbio.org 

Address 
Rikhard Nymansväg 9 B 
FIN-00370 Helsingfors 

Website 

WWW.ncbio.org 

14

 
                                                   
 
► News from the 

  World Health Organisation   

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Ethics at the World Health Organization (ETH) 

The  Department  of  Ethics,  Trade,  Human  Rights,  and  Health  Law  (ETH)  implements 
activities  collaboratively  with  departments  in  the  WHO  Headquarters  and  the  Regional 
Offices. The efforts are concentrated in the following areas: 

Equitable access to care 

(cid:139) 

(cid:139) 

(cid:139) 

(cid:139) 

ETH is engaged in the policy development of one of WHO's top priorities - to provide 
treatment to 3 million HIV/AIDS patients by the end of 2005 (“3x5 initiative”). The 
role of ETH in this process is to advise the “3x5 initiative” on ethical issues in clinical 
ethics,  standard  of  care,  and  equitable  access,  with  a  strong  focus  on  the  latter. 
Guidance documents and training materials are to be elaborated. To this end, ETH, in 
collaboration with others at WHO and UNAIDS, held an international consultation on 
"Equitable  Access  to  Care  for  HIV/AIDS"  on  26-27  January  20046.  Based  on  this 
meeting and wide consultation with experts and stakeholders globally, ETH led a team 
in producing a volume in the HIV Department's 3 by 5 publication series, “Guidance 
on Ethics and Equitable Access to HIV Treatment and Care”7. 

Regional follow-up meetings and the integration into country missions and capacity-
building  activities  are  planned,  with  the  aim  of  operationalizing  the  guidelines. 
Monitoring  and  impact  assessment  tools  are  to  be  developed  in  collaboration  with 
other WHO departments.  

A  case  study  entitled  “Equity  and  fair  process  in  scaling  up  anti-retroviral  therapy: 
potentials and challenges in the United Republic of Tanzania” is close to completion. 
It will be published jointly with the German Technical Cooperation (GTZ), the MoH 
Tanzania, and the WHO department of HIV. 

ETH is member of the Technical Advisory Group (TAG) for the development of the 
Guide for Essential Practice in Comprehensive Cervical Cancer Control at WHO. In 
this  capacity,  ETH  is  advising  the  TAG  on  issues  ranging  from  clinical  ethics  to 
ethical considerations in cost-effectiveness analyses and equity for the development of 
this guidance document. 

ETH is also a member of the WHO Cancer Control Steering Group. It is advising the 
Department of Cancer Control in implementing a WHO Executive Board Resolution 
on Cancer Control. Among other activities, a “Global Report on Cancer Control” is 
being developed, which will to be published in spring 2006. 

ETH is involved in an initiative to promote the access to opioid drugs in palliative care 
in  developing  countries.  Partners  include  other  WHO  departments,  collaborating 

6 available at: http://www.who.int/ethics/en/equity_art_meeting_report_e.pdf 
7 available at: http://www.who.int/ethics/en/ethics_equity_HIV _e.pdf. 
This will also be available in French later this year. 

15

 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

centres  and  the  International  Narcotics  Control  Board  in  Vienna.  The  topics  on  the 
agenda for ETH include equity in access, informed consent, cultural perceptions and 
barriers, and end-of-life issues. 

Human organ and tissue transplantation 
The 57th World Health Assembly adopted a resolution addressing ethical and technical aspects 
of allogeneic transplantation as well as xenotransplantation8. 

WHO  has  collaborated  with  the  Transplant  Society  to  establish  the  Global  Alliance  for 
Transplantation (which has as a major goal the establishment of a database on the experience 
with  live  organ  donation);  and  participated  in  a  US-based  consultation  on  the  standards  for 
donation  of  organs  following  cessation  of  circulatory  and  respiratory  functions.  A  series  of 
regional consultations are being planned.  

Research ethics 

(cid:139) 

(cid:139) 

(cid:139) 

(cid:139) 

WHO has been engaged for many years in numerous activities in the field of research 
ethics,  running  workshops  for  Research  Ethics  Committees,  promulgating  guidelines 
and standards9.  

Based  on  collaborations  within  WHO,  ETH  is  contributing  to  a  number  of  training 
activities. ETH is taking part to planning workshops organized by the department of 
Immunization,  Vaccines  and  Biological  (IVB)  for  national  regulatory  Authorities 
(1st in Ethiopia in January 2005, 2nd in Burkina Faso, in May 2005). With the Eastern 
Mediterranean  Regional  Office of  WHO,  a  training  workshop  is  planed  in  Morocco, 
June 2005, another activity will be organized in Senegal in July 2005, with the African 
Regional Office. 

ETH  forms  part  of  the  Steering  Committee  of  the  Global  Forum  for  Bioethics  in 
Research; the last forum hosted in Blantyre (Malawi) in March 2005 was an occasion 
for 120 participants, most of them from developing countries, to discuss the issue of 
post-trial obligations of researchers and sponsors10. 

ETH  is  a  partner  of  NEBRA  (Networking  for  Ethics  on  Biomedical  Research  in 
Africa)  in  collaboration  with  a  group  of  African  and  European  institutions.  This 
project is funded by the European Commission (6th Framework programme - Science 
and Society). Activities started in February 2005, after the 1st plenary meeting hosted 
by  MRC-Gambia  in  Banjul  in  April  2005,  a  questionnaire  will  be  implemented  in 
fifteen countries to have exhaustive and updated information concerning ethics review 
processes  in  the  sub-region.  A  long  term  strategy  will  be  elaborated  as  a  basis  for 
future activities in the countries. 

Cloning 

At  the  request  of  a  Member  State,  ETH  has  prepared  an  information  document, 
”Reproductive  Cloning  of  Human  Beings:  Report  on  discussions  in  the  United  Nations 
General Assembly”, for the January 2005 meeting of the Executive Board. 

Bioterrorism and dual use of research results  

In  this  area,  ETH  is  working  closely  with  the  Department  of  Communicable  Disease 
Surveillance  and  Response  and  others  at  WHO.  The  purpose  of  the  project  is  to  raise 
awareness among WHO Member States about the implications that life science research and 

8 available at: http://www.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/WHA57/A57_R18-en.pdf 
9 available at: http://www.who.int/ethics/research/  
10 More information is available at: http://www.gfbronline.com/  

16

 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

development  (R&D)  may  have  for  global  health  security.  This  project  underlines  both  the 
importance of carrying out life science R&D for improving the health of all people and being 
aware  of  the  potential  risks  of  life  science  R&D.  Awareness  will  be  raised  from  both 
informative  and  ethical  perspectives,  and  may  ultimately  take  the  form  of  guidance  or  an 
evaluative framework. 

ETH collaboration with other international and regional bodies 

(cid:139) 

(cid:139) 

(cid:139) 

ETH  participated  in  The  European  Conference  of  National  Ethics  Committees 
(COMETH)  and  steering  committee  on  Bioethics  of  the  Council  of  Europe  (CDBI) 
meeting in Dubrovnik (Croatia), in April 2005. 

ETH  is  member  of  the  UN  Interagency  Committee  on  Bioethics  and  observer  for  the 
International Bioethics Committee (IBC) of UNESCO. 

ETH  provides  the  permanent  secretariat  for  the  Global  Summit  of  National  Bioethics 
Commissions  which  will  next  meet  in  Beijing,  China,  in  November  2006,  though 
several  of  the  committees  are  interested  in  carrying  forward  regional  meetings  in  the 
meantime11. 

ETH collaboration with academic centres 

In  collaboration  with  the  University  of  Geneva,  ETH  forms  part  of  a  research  project  on 
“Human Genetic Databases: Toward a Global Ethical Framework” (funded by the Geneva 
International Academic Network), interviews for the study are under way. 

Other activities 

(cid:139) 

(cid:139) 

Dissemination of information: ETH has established an extensive webpage12. A Global 
Calendar  of  events  is  offered  as  well  as  documents  of  reference  and  guidelines.  A 
comprehensive list of national ethics committees has been completed. 

A program for internship welcomes academics, healthcare professionals, and graduate 
students  in  bioethics  at  the  Department  of  Ethics,  Trade,  Human  Rights  and  Health 
Law. 

11 More information is available at: http://www.who.int/ethics/globalsummit/en/  
12 http://www.who.int/ethics/ 

17

 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Further Information 

Ethics and Health at WHO (ETH) 

Professor Alexander Capron 
Director 

Dr Marie-Charlotte Bouësseau 
Technical Officer/Ethicist 

Contact: Mrs Anne Newson 
Tel: +41 22 791 1207 | Fax: +41 22 791 1399 
Email: ethics@who.int  

Address 
WHO/SDE/ETH - World Health Organization 
20, Avenue Appia 
CH-1211 Genève 27 

Website 

WWW.who.int/ethics 

18

 
                                                           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

National and Regional 

Ethics Committees 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
► News from Quebec, Canada 

 Science and Technology Ethics Committee  

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Commission de l’éthique de la science et de la technologie 

CEST Youth 2005: an innovative project  

Electronic plagiarism in school work 

The  project  to  create  the  “CEST  Jeunesse  2005”  (“CEST  Youth  2005”)  was  inspired  by 
Parlement jeunesse (Youth Parliament), organized for a number of years by the Pedagogical 
Services Directorate of the Québec National Assembly. The Commission adopted the project 
concept at its meeting of 21 October 2004. 

The  “CEST  Youth  2005”  has  met  from  15  to 17  April 2005.  The  preliminary  work  for  this 
meeting took place in classrooms from January to April 2005, and was supervised by teachers 
from five CEGEPs (post-secondary education – students from 17 to 20 years of age) who are 
participating  in  the  project  along  with  students  from  the  core  ethics  course  taken  by  all 
CEGEP  students.  At  the  end  of  March,  three  students  per  CEGEP  were  selected  to  form 
CEST Youth 2005 (the same number of members as the CEST) and to participate in the April 
meeting:  During  this  meeting,  the  students  agreed  the  broad  outlines  of  a  draft  position 
statement to be tabled with the CEST and recommendations for stakeholders concerned by the 
problem of electronic plagiarism in school work. The CEST will publish the results of their 
work in September 2005 (more details on our website). 

Objectives of the project 

(cid:139) 

(cid:139) 

To give CEGEP students the opportunity to focus on ethical issues related to a specific 
application of science and technology as part of an ethics course and to prepare a draft 
position statement on the subject, accompanied by recommendations, for the Quebec 
Government; 

To provide an opportunity for 15 of these students to experiment with how the CEST 
develops  an  opinion  statement  by  getting  together  to  discuss  the  subject  –  i.e. 
electronic plagiarism – and to propose recommendations, to be tabled with the CEST. 
The latter will study this draft at its June meeting and will decide upon the appropriate 
follow-up: a “CEST Youth” report or a joint CEST/“CEST Youth” position statement, 
depending on the content of the CEST Youth proposition. In either case, the text will 
be tabled with the Government. 

If the “CEST Youth 2005” project proves to be a success, the CEST hopes to repeat it every 
second year. The CEST would then choose a work theme in collaboration with the teachers 
wishing to be involved in the 2007 event.  

CEST work in progress 

The use of biometric data for security purposes 

The CEST has prepared a study paper in order to review the subject and to propose a series of 
questions  concerning  a  certain  number  of  ethical  issues  raised  by  the  applications  of 
biometrics  in  a  democratic  and  pluralistic  society  (available  in  French  on  the  Commission 

20

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

website).  This  document  will  serve  as  the  basis  for  a  forum  to  be  held  in  mid  October, 
involving  a  group  of  experts  who  will  explore  the  various  facets  of  the  subject:  public 
security,  biometric  technology,  legislation,  individual  rights  and  freedoms  and  other  ethical 
issues. Members of the general public will also be invited to attend the forum and participate 
in  the  discussions.  Following  the  public  forum,  the  CEST  will  begin  to  prepare  a  position 
statement scheduled for release in the winter of 2006. 

Ethical issues related to nanotechnology 

Like  some  of  its  European  counterparts  (including  the  French  CCNE  and  Italy’s  National 
Bioethics  Committee),  the  CEST  has  begun  to  draft  a  position  statement  concerning 
nanotechnology. In the fall of 2005, while laying the groundwork for its statement, the CEST 
intends  to  hold  a  public  forum  on  the  ethical  issues  related  to  nanotechnology  that  will  be 
based  on  a  preliminary  report  on  the  subject  prepared  by  the  CEST.  The  CEST  position 
statement will follow this consultation and is slated for publication in the spring of 2006. 

Ethical issues in the neurosciences 

Preliminary work on this position statement includes completing a report that will serve as a 
description of the field of neuroscience and its applications and will propose a series of ethical 
questions  on  the  subject.  This  report  should  be  released  in  the  fall  of  2005  and  will  be 
followed  by  a  consultation.  The  CEST  should  publish  its  position  statement  in  the  fall  of 
2006. 

Two CEST productions available in English 

Position statement on organ donations and transplants 

Being aware of the keen interest in this subject shown by all Canadians and of the ongoing 
debate  concerning  whether  or  not  to  authorize  organ  retrieval  from  donors  who  have  died 
following a cardiopulmonary arrest (and not just from those who are neurologically dead), the 
CEST has had its position statement translated into English (the document is available in PDF 
format on the CEST website). 

Brochure and section on the CEST website concerning genetic databases 

In order to meet the information needs of Québec’s anglophone community, especially young 
adults studying at the post-secondary level, the Commission has produced an English version 
of  the  following  texts:  its  brochure  on  genetic  databases  (PDF  file  on  the  Commission 
website) and a section of its website devoted to the subject and designed as a complement to 
the information provided by the brochure. 

21

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Further Information 

Diane Duquet, Ph.D. 
Commission coordinator 

Address 
Commission de l’éthique de la science et de la technologie (CEST) 
1200 route de l’Église, 3rd Floor - Office 3.45 
Sainte-Foy (Québec) G1V 4Z2 
Tel: (418) 528-0965 | Fax: (418) 646-0920 
Email: ethique@etique.gouv.qc.ca 

Website 

WWW.ethique.gouv.qc.ca 

► News from France 

 

National Consultative Ethics  

  Committee for Health and Life Sciences   

Comité consultatif national d’éthique pour les sciences de la vie et de la santé 

Statute 

Following a law of august 2004, the statute of the CCNE has changed. The new law institutes 
our Committee as an Independent Authority and extend the mission to the societal questions 
raised in the fields of competence. 

The budget is affected to the Prime Minister’s services and the financial control is under the 
dependence of the “Cour des Comptes”. 

Loi n° 2004-800 du 6 août 2004 relative à la bioéthique 

« Art. L.1412-1. – Le Comité consultatif national d’éthique pour les sciences de la vie et de la 
santé a pour mission de donner des avis sur les problèmes éthiques et les questions de société 
soulevés par les progrès de la connaissance dans les domaines de la biologie, de la médecine 
et de la santé. 

« Art. L.1412-2. – Le comité est une autorité indépendante qui comprend, outre son président 
nommé  par  le  Président  de  la  République  pour  une  durée  de  deux  ans  renouvelable,  trente-
neuf membres nommés pour une durée de quatre ans renouvelable une fois. 

« Art.  L.  1412-4.  –  Les  crédits  nécessaires  à  l’accomplissement  des  missions  du  Comité 
consultatif national d’éthique pour les sciences de la vie et de la santé sont inscrits au budget 
des services généraux du Premier ministre. 

22

 
                                                                             
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

« Les dispositions de la loi du 10 août 1922 relative à l’organisation du contrôle des dépenses 
engagées ne sont pas applicables à leur gestion. 

« Le comité présente ses comptes au contrôle de la Cour des comptes. 

Composition 

The new law confirms the multidisciplinarity and pluralism organised in the previous one, but 
that means an enhancement of the independence of the Committee. 

Since February 2005, new members have been nominated. 

The new composition of the committee is 

President: 

Didier SICARD  

Honorary Presidents:  

Jean BERNARD 
Jean-Pierre CHANGEUX 

5 members, designated by the President of the Republic, are drawn from the 

principal philosophies and religious faiths: 

-  Olivier ABEL 
-  Sadek BELOUCIF 
-  Olivier de DINECHIN 
-  Haïm KORSIA 
-  Blandine KRIEGEL 

19  members,  chosen  because  of  their 
qualifications,  competence  and  their 
interest in ethical issues: 

15 members engaged in scientific research 

Jean BARDET 
Monique CANTO-SPERBER 
Chantal DESCHAMPS 
Marie-Jeanne DIEN 
Hélène GAUMONT-PRAT 
Alain GRIMFELD 
Marie-Thérèse HERMANGE 
Bernard KANOVITCH 
Chantal LEBATARD 
Pierre Le COZ 
Jacqueline MANDELBAUM 
Lucien NEUWIRTH 
Christian De ROUFFIGNAC 
Philippe ROUVILLOIS 
Michel ROUX 
Alain-Gérard SLAMA 
Dominique STOPPA-LYONNET 
Mario STASI 
Philippe WAQUET 

Jean-Claude AMEISEN 
Claude BURLET 
Jean-Paul CAVERNI 
Pascale COSSART 
Mireille DELMAS-MARTY 
Alain FISCHER 
Claude KORDON 
Pierre Le NEINDRE 
Jean-Antoine LEPESANT 
Martine LOIZEAU 
Carole MOQUIN-PATTEY 
Robert NAQUET 
Maxime SELIGMANN 
Claude SUREAU 
Dominique WOLTON 

23

 
 
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Last three Opinions 

– 

– 

– 

Opinion N° 84: Opinion on education in medical ethics, 2004-04-29 

Opinion  N°  85:  Information  regarding  the  risk  of  blood  transmission  of  Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease, 2004-11-04 

Opinion N° 86: Problems connected to marketing self-test kits for HIV screening and 
diagnosis of genetic disease, 2004-11-04 

(cid:41) 

The full Opinions are available on our website at: www.ccne-ethique.fr  

Future work 

– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 

Commercialisation of embryonic stem cells 
Prison medicine 
Ethical aspects of economic criteria in medical decisions 
Anonymity and access to origins 
Neurosciences, development of brain sciences 
Nano-biotechnologies 

Annual public meeting: Paris – November 2005 

Further Information 

Marie-Hélène Mouneyrat 
General Secretary 
Tel: + 33 (0)1 44 42 48 52/53 | Fax: + 33 (0)1 44 42 48 48 
Email:   mialet@comite-ethique.fr 

rahmani@comite-ethique.fr 

Address 
Comité consultatif national d’éthique pour les sciences de la vie 
et de la santé (CCNE) 
71, rue Saint-Dominique 
F-75007 PARIS 

Website 

WWW.ccne-ethique.fr 

24

 
                                                                          
 
 
 
 
► News from Germany 

 

National Ethics Council 

 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Der Nationale Ethikrat 

Function 

Following  the  German  Federal  Government’s  decision  of  2  May  2001  the  National  Ethics 
Council was established on 8 June 2001 as a national forum for dialogue about ethical issues 
in the life sciences. It provides an umbrella for interdisciplinary discourse relating to science, 
medicine, theology, philosophy and the social and legal sciences, expressing its views on both 
the ethical aspects of new developments in the life sciences and their impact on individuals 
and  society  as  a  whole.  The  National  Ethics  Council  consists  of  up  to  25  Members  who 
represent  the  fields  of  science,  medicine,  theology,  philosophy,  society,  law,  ecology  and 
economy,  and  are  appointed  by  the  Federal  Chancellor  for  a  period  of  four  years.  The 
Members generally convene once a month in Berlin. 

The National Ethics Council is an independent body, bound only by its purpose as stipulated 
in the Government decision that established it. It determines the scope and organisation of its 
work independently. 

The  Ethics  Council  puts  great  emphasis  on  its  work  with  the  community  and  makes  its 
opinions, recommendations and reports public. 

The National Ethics Council cooperates with other ethics bodies in Germany as well as with 
comparable institutions of other countries and international organisations. 

The  General  Secretariat  of  the  National  Ethics  Council  is  located  on  the  premises  of  the 
Berlin  Brandenburg  Academy  of  Sciences  and  Humanities.  The  Council  and  its  General 
Secretariat are funded by the German Federal Government. 

Previous Opinions 

Importing human embryonic stem cells (2001-12-20) 

Following  intensive  debate  the  National  Ethics  Council  published  its  Opinion  on  importing 
human embryonic stem cells for research purposes on 20 December 2001. 

In conclusion, the comprehensive document offers the following options: 

A 

B 

C 

The temporary import of pluripotent human stem cells is deemed ethically acceptable 
under strict conditions (described in detail in the Opinion), as the production of such 
stem  cells  using  surplus  embryos  is  held  to  be  ethically  permissible.  Therefore,  the 
production  of  such  stem  cells  using  surplus  embryos  within  Germany  would  also  be 
acceptable. The import conditions mentioned would have to apply in equal measure to 
both publicly and privately funded research. 

The  Council  advocates  the  provisional  and  temporary  import  of  human  embryonic 
stem  cells  under  strict  conditions  as  described  in  the  Opinion.  All  conditions  shall 
apply  in  equal  measure  to  both  publicly  and  privately  funded  research,  and  must  be 
met prior to import. 

A  provisional  ban  (moratorium)  should  be  imposed  on  stem  cell  imports.  The 
legislator  must  arrive  at  an  explicit  decision  on  imports,  yet  not  before  clarifying  a 

25

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

D 

number of issues, individually listed in the Opinion. These issues should be examined 
before the end of 2004. 

Stem  cell  imports  are  deemed  ethically  impermissible,  mainly  due  to  the  basic 
considerations surrounding the production of stem cells using human embryos. As this 
is deemed an impermissible instrumentalisation (destruction) of human life, it follows 
that the import of such stem cells must be rejected. The imported cells carry the stigma 
of  the  conditions  under  which  they  were  produced.  Their  import  will  lead  to  an 
increase  in  demand,  thereby  directly  promoting  consumption  of  embryos  in  the 
exporting  countries.  Eventually  the  level  of  protection  afforded  to  embryos  will  be 
lowered also in Germany. 

Bearing in mind that the National Ethics Council has yet to express its opinions on the basic 
issues surrounding stem cell research, and while decisions regarding the import of embryonic 
stem  cells  are  still  pending,  fifteen  Members  have  moved  in  favour  of  a  tightly  restricted 
temporary  import  of  embryonic  stem  cells  (Option  B).  Nine  among  these  fifteen  also 
advocated  Option  A.  Ten  Members  favour  a  moratorium  on  stem  cell  imports  for  the  time 
being (Option C), among these four who are also in favour of Option D. 

Genetic diagnosis before and during pregnancy (2003-01-23) 

Germany's National Ethics Council unanimously recommends regulating the use of prenatal 
diagnosis  (PND)  and  pre-implantation  genetic  diagnosis  (PGD)  in  a  special  comprehensive 
reproductive medicine law.  

The Council's 24 members once again urged an open discussion of the ethical, legal and social 
issues arising from advances being made in medicine and the life sciences, a discussion that 
acknowledges existing differences of opinion. The Council points out that mutual respect is a 
prerequisite  for  reaching  a  convincing  political  solution  to  the  conflicts  that  have  come  to 
light in the course of this discussion. Furthermore, this particularly calls for a willingness to 
respect  differing  opinions  and  to  examine  the  arguments  behind  these  opinions  equally 
conscientiously and objectively. 

As already stated in its first Opinion on the import of human embryonic stem cells, issued in 
December 2001, the National Ethics Council consequently does not consider it to be its task 
to embrace a particular regulatory arrangement or indeed to recommend that arrangement to 
lawmakers as ultimately the only possible option.  

The Council's job is, rather, to develop arguments and point out possible solutions connected 
with these arguments.  It  must  be left  to parliament to choose the legislative path that, in its 
view and in cognizance of these arguments, is appropriate. 

Based on this understanding, the Opinion presents and discusses what are, from the Council's 
perspective,  the  two  possible  responses  to  pre-implantation  genetic  diagnosis,  namely,  strict 
rejection or allowing PGD only as an exception when stringent requirements have been met. 
As part of the possible regulatory arrangements it outlines, the Opinion also highlights various 
approaches  that  could  be  taken  and,  in  doing  so,  further  broadens  the  scope  of  its  critical 
analysis. 

The  Council's  members  have  therefore  decided  to  dispense  with  a  vote  and  have  confined 
themselves instead to indicating their own position by signing the approaches they support. 

With the Opinion issued in 2003, the Council presented a document that 

– 

describes  the  medical  basis  for  PND  and  PGD  and  outlines  the  legal  and  social 
framework for their actual or possible use, 

26

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

– 

– 

assesses various arguments in favor of or against allowing PGD, and  

critically discusses the current practice of PND. 

Biobanks for research (2004-03-17) 

The  National  Ethics  Council  has  examined  the  scientific  status  of  biobanks  by  reference  to 
concrete  examples,  established  ethical  principles  for  their  evaluation,  put  forward  a 
framework of legal conditions to govern their operation, and formulated conclusions on how 
they should be regulated. The Opinion is preceded by 30 regulatory proposals. 

For the purposes of this Opinion, biobanks are defined as collections of specimens of human 
bodily  substances  associated,  or  associatable,  with  personal  data  and  information  on  their 
donors. The Opinion deals exclusively with biobanks intended for medical research. 

Biobanks  are  an  important  resource  for  identifying  the  causes  and  mechanisms  of  a  large 
number of diseases, and in that respect could lead to significant breakthroughs in medical and 
pharmaceutical research. However, they also arouse anxiety and distrust. The main concern is 
donor protection. What is feared is the uncontrolled use of specimens and data, together with 
the possibility that potential donors might be pressurized into assuming unreasonable risks or 
imprudently divulging personal information. 

The  National  Ethics  Council  therefore  considers  it  essential  for  explicit  information  to  be 
given  to  those  concerned  and  regards  their  consent  as  being  of  central  importance.  At  the 
same time the Ethics Council is aware that the full scientific potential of biobank specimens 
and data can often be exploited only if their use is not restricted to individual, predetermined 
research projects. For this reason, it must be also possible for donors to consent to the use of 
their  specimens  and  data  for  medical  research  in  general  and  for  an  indefinite  period.  The 
risks to donors presented by the greater flexibility thus afforded to research must, however, be 
offset by a legal requirement of confidentiality on the part of the researchers. 

The problems and issues raised by biobanks are outlined in a joint declaration by the National 
Ethics Councils of Germany and France (2003-10-02).  

The large-scale collection and comparison of body materials and the data derived from them 
make it possible to establish correlations that may in the long term yield a valuable diagnostic 
and therapeutic return. However, there is a risk that the data and samples could be used for 
purposes other than those to which the donor has consented or be passed on to third parties.  

The following aspects are of paramount importance in the regulation of biobanks:  

– 

– 

– 

the  existence  of  a  guaranteed  continuous  "chain  of  responsibility"  in  relation  to  the 
derivation, storage, handling and use of body materials and personal data;  

a clear definition of the donor’s free and informed consent; and  

issues of solidarity, altruism and justice.  

The conclusion is that a new regulatory framework must be established in both countries to 
reconcile the development and utilization of research with protection of the individual. This is 
not only a task confronting Germany and France, but must also be addressed internationally.  

27

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Polar body13 diagnosis (2004-06-16)14 

The German National Ethics Council does not see any need for specific legislation on polar 
body  diagnosis  at  present,  but  continues  to  recommend  the  passing  of  a  Reproductive 
Medicine Law to regulate the entire field of reproductive medicine. 

In its Opinion on genetic diagnosis before and during pregnancy (2003) the National Ethics 
Council already  discussed the  possibilities and limits of polar body diagnosis and evaluated 
its ethical and legal aspects in the context of pre-implantation genetic diagnosis. 

Polar body diagnosis is deemed to be permissible, and is practised, in Germany because the 
egg cell is examined at the “pronuclear stage” – that is, before an embryo as defined by the 
German Embryo Protection Law has come into being. 

Against  this  background  the  National  Ethics  Council  convened  a  group  of  experts  for  a 
hearing  on  19  February  2004  to  obtain  information  on  advances  in  the  technique,  its 
application in the field of reproductive medical therapy and its use under the conditions laid 
down by the Embryo Protection Law. 

The  National  Ethics  Council  welcomes  the  initiative  of  the  centres  that  conduct  polar  body 
diagnosis in using the procedure only in the context of a joint scientific study. 

Cloning for reproductive purposes and cloning for the purposes of biomedical research 
(2004-09-13) 

After more than a year of intensive deliberation the German National Ethics Council issued its 
Opinion  on  cloning  for  reproductive  purposes  and  cloning  for  the  purposes  of  biomedical 
research on 13 September 2004. 

The  National  Ethics  Council  unanimously  takes  the  view  that  a  worldwide  ban  should  be 
imposed on human cloning for reproductive purposes and that the legal situation in Germany 
should be clarified by the adoption of criminal-law provisions prohibiting the practice. 

Three positions have emerged on human cloning for research purposes: 

A 

B 

C 

Retention of the prohibition of research cloning; 

Limited sanctioning of research cloning; 

Prohibition of research cloning for the time being. 

Notwithstanding these three positions, the National Ethics Council has reached a consensus to 
the effect that human cloning for research purposes should not be allowed at present. 

The Council’s ethical and constitutional assessments on reproductive and research cloning are 
based  on  a  thoroughgoing  analysis  of  the  scientific  state  of  the  art  and  of  the  current  legal 
situation. 

As  with  the  Opinion  on  genetic  diagnosis  before  and  during  pregnancy  (2003),  the  Council 
again  decided  to  dispense  with  a  vote.  The  differing  positions  on  research  cloning  are  each 
signed by the members who subscribe to them. 

13  Editorial  footnote:  A  polar  body  is  a  small  cell  (which  eventually  disintegrates)  that  is  the  by-product  of 
meiosis in female animals. One functional ovum and potentially three polar bodies result from meiosis of each 
primary oocyte. 
14 A genetic examination can be carried out not only on embryonic cells but also, to test for particular conditions, 
on  the  polar  bodies  formed  during  oocyte  maturation.  The  first  polar  body  arises  just  before  ovulation  and 
contains one of the mother’s two chromosome sets. The other maternal chromosome set remains in the egg cell. 
Examination of the polar body can therefore reveal any chromosomal aberrations that have already taken place. 

28

 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

The  patenting  of  biotechnological  inventions  involving  the  use  of  biological  material 
of human origin (2004-10-06) 

After  several  months  of  intensive  debate  the  German  National  Ethics  Council  issued  its 
Opinion  on  the  patenting  of  biotechnological  inventions  involving  the  use  of  biological 
material of human origin on 6 October 2004. 

The majority recommendation of the National Ethics Council is that the EU directive on the 
legal protection of biotechnological inventions should be transposed into national law as soon 
as  possible.  This  recommendation  is  based  on  the  view  that  the  purpose  of  the  draft  law 
presented by the Federal Government is to limit the content that can be protected by a patent. 
The  majority  also  recommends  the  adoption  of  measures  –  if  necessary  outside  the  field  of 
patent  law  –  to  ensure  that  donors  are  given  adequate  information  and  that  due  evidence  of 
their consent is furnished. There is no need for any further measures: the practical treatment 
of  substance  protection  on  the  one  hand  and  the  limitation  and  concrete  shaping  of  patent 
protection on the other can be left to patent practice. However, future trends and, in particular, 
the  practice  of  the  courts  and  patent  offices  should  be  closely  monitored,  especially  with 
respect  to  the  handling  of  substance  protection  and  of  the  prohibition  of  granting  on  public 
order grounds, and as regards the facilitation of compulsory licensing provided for in the draft 
law. Any concerns arising should give rise to attempts to secure changes and clarifications at 
EU level. 

In  a  more  far-reaching  position  statement,  eleven  members  of  the  Council  recommend  that 
Germany  make  full  use  of  the  existing  arrangements  allowing  the  adoption  of  individual 
national  provisions,  as  in  other  EU  Member  States,  and  regret  that  considerations  of  time 
preclude  a  review  of  a  number  of  fundamental  elements  of  the  Directive.  They  therefore 
suggest that any necessary corrections be set out in the explanatory memorandum to the law 
and communicated to the European Commission as soon as possible. With regard to the legal 
instrument itself, they recommend that: 

– 

– 

– 

– 

– 

the extent of protection afforded by a claim should be limited to the technical 
application of a function as specifically set forth in the description;  

explicit  provisions  should  be  adopted  stipulating  that  reproductive  human 
substances, human organs, human embryonic stem cells and stem cell lines are 
not patentable;  

it should be obligatory to furnish evidence of the provenance of the biological 
substances of human and non-human origin used in each case;  

it should be compulsory to obtain free and informed donor consent; and 

the need for an as restrictive as possible interpretation of inventions should be 
emphasized.  

Living Wills (2005-05-19) 

On  19  May  2005,  the  German  National  Ethics  Council  completed  work  on  its  Opinion  on 
Living Wills. The council makes the following recommendations: 

1. 

2. 

The  National  Ethics  Council  emphasizes  that  the  debate  on  the  scope  and 
binding  character  of  living  wills  must  not  have  the  effect  of  calling  into 
question the ban on euthanasia enshrined in Section 216 of the German Penal 
Code. 

The  National  Ethics  Council  believes  that  a  mentally  competent  person  must 
have the right, in order to provide for the possibility of his or her ceasing to be 
mentally  competent  at  some  future  date,  to  draw  up  a  living  will  containing 

29

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

binding stipulations for or against subsequent medical treatment. It should be 
possible  for  these  to  include  the  adoption,  cessation  or  refusal  of  medically 
indicated  measures  to  preserve  life,  but  on  no  account  measures  for  actively 
bringing about death. For the sake of legal certainty, the conditions and scope 
of a living will should be fixed by law. At the same time, efforts to safeguard 
the  provision  of  support  in  the  fields  of  palliative  medicine,  pain  therapy, 
nursing and psychosocial care should be continued and intensified. 

Living wills influence the legal relationship  obtaining between  the  patient  on 
the  one  hand  and,  on  the  other,  the  doctor,  the  nursing  staff,  the  patient’s 
representative or members of the patient’s family. They ought therefore to be 
governed  by  specific  provisions  in  the  Civil  Code.  The  members  of  the 
National Ethics Council consider the adoption of complementary criminal-law 
provisions to be desirable, so as to increase the degree of legal certainty for the 
above-mentioned  persons  in  terms  of  the  criminal  as  well  as  of  the  civil  law 
and  to  make  the  distinction  between  living  wills  and  euthanasia  sufficiently 
clear.  Some  members  hold  that  appropriate  criminal-law  provisions  are 
essential. 

In  the  view  of  the  large  majority  of  the  members  of  the  National  Ethics 
Council,  it  should  be  made  clear  by  legislation  that  a  living  will  whereby  a 
person has recognizably and in sufficiently concrete terms specified his or her 
wishes  in  relation  to  a  given  medical  treatment  is  binding  on  doctors  and 
nursing staff. Some members reject the notion that living wills should have a 
strictly binding character, in order to ensure that doctors and nursing staff have 
sufficient discretion in their decision-making; however, those concerned must 
put forward compelling reasons for making use of this possibility. 

The predominant view of the members of the National Ethics Council is that 
the  scope  and  binding  character  of  a  living  will  should  not  be  limited  to 
specific  phases  of  the  patient’s  illness.  Some  members  believe  that  decisions 
on the cessation of life-preserving measures should be deemed binding only in 
the case of an irreversible condition that will lead to the death of the patient in 
the relatively short term. 

The  National  Ethics  Council  recommends  that  when  provisions  governing 
living wills are adopted, the powers of legal representatives and proxies should 
be  specified  by  law  at  the  same  time.  Legislation  should  be  passed  to  ensure 
that a proxy appointed by the patient or a court-designated legal representative 
can  enforce  compliance  with  the  patient’s  wishes  as  set  forth  in  a  living  will 
even if the doctor and nursing staff and also, where relevant, the members of 
the patient’s family disagree. 

The majority view of the National Ethics Council is that a living will in which 
the patient has recognizably and in sufficiently concrete terms made a decision 
of  his  or  her  own  in  relation  to  the  relevant  situation  is  binding  on  the  legal 
representative or proxy even if he or she considers this decision not to be in the 
patient’s best interests. 

The  National  Ethics  Council  recommends  that  the  Court  of  Guardianship 
should have  jurisdiction in  cases of reasonable suspicion of abuse of a living 
will by the legal representative or proxy. In addition, the law should stipulate 
that decisions of the legal representative shall be subject to the consent of the 
Court  of  Guardianship  in  the  event  of  differences  of  opinion  on  the  validity 
and  interpretation  of  a  living  will  between  the  legal  representative,  doctor, 
nursing staff or members of the patient’s family. 

30

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

The  National  Ethics  Council  recommends  that  in  cases  where  no  relevant 
living  will  exist  separate  provisions  should  be  adopted  with  regard  to  the 
decision-making  competence  of  a  legal  representative  and  of  a  proxy 
respectively. In this case the legal representative should be required by law to 
act  in  the  patient’s  best  interests  in  accordance  with  his  or  her  presumed 
wishes.  For  all  decisions  carrying  a  risk  of  the  patient’s  death  or  severe  and 
prolonged  harm  to  the  patient’s  health,  the  legal  representative  should  be 
required  to  obtain  the  consent  of  the  Court  of  Guardianship.  The  decision-
making powers of the proxy, on the other hand, should be determined by the 
instrument of proxy and by the discretionary scope which it allows. The Court 
of Guardianship should have jurisdiction only if there are indications that the 
proxy is exceeding the scope of the discretion granted to him or her. 

The National Ethics Council considers that the law should provide that a living 
will, in order to be deemed valid, must be drawn up in writing or documented 
in  comparably  reliable  form  (e.g.  on  video  tape).  Statements  not  complying 
with this formal requirement should be taken into account in determining the 
patient’s presumed wishes. 

The majority view of the National Ethics Council is that the validity of a living 
will  should  not  be  made  conditional  on  its  maker’s  having  obtained  prior 
expert  advice.  However,  all  members  of  the  National  Ethics  Council 
recommend that expert advice be taken before a living will is drawn up. 

The National Ethics Council recommends that provision be made for ensuring 
that  living  wills  are  up  to  date.  The  majority  of  the  Council’s  members 
consider that the validity of a living will or of an instrument of proxy should 
not  be  made  subject  to  predetermined  time  limits  or  dependent  on  repeated 
confirmation.  The  Council  favours  a  statutory  presumption  that  the  decision 
embodied in a living will or instrument of proxy remains valid in the concrete 
situation.  The  mere  assumption  that  the  patient  has  since  changed  his  or  her 
mind is insufficient to invalidate the presumption. Some members believe that 
before  the  provisions  of  a  living  will  or  instrument  of  proxy  are  applied, 
evidence  must  be  produced  that  the  wishes  expressed  in  it  correspond  to  the 
patient’s presumed present wishes. 

13. 

In  the  opinion  of  the  National  Ethics  Council,  the  law  should  –  especially  in 
view  of  an  increasing  number  of  cases  of  dementia  –  make  it  clear  that  any 
signs  of  a  desire  to  live  in  a  person  who  is  no  longer  mentally  competent 
invalidate the binding character of a living will in which treatment is refused, 
unless: 

a) 

b) 

c) 

d) 

the  medical  decision  situation  is  described  in  the  living  will  in  a 
sufficiently concrete manner; 
the living will refers to the signs of a desire to live mentioned above and 
stipulates that they are immaterial to the decision; 
the  living  will  has  been  drawn  up  in  writing  or  is  documented  in  a 
comparably reliable manner; and 
the living will has been drawn up after suitable advice has been obtained. 

14. 

The existence or non-existence of a living will may not be made a precondition 
of  access  to  care  facilities.  Neither  may  living  wills  be  abused  for  economic 
purposes in other ways. 

31

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Current work and forthcoming Opinions 

– 

– 

Predictive health information 

End-of-life issues 

Annual public meetings 

– 

– 

– 

Biobanks  –  a  chance  for  progress  in  science  or  a  sellout  of  the  “resource”  human 
body? (2002-10-24) 

The attitudes of non-Western cultures to prenatal life (2003-10-23) 

What  kind  of  doctors  does  our  society  want?  The  medical  treatment  contract  today 
(2004-10-21) 

Further Information 

Dr Rudolf Teuwsen 
Head of Office  
Tel. +49 30 20370-612 | Fax: +49 30 20370-252 
Email: rteuwsen@ethikrat.org 

Ulrike Florian 
Press and public relations officer 
Tel. +49 30 20370-246 | Fax: +49 30 20370-252 
Email: florian@ethikrat.org 

Address 
German National Ethics Council 
Jaegerstrasse 22/23, D-10117 Berlin 

Website 

WWW.ethikrat.org/ 

► News from Greece 

  Hellenic National Bioethics Commission   

Recently issued recommendations 

Recommendation on Clinical Trials 

in  every  patient/physician 
The  National  Bioethics  Commission  acknowledged 
relationship, patients are a priori in a vulnerable position and stressed the wide ethical, and 
legal, responsibility of physicians vis-à-vis the patient.  

that 

The  Commission  recognized  the  need  of  human  subject  experimentation  in  the  context  of 
clinical trials given that there is scientific uncertainty in the medical community about which 
treatment – current vs. new – is more suitable to cure a disease and the principles of respect to 
persons, beneficence, and justice are respected. 

32

 
                          
 
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

The Commission stressed that the procedure of informed consent does not always safeguard 
the  protection  of  participants  since  in  certain  contexts  –  e.g.  prison,  army  –  participant  free 
will is de facto restricted. The Commission reckoned that there is a heightened risk for people 
in such cases to be treated as experimental “means” and therefore judged that their inclusion 
to clinical trials is in principle ethically unjustified. 

The Commission highlighted the demand of the medical research community for transparency 
in all stages of a clinical trial, including the design, the collection/processing and publication 
of results and pinpointed that transparency is crucial also for the social acceptance of clinical 
research. 

The Commission supported mandatory publication of results at the end of all clinical trials as 
well as the creation of a national registry for clinical trials that would be freely accessible to 
the public. 

The Commission emphasized the importance of systematic ethical training of young scientists 
and recommended the integration of related subjects in the curricula of biomedical faculties. 

The Commission identified a lack of essential ethical controls in biomedical research facilities 
and  urged  the  government  to  take  appropriate  steps  to  set  up  institutional  and/or  regional 
Research Ethics Committees. 

Current work 

The  Commission  has  met  already  twice  in  2005  in  order  to  deal  with  the  issue  of  “Review 
Ethics Committees”. The Commission intends to produce a draft Rules of Procedures for the 
Research Ethics Committees that are active in Greek hospitals and universities. 

During the above meetings, the Commission is also elaborating – as second main subject – the 
issue of euthanasia. 

Hearings 

Following  the  successful  and  very  fruitful  results  from  the  first  hearing  arranged  by  the 
Commission  on  the  issue  of  clinical  trials  on  medicinal  products  for  human  use,  the 
Commission sought consultation from experts for a second time (in March 2005) on its efforts 
to  develop  draft  Rules  of  Procedures  for  Research  Ethics  Committees  (in  hospitals  and 
universities). 

Information work/Consultation via the website 

The Commission’s website is currently under reconstruction (updating procedure) in order to 
meet new regulations for accessibility. The home page will be revised to ensure that visitors 
to the site are able to navigate the site as easily as possible. The Commission hopes that the 
website will become an increasingly important component of its dissemination strategy, since 
it will be enriched with new rubrics of bioethics related issues. 

Cooperation with other relevant bodies / Committees 

The Commission is regularly invited to respond to consultative documents produced by other 
relevant  ethics  bodies/committees/councils,  for  example,  the  Nuffield  Council  on  Bioethics 
kindly requested last month the comments of the Commission (in the form of a questionnaire) 
on the ethical issues raised by prolonging life in foetuses and the newborn.  

Future Agenda 

The  Commission  strongly  considers  that  education  in  bioethics  can  help  to  bring  out  the 
complexity  of  the  issues  related  to  bioethics.  Therefore  the  Commission  intends  to  give 

33

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

priority  to  the  issue  of  education  in  bioethics  and  more  specifically  how  bioethics  can  be 
taught and at which educational level. 

Follow – up of an initiative at European level 

In  response  to  the  call  for  proposal  “FP6-2004-Science-and-Society-9”  of  the  European 
Commission,  the  Hellenic  National  Bioethics  Commission  took  the  initiative  to  submit  (20 
October  2004)  a  proposal  with  the  collaboration  of  three  other  Bioethics  Committees  (The 
German Ethics Council, the French Consultative Ethics Committee and the National Bioethics 
Committee of Cyprus). The subject of the proposal was “Ethical Research on Supernumerary 
Human  Embryos”.  The  co-ordinator  organization  was  the  Hellenic  National  Bioethics 
Commission. 

Initially the proposal was favourably evaluated by the Commission Services, however, due to 
the proposal’s position in the resulting ranked lists of proposals, and to the budgetary limits, 
no contract negotiations on this proposal will be proceeded with by the Commission. 

Further Information 

Marianna Dracopoulou 
Executive Head Secretary 
Tel: +30 210 88 47 700 
Fax: +30 210 88.47 701 
Email: Secretariat@bioethics.gr, 

Address 
Evelpidon 47 Str. T.K., GR-11362 Athens 

Website 

WWW.bioethics.gr 

► A View from Malta 

 

Bioethics Consultative Committee   

Individuation in Early Human Development  

When  Norman  Ford,  first  wrote  “When  Did  I  Begin”,  he  clearly  pointed  out  that  the  really 
valid  argument  that  may  be  used  in  identifying  the  point  of  human  individuation  during 
embryological  development,  is  not  the  argument  of  potential,  but  that  of  ontological 
development of the human being. This means looking back at the time-fractions preceding a 
present moment and going back to trace the beginning of the existent individual, as much as 
possible.  Ford  himself  was  actually  misled  by  the  argument  on  twinning  from  the  same 
monovular embryo. Had it not been for this, which can be explained by realising that a new 
individual arises when a new pluripotent cell separates from the developing cell mass(1), Ford 
himself  could  have  come  to  an  entirely  different  conclusion.  His  conclusion  could  have 
invariably been genetic union of the two pronuclei to form the zygote, that is about 20 hours 
after penetration of the ovum by the sperm cell. Beyond that point, it is difficult to trace the 

34

 
               
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

ontogenic  continuation  of  the  same  human  individual  for  both  anatomical  and  functional 
reasons. 

Anatomically, when the sperm enters the ovum, it sets off a reaction to seal off the ovum from 
the  outside  environment  and  creates  a  number  of  ionic  changes in  the  ovum  which  leads  to 
certain changes in the female pronucleus. The sperm itself looses its tail and becomes known 
as the male pronucleus! It is interesting to note that about two or three hours after penetration, 
the  genetic  information  in  the  female  pronucleus,  changes  substantially  in  a  haphazard 
fashion, as the ovum passes through its so called 2nd meiotic division with sufficient crossing 
over  and  changes  between  chromosomes  thereby  ensuring  that  the  result  of  this,  is  a 
genetically  different  female  pronucleus  than  the  one  just  before.  The  excess  chromosomes 
after this division are thrown out into the now newly called ootid, as the 2nd polar body, which 
usually comes to sit just inside the outer border of the ootid. There is no way that the genetic 
information inside the now present female pronucleus is the same as that previous to the 2nd 
polar body formation, so there is no way that ontological development may be traced beyond 
this  particular  point  in  time!  According  to  the  different  genetic  result  obtained  within  the 
second meiotic division, the new zygote will be able to specifically read for protein synthesis, 
which is the material basis for a new body. This reason alone should alert one to the fact, that 
therefore it is not possible to have a human individual before this point. At penetration,  the 
cell  is  a  human  cell  with  the  potential  to  become  a  zygote  or  embryo.  If  there  is  a  human 
individual  at  penetration,  it  definitely  is  not  the  same  one  that  exists  after  the  2nd  meiotic 
division! So do we get two individuals out of the same ovum? I think not. 

Another point of interest, is that the original female egg nucleus after penetration and before 
the  2nd  polar  body  formation,  although  nominally  haploid  actually  contains  two  chromatids 
which are totally diverse from each other because of the cross-over results of the first meiotic 
division  and  therefore  prior  to  this  point  in  human  development,  the  total  complement  of 
genes  between  the  male  and  female  pronuclei,  is  triploid  that  is  containing  three  sets  of 
chromosomes  which  is  not  exactly  normal.  It  is  interesting  that  once  the  2nd  polar  body  is 
extruded,  this  may  itself  be  fertilised  by  a  second  sperm  cell  to  produce  monovular  twins 
which are however genetically non-identical(2).  

After the formation of the ootid with the two pronuclei, male and female, each with a haploid 
(one half) set of chromosomes, the two come together, the nuclear membrane disappears and 
the  new  complete  set  of  chromosomes  of  the  zygote  meet  for  the  first  time.  As  Professor 
Jerome Lejeune (Geneticist; 1st President of the Pontifical Academy for Life) remarked, this is 
the  human  embryo  with  a  new  combined  set  of  diploid  (one  whole)  human  chromosomes. 
Therefore this must mark the beginning of a complete individual with consequent connected 
ontogeny. The information from both the male and the female pronuclei is necessary to form 
the  zygote,  otherwise  it  will  not  develop  into  a  foetus,  but  change  into  a  shapeless 
hydatidiform  mole,  which  sometimes  happens  when  one  of  the  two  pronuclei  dies  out.  For 
those  who  maintain  individuation  from  penetration,  this  would  mean  that  there  would  first 
have been a specific individual, who then was changed at the 2nd meiotic division into another 
genetically  different  second  individual,  who  then  disappeared  completely  when  the 
hydatidiform  mole  formed.  Rather  preposterous  I  would  think!  The  reality  is  that  with  the 
formation  of  the  hydatidiform  mole,  the  individual  never  did  exist  and  never  will,  because 
development is disordered!  

We therefore know that the only really substantial change in human development, is when the 
male and female pronuclei each carrying 23 single chromosomes, transform themselves into a 
completely  different  entity  with  46  chromosomes,  the  human  zygote.  Beyond  this  stage 
substantial change does not occur(3). 

Some  people  are  saying  that  the  full  complement  of  genes  exist at  penetration  so  there  is  a 
human individual here. They are alluding to the fact that since the full complement of genes 

35

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

exist in two separate pronuclei, that constitutes the full human genome, but again I ask when 
is this, prior to or after the 2nd meiotic division? Or are there two individuals? Some people 
are claiming that there is an individual in the pronuclear stage because some new protein is 
being laid down and the two pronuclei have actually started some transcription of their DNA 
(transcription is the copying of the DNA information in the gene, onto RNA templates called 
m-RNA). First of all for the formation of protein as the physical basis of the new individual, 
transcription  is  not  enough,  but  it  must  be  followed  by  another  process  called  translation, 
where another form of RNA called t-RNA, must bind to the m-RNA produced previously and 
bring  the  protein  precursor  units  together,  which  then  join  and  form  the  protein!  This  takes 
place outside the nucleus on another type of RNA called r-RNA which acts as an anchor and 
bottle  opener  at  the  same  time.  At  the  pronuclear  stage,  transcription  is  spurious  and 
haphazard and is not coupled to translation(4). It is also non directed. If one adds some DNA 
to a test tube and pours in the precursors of RNA, these will start to be formed spontaneously 
after  some  time.  Does  this  mean  that  there  is  human  life  inside  the  test  tube?  This 
transcription  is  non-directional  and  passive.  There  is  no  human  life  in  the  test-tube. 
Directional  transcription  together  with  the  translation  of  the  new  body  proteins  only  occurs 
after pronuclear fusion to form the zygotic nucleus. This is then activated at the four cell stage 
of morular development at what is called Zygotic Genome Activation or ZGA. It is here that 
the zygotic genome directs the development of the new individual(5)! In fact up to this stage, 
the new cells only grow in number not in size as the existing cytoplasm is shared between the 
ever  increasing  number  of  dividing  cells  and  it  is  only  after  ZGA  that  the  cell  volume 
increases  in  size  too.  Also  it  is  important  to  add  that  initial  short  segments  of  m-RNA  are 
needed from certain specific chromosomal transcriptions to read off the information for new 
transcription from other different chromosomes within the same nucleus, so it seems that all 
the chromosomes should be present together in one nucleus for the whole genome to be read 
properly. 

This  still  leaves  one  unanswered  question.  The  detection  of  new  proteins  in  the  pronuclear 
ootid. It seems that these new proteins are transcribed and translated by ‘new’ m-RNA which 
lay dormant inside the original ovum and sperm and which were produced by the mother and 
the  father,  so  called  maternal  and  paternal  m-RNA(6).  It  is  a  fact  that  fertilization  and  early 
zygotic development up to the 4 cell stage of the embryo is under maternal m-RNA control 
from the ovum. If one removes both pronuclei of a developing ootid (enucleation), this will 
continue  to  develop  spontaneously  up  to  the  4-cell  stage  of  the  morula  or  embryo  and  then 
stop  suddenly.  Therefore  it  shows  that  the  elements  for  fertilization  and  very  directed  early 
embryological  development  already  lie  dormant  within  the  ovum  and  they  are  then 
superceded by the directed control of the new embryonic genome after pronuclear  fusion at 
ZGA.  This  process  is  called  maternal  to  embryonic  transition  of  developmental  control,  or 
MET for short(7). 

In my mind all this leaves no doubt that integrating the anatomical and functional imperatives 
of  embryological  development,  the  point  of  individuation  lies  with  pronuclear  fusion.  As 
somebody wrote previously, when one goes into these matters with questions, one comes out 
with  answers,  but  when  one  enters  with  preconceived  answers,  one  comes  out  with  many 
questions! 

Further Information 

                                 

Dr Michael Asciak MD. M.Phil. MP. 
Chairman Bioethics Consultative Committee 
Email: michael.asciak@gov.mt 

36

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

References 

1.  Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal, June 1999, John Hopkins University Press, Maryland, pg. 138. 

2.  Scott F. Gilbert, Non-identical Monozygotic Twins,  
www.devbio.com/printer.php?ch=11&id=111 

3.  German, L.J., Fundamental Ethical Issues in Assisted Procreation, paper. 

4.  Schultz,  R.M.,  The  Molecular  Foundations  of  the  Maternal  to  Zygotic  Transition  in  the  Preimplantation 

Embryo. Human Reproduction Update, Vol.8 pg.323-331, 2002. 

5. 

Ibid. 

6.  Scott F. Gilbert, Early Research Docuting Stored Maternal mRNAs, 

www.devbio.com/printer.php?ch=5&id=52 

7.  Allan  King,  W.,  Maternal 

to 

Embryonic 

Transition 

of  Developmental 

Control, 

www.begc.crbr.ulaval.ca/themes/themes3.htm 

► News from Poland 

  Committee of Medical Ethics of the Polish 

Chamber of Physicians and Dentists   

Jerzy Umiastowski 

Ethical Questions on Prenatal Biotechnology 

The Committee of Medical Ethics of the Polish Chamber of Physicians and Dentists has been 
carrying  on  the  public  debate  on  prenatal  biotechnology,  in  particular  on  ethical  problems 
connected with fecundation in vitro. 

The debate was initiated with the conference entitled “Ethical questions concerning prenatal 
biotechnology” organized in Warsaw on 25 November 2004. The aim of the conference was 
the  formulation  of  ethical  questions  rather  than  the  presentation  of  views.  We  accepted  that 
formulation  of  ethical  questions  would  be  an  essential  element  of  the  debate.  The  debate 
without precisely formulated questions often becomes a controversy. Rational questions lead 
towards rational and not controversial answers. 

The  questions  are  being  published  in  subsequent  issues  of  the  Physicians’  Newspaper,  a 
monthly magazine edited by the Polish Chamber of Physicians and Dentists, reaching every 
physician  in  Poland.  After  discussion,  the  questions  will  be  sent  to  the  members  of  the 
Parliament  to  take  them  into  consideration  in  the  course  of  legislative  procedures.  We  also 
intend to publish the questions in popular magazines. 

Below I present some of the questions posed during the Conference: 

Whether ethical and legal principles concerning therapeutic methods and procedures 
(particularly in relation to prenatal biotechnology) can be solved in mass voting? 

Is the procedure of so-called reduction of pregnancies, connected with fecundation in 
vitro, ethically permissible? 

(cid:86)

37

 
 
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)

In what way is the ethical and legal status of frozen human embryos to be resolved? 

Whether first cell fissions and related transcription of genetic information on human 
organism,  effected  in  a  test  tube,  are  not  more  risky  for  a  human  being  than  cell 
fissions going on in natural conditions within the mother’s reproductive organ? 

Can man in embryo be a subject of propriety; if so - who is the owner, how long is 
the title of ownership obligatory and what are the owner’s rights resulting from this 
title? If not – on what ground we can decide about human embryos? 

Whether  donors  of  human  reproductive  cells  for  fecundation  in  vitro  may  remain 
anonymous, and – at the same time – is a person born as a result of fecundation in 
vitro entitled to know who are his/her biological parents? In what way can a possible 
legal controversy be resolved? 

Does  the  clause  of  conscience  apply  also  to  the  gynaecologist’s  actions  within  the 
context of so-called “partnership medicine”? 

Should prenatal genetic diagnostics be a basis for selection, or for therapy? 

Can  an  embryo  produced  in  vitro  be  implanted  into  every  woman’s  reproductive 
organ, for example: can it be implanted into a woman after menopause? 

Is trisomia 21, i.e. Down’s syndrome medical an indication to terminate pregnancy? 
On the one hand the foetus is said to be a patient who has the right to be treated, on 
the other hand decisions are taken to deprive it of life when it is ill. 

Biotechnological procedures of artificial production of human beings “on order” – a 
person  of  defined,  “ordered”  features  –  do  these  procedures  violate  this  person’s 
rights? What to do with an individual, whose features do not satisfy the expectations 
of the persons who ordered the procedure? Are “ordering” persons entitled to refuse 
accepting  a  child  who  does  not  fulfil  their  expectations?  Is  commercialization  of 
reproduction ethically positive (especially from the point of view of newly conceived 
human beings)? 

Is  the  procedure  resulting  in  conceiving  of  a  child  of  three  parents  ethically 
acceptable? (In the case when a mother is the carrier of diseases that are transferred 
by mitochondria localized in egg cytoplasma the egg cell nucleus is transported into 
other woman’s egg, this egg is fecundated with a father’s sperma and implanted into 
a woman from whom the oocyte nucleus was taken.) 

Whether  invasive  prenatal  diagnostics  in  pregnant  women  (quite  often  applied  in 
women aged over 35 years) can be an element of genetic selection of foetuses? 

What scope of information on health risk, both for mother and for foetus, should be 
furnished  to  persons  who  intend  to  undergo  the  procedure  of  extracorporal 
fecundation? 

What  information  on  the  foetus’health  should  be  furnished  to  its  parents?  Only 
certain  information,  or  also  information  on  low  probability  prospects?  How  to  find 
out whether parents really want to be informed about the state of foetus’ health? 

What  types  of  foetal  surgery  are  ethically  acceptable,  considering  that  the  mother’s 
and  child’s  interests  might  be  opposite,  although  they  are  inseparably  connected? 

38

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)
(cid:86)

Who should decide about such operation and what criteria should be fulfilled by the 
operating  centre?  What  should  be  the  mother’s  share  in  making  the  decision,  and 
what  should  be  the  physician’s  share?  Should  foetus’  interests  be  taken  into 
consideration in making the decision? 

Is  it  allowed  to  freeze  human  embryos  and  to  implant  them  after  unfreezing  into  a 
woman’s reproductive organ, being not sure if it is not harmful for a child? 

If we admit that freezing of human embryos is permissible, how long after freezing 
human embryo is to be recognized as useless and no more fit for implantation? 

If we admit the procedure of a substitute or surrogate mother to be permissible, is it 
allowed to implant human embryos on the order of any persons, or only on the order 
of persons fulfilling defined criteria ( for example: familial, or other )? 

According  to  the  law  –  who  are  the  parents  of  an  artificially  conceived  child: 
biological  parents,  or  persons  who  ordered  the  procedure,  even  if  they  are  not 
biological parents? 

Is depriving a person of information on his/her parents a violation of his/her rights? 

Can mentally ill persons (even those capable to act legally) or persons with genetic 
disorders become donors of reproductive cells? 

What information about donors of reproductive cells should be furnished to a woman 
into whom an artificially produced embryo is to be implanted? 

Is  it  allowed  “to  order”  desired  features  of  an  artificially  conceived  child  (for 
example: colour of eyes or mental features) and, according to this “order”, to select 
human reproductive cells, or frozen embryos? 

Is it allowed to use for fecundation human reproductive cells after the donors’death? 

Is  a  married  man  entitled  to  refuse  his  consent  for  implanting  an  embryo  into  his 
wife, if biological the father of the embryo is another man? 

On what legal ground will courts adjust quarrels at law connected with the previous 
question (for instance: on legacy)? 

Is  a  person  conceived  as  a  result  of  fecundation  in  vitro  entitled  to  receive 
compensation  in  case  this  procedure  damaged  his/her  health  (for  instance:  as  the 
result of freezing) – if yes, where should claims for compensation be entered? 

Who performs the obligations of a parent towards an artificially conceived child and 
since what moment in this child’s existence? 

Is one allowed to abandon parental obligations towards a child conceived in vitro? 

Is every health care institution allowed to perform fecundation in vitro? If not, which 
one is? 

39

 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Further Information 

Jerzy Umiastowski 
Email: j.umiastowski@hipokrates.org 

                                           

THE POLISH CHAMBER OF PHYSICIANS AND DENTISTS 
Website 

WWW.nil.org.pl 

 Bioethics Commission of the Ministry of Health  

Andrzej Gorski 

The Bioethics Commission has organized five major international conferences in bioethics 
over the last ten years, namely: 

Scientific integrity – 1995 

(cid:41) 

http://surfer.iitd.pan.wroc.pl/events/integrity.html 

Scientific misconduct: an international perspective – 1998 

(cid:41) 

http://surfer.iitd.pan.wroc.pl/events/misconduct.html 

Conflict of interest and its significance in science and medicine – 2002 

(cid:41) 

http://surfer.iitd.pan.wroc.pl/events/coi.html 

Placebo: its action and place in health research today – 2003 

(cid:41) 

http://surfer.iitd.pan.wroc.pl/events/placebo.html 

The ethics of intellectual property rights and patents – 2004 

(cid:41) 

http://surfer.iitd.pan.wroc.pl/events/patents.html 

On 3-4 June of this year the Commission held its most recent conference with the title: 

The responsible conduct of basic and clinical research 

As in previous years, the organisers welcomed a number of reputed speakers, 
including representatives of Office of Research Integrity, World Medical Association, 
etc. 

The proceedings will appear in Science & Engineering Ethics. 

This Conference will be published in a future edition of Ethically Speaking. 

40

 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Further Information 

Professor Andrzej Gorski 
Chair, Bioethics Commission, Ministry of Health 

                             

WWW.kb.mz.gov.pl 

Website 

► News from Portugal 

 

National Council of Ethics 

for the Life Sciences 

 

The  National  Council  of  Ethics  for  the  Life  Sciences  (CNECV)  is  an  independent  body 
created  in  1990  by  Law  N°  14/90  of  the  9th  of  June  for  the  purpose  of  “analysing 
systematically  the  moral  problems  which  arise  out  of  scientific  progress  in  the  fields  of 
biology, medicine or general health care.” 

NATIONAL COUNCIL OF ETHICS FOR THE LIFE SCIENCES 

THE ROAD TO CONSTRUCTIVE DIALOGUE 

The CNECV defines itself as national, independent, pluralist and consultative. 

National - because its Opinions are addressed to all citizens and its very purpose is to promote 
public reflection on the issues it analyses. 

Independent  -  because  its  members  do  not  represent  any  particular  entity,  social  group  or 
professional group. Members participate in the Council and its debates according to their own 
conscience. 

Pluralist - owing to its transdisciplinary composition, in terms of the members’ backgrounds 
(both from science and the humanities), each bringing its own language, methods and ways of 
thinking to the quest for a common reflection. 

Consultative  -  because,  when  it  issues  its  opinions  or  work  documents,  it  binds  neither  the 
entities that request them nor any other body. We may affirm that the CNECV is, deliberately, 
a  body  without  formal  power,  which  creates  its  authority  through  the  way  in  which  its 
pronouncements are received by and influence the opinion of decision-makers and the public. 

Bioethics  involves  wide-ranging  issues.  Hence,  diverse  entities  are  entitled  to  request 
opinions  from  the  CNECV  –  the  President  of  the  Republic,  Parliament,  members  of 
Government, entities entitled to member status, public or private centres practising techniques 
connected  in  some  way  to  the  fields  of  biology,  medicine  or  health  care  –  and  the  Council 
may issue pronouncements on diverse themes. 

41

 
 
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

The present composition of the Council began its tenure on 4 September 2003. Since then, the 
CNECV  has  already  elaborated  five  Opinions15,  adding  to  the  forty  issued  during  previous 
tenures  (the  first,  presided  by  Mário  Raposo  and  Augusto  Lopes  Cardoso,  ran  from 
31 January 1991 to 31 January 1996; the second, presided by Luís Archer, from 20 November 
1996 to 20 November 2001). 

Bioethical reflection turns essentially on the greater good of mankind, on how technological 
advances  may  best  serve  human  needs,  wishes  and  dignity.  Bioethics  proposes  the  kind  of 
citizenship  in  which  all  people  see  themselves  as  “citizens  of  the  world”,  respecting 
divergence and harmonising different visions. And, despite the different methods of analysis, 
the different lines of thought and the diverse reflection structures, the path to follow must be 
always that of pluralism, tolerance, participation and constructive dialogue. 

Composition 

President 

Paula Martinho da Silva 

Council Members designated by Parliament 

Salvador Massano Cardoso 
Agostinho Almeida Santos 
António Vaz Carneiro 
Rui Lopes Nunes 
Miguel Oliveira da Silva 

Council Members designated by Government, by field of interest 

José de Oliveira Ascensão – Science and Higher Learning 
Marta Mendonça – Justice 
Michel Renaud – Education 
José Pedro Ramos Ascensão – Youth 
João Lobo Antunes – Health Care 

Council Members designated by other entities 

Maria do Céu Patrão Neves – Council of Deans of Portuguese Universities 
Jorge Biscaia – Nationwide organisations representing bioethics-related activities  
José Germano Rego de Sousa – Medical Association 
Rita Amaral Cabral – Bar Association 
Manuel Pedro Salema Fevereiro – Biologists’ Association 
Maria Fernanda Silva Henriques – Commission for the Equality and Rights of Women 
Daniel Serrão – Lisbon Academy of Sciences 
Fernando Regateiro – Science and Technology Foundation 
Jorge Oliveira Soares – Higher Council of Forensic Medicine 

President’s Assistant 

Ana Sofia Carvalho 

Executive Secretary 

Sónia Taveira 

15 Full versions of all Opinions are available at www.cnecv.gov.pt. For the time being, English versions exist 
only in printed form. 

42

 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Opinions / Recommendations 

Up  to  April  2005,  the  Council  produced  a  total  of  45  Opinions/Recommendations.  CNECV 
Opinions/Recommendations, Activity Reports and Reports on the state of application of new 
technologies  to  human  life  are  all  available  in  our  website.  The  Acts  of  Seminaries  and 
Meetings  have  also  been  published  in  Colecção  Bioética,  vols.  I  to  VIII,  Presidência  do 
Conselho de Ministros, Lisboa, 1995 to 2001. 

Current work and forthcoming Opinions 

– 
– 
– 
– 
– 

Ethics and stem cell research 
Pre-implantation Genetic Diagnosis 
Biomedical Research 
Ethics and religious arguments for the objection of blood transfusion 
Cloning 

Further Information 

Paula Martinho da Silva 
President of National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences
Rua Professor Gomes Teixeira, P-1399-022 Lisboa 
Tel: +351.213927600 | Fax: +351.213927744 
Email: pres.cnecv@sg.pcm.gov.pt 

Ana Sofia Carvalho 
President’s Assistant 
Rua Professor Gomes Teixeira, P-1399-022 Lisboa 
Tel: +351.213927600 | Fax: +351.213927744 
Email: ascarvalho@sg.pcm.gov.pt 

Website 

WWW.cnecv.gov.pt 

43

 
                              
 
 
 
 
► News from Slovakia 

 

Central Ethics Committee of the 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Ministry of Health 

 

Activities June 2002 – May 2005 

Brief Historical Perspective (1990-2002) 

The  Central  Ethics  Committee  (CEC)  of  the  Ministry  of  Health  (MH)  was  originally 
established  by  the  Slovak  Minister  of  Health  in  1990.  It  was  given  a  mission  to  advise  the 
minister,  and  also  other  ministries  and  top  country  institutions  on  ethical  questions  in 
connection with health care and with biomedical research. It was only few months after major 
political changes had taken place in Slovakia (Velvet Revolution of November 1989). From 
the very beginning, CEC took upon itself the role of a “national bioethics committee”. CEC 
was very active in helping to establish the discipline of bioethics in Slovakia. This included 
concrete  help  and  support  in  founding  “bioethics institutions”,  such  as  ethics  committees  in 
major hospitals and  research  institutions, and of  the  leading  bioethics  teaching  and  research 
centre – Institute of Medical Ethics and Bioethics (IMEB) in Bratislava(1)(2). 

An  important  part  of  CEC  work  was  devoted  to  the  international  collaboration  and 
networking, establishing working contacts with leading international institutions active in the 
field  (e.g.  CDBI,  UNESCO,  EGE,  ...),  with  other  national  bioethics  bodies,  and  –  in 
collaboration  with  IMEB,  with  many  medical  ethics  /  bioethics  centres  in  Europe,  and 
beyond.  CEC  and  IMEB  were  co-organisers  of  several  international  conferences/congresses 
and  other  meetings  in  Bratislava,  in  particular  those  in  collaboration  with  the  DEBRA 
Program  of  the  Council  of  Europe  (CoE),  and  also  with  the  DG  Research  (“Science  and 
Society”) of the European Commission. 

During  the  15  years  of  its  existence,  CEC  was  several  times  thoroughly  “reconstructed” 
concerning  its  membership,  and  also  its  statutes.  Not  all  periods  were  marked  by  the  same 
intensity of activities; there were even some quite passive ones. In 2002, the present CEC was 
appointed  with  a brand  new  membership  and  president.  It  also  received  an  administrative 
secretary, and its own office with the necessary equipment located in the Ministry of Health. 
The new CEC Statutes were for the first time published in the official journal of MH(3). MH 
will issue the amended Statutes this year (2005), and also some personal changes to achieve 
the necessary CEC membership renewal are expected. 

Priorities and Activities 2002 – May 2005 

Since  its  appointment  in  June  2002,  CEC  has  been  working  in  several  priority  fields.  They 
can briefly be summarised as follows: 

1. 

Advising  the  Minister  and  various  departments  of  MH  on  ethical  issues  connected 
with  health  care,  and  with  biomedical  research.  An  intensive  collaboration  and 
exchange  has  been  established,  especially  with  the  department  of  health  care, 
department  of  control,  and  the  department  of  foreign  affairs.  During  the  period 
indicated, many informal consultations, as well as brief opinions to concrete cases or 
problems were produced in writing by the CEC. 

44

 
 
2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Providing comments on new legislation prepared by MH. This was one of the major 
tasks  of  CEC  and  it  occupied  most  of  its  working  time  and  capacity.  In  September 
2004, a major bulk of new health care legislation was passed by the Slovak Parliament 
(Slovak National Council). Altogether 7 new bills – approximately 2500 pages. They 
were  aimed  at  founding  a new  legal  basis  for  health  care  in  Slovakia  as  a result  of 
a profound  and  ambitious  reform  of  the  national  health  care  system.  Besides  other 
crucial  issues,  the  new  legislation  on  biomedical  research  and  on  ethics  committees 
was also elaborated and included into the new health care act (law N°576/2004 Coll. 
on health care). CEC has also been provided for in this law (before it was established 
by  ministerial  decree  only),  as  well  as  for  the  system  of  ethics  committees  (ECs)  in 
Slovakia  (regional,  local  –  both  reviewing  research  projects,  including  drug  clinical 
trials protocols, but they also could advise on the issues of “clinical bioethics”). 

Revitalising and development of the system of ECs in Slovakia: CEC elaborated and 
approved a special programme to this effect already in June 2002. The programme has 
been  published  in  major  health  professional  journals  in  Slovakia.  Since  2002  annual 
meetings  of  ECs  have  been  re-introduced.  CEC  also  directly  contributed  to  the 
drafting of the parts of the new health law (law 576/2004 Coll., cited above) devoted 
to  the  problems  of  ethics  committees,  biomedical  research,  medical  genetics, 
transplantation of organs, tissues and cells, informed consent, etc. At present CEC is 
working  on  a draft  ministerial  regulation  on  ethics  committees.  It  should  cover  both 
ECs for research (regional and local), and the “clinical ethics” ECs.  

Advising  and  providing  guidance  on  a  case-by-case  basis  for  ECs  in  Slovakia.  CEC 
became  a  point  of  reference  for  members  and  chairs  of  ECs  –  providing  informal 
(including  telephone  or  Email)  consultations  and  advice,  and  also  brief  written 
responses to questions posed to it by ECs. Reserved for exceptional cases only, CEC 
also  reviewed  several  research  protocols  (e.g.  a  gene  therapy  trial  proposal,  some 
international research projects co-sponsored by WHO, etc.). 

International  collaboration  and  participation:  CEC  through  its  chairperson  took  an 
active role in several European bodies concerned with bioethics and related areas (e.g. 
membership in CDBI of CoE and its Bureau; membership in the Bureau of COMETH; 
participation  in  various  activities  of  the  Department  “Science  and  Society”  of  DG 
Research  of  the  European  Commission,  including  the  NEC  Forum  and  various 
international  conferences;  collaboration  with  European  Forum  of  GCP,  etc.).  The 
chairperson  of  CEC  authored  a  European  Commission  sponsored  brochure  on 
legislation in the area of biomedical research in the Slovak Republic(4). 

Co-sponsoring international conferences and meetings in bioethics that took place in 
Bratislava:  These  activities  were  developing  further  the  already  existing  tradition  of 
international bioethics meetings, congresses and courses held in Bratislava since 1991. 
The most important of these in 2002 – 2005 period were the following: 

-  Ethics  of  Science  and  Research  (together  with  Department  Science  and  Society, 
DG Research, European Commission), April 2002 (book of proceedings in press), 

-  Ethics  of  Human  Genetics:  Challenges  of  the  (Post)Genomic  Era  (together  with 
Debra  Program  of  CoE  and  supported  by  the  European  Commission),  October 
2002 (book of proceedings(5)), 

-  Ethical  Support  in  Clinical  Practice:  Present  State  and  Perspectives  in  Europe 

(Debra Program of CoE), November 2004 (book of proceedings(6)). 

45

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Further Information 

Central Ethics Committee - Ministry of Health of the Slovak Republic 
Marián Zbončák, M.D., MPH 
Administrative Secretary 
Limbová St. 2, SK-837 52 Bratislava 
Tel: (+421-2) 59373.412 
Email: marian.zboncak@health.gov.sk 

Professor Jozef Glasa, M.D., PhD. 
Chairman 
Tel: (+421-2) 59369.472 | Fax: (+421-2)59369.506 
Email: jozef.glasa@szu.sk 
Institute of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacology 
Slovak Medical University 
Institute of Medical Ethics and Bioethics n.f. 
Limbová 12, SK-83303 Bratislava 

Website 

WWW.health.gov.sk 
(go to “Etická komisia“ – “Ethics Committee“) 

References 

1.  Glasa, J.: Bioethics and challenges of a society in transition: The birth and development of bioethics on post 

– totalitarian Slovakia. Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal, Vol. 10, 2000, No. 2, p. 165 – 170.  

2.  Glasa, J., Bielik, J., Ďačok, J., Glasová, M., Porubský, J.: Ethics committees (HECs/IRBs) and health care 

reform in the Slovak Republic: 1990 – 2000. HEC Forum, Vol. 12, 2000, No. 4, p. 358 – 366. 

3.  Vestník MZ SR, Vol. 51, Part 20 – 21, July 21, 2003, p. 146 – 150. 

4.  Glasa,  J.:  National  Regulations  on  Ethics  and  Research  in  Slovak  Republic.  Office  of  the  Official 

Publications of European Communities, Luxembourg, 2003, 2 x 30 pp (English and Slovak part). 

5.  Glasa,  J.  (Ed.):  Ethics  of  Human  Genetics:  Challenges  of  the  (Post)Genomic  Era.  Council  of  Europe  – 

Charis – IMEB Fdn., Bratislava, 2002, 228 pp. 

6.  Glasa, J. (Ed.): Ethics Support in Clinical Practice: Status Quo and Perspectives in Europe. Medical Ethics 

& Bioethics, Vol. 11, 2004, Supplement 1, 23 pp. 

46

 
                                       
 
 
 
► News from Sweden 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

 Swedish National Council on Medical Ethics  

Current work 

Prenatal diagnosis 

The Swedish National Council on Medical Ethics has on numerous occasions discussed issues 
related  to  prenatal  genetic  diagnosis.  The  Council  started  its  current  work  on  prenatal 
diagnosis  in  February  2004.  At  an  initial  stage  an  internal  working  group  visited  clinics  in 
different  regions  in  Sweden  for  discussions  with  medical  and  health  professionals  about 
developments in the field of prenatal diagnosis, attitudes among physicians and midwives and 
patients’  demands.  In  December  2004,  the  Council  addressed  a  preliminary  opinion  about 
prenatal  diagnosis  concerning  a  rapid  simplified  version  of  prenatal  genetic  diagnosis,  QF-
PCR.  The  Council  emphasised  the  importance  of  an  analysis  of  the  ethical,  social  and 
psychological  issues  involved  before  the  medical  clinics  introduce  QF-PCR,  instead  of  the 
present complete chromosomal test.  

(cid:41) 

The Council expects to publish a full report on the topic towards autumn 2005. 

Foetal reduction 

Foetal  reduction  is  performed  in  order  to  reduce  the  numbers  of  foetuses,  in  case  of  a 
multifoetal pregnancy. At present time there is no specific regulation concerning embryonic 
and  foetal  reduction  in  Sweden.  In  November,  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  social  affairs 
referred  the  issue  to  the  Council  for  ethical  consideration.  A  number  of  experts  have  been 
invited to discuss the topic with the Council.  

(cid:41) 

The Council expects to publish an opinion on the issue towards June 2005. 

Ethical aspects of commercial umbilical cord blood banking 

Companies have recently started to offer pregnant women in Sweden the possibilities to store 
umbilical  cord  blood  for  family  use.  The  Council  considers  the  ethical  aspects  on  this  new 
form  of  private  storage  of  human  tissue.  Simultaneously  the  question  about  a  national  bank 
for cord blood is under discussion in Sweden. In December 2004, the Council held a hearing 
on  the  subject  with  a  number  of  experts  invited.  In  April  2005,  the  Council  arranged  a 
symposium at the annual congress for health professionals, in Stockholm. 

(cid:41) 

The Council expects to publish an opinion on the topic towards May/June 200516. 

16 Editorial footnote: the EGE published an Opinion on umbilical cord blood banking in 2004 (N°19) available at 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/avis3_en.htm 

47

 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Recent activities 

Pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) 
In  January  2004,  the  Council  released  an  Opinion17  concerning  pre-implantation  genetic 
diagnosis (PGD). 

At  present,  PGD  is  not  subject  to  any  explicit  statutory  regulation.  However,  in  1995,  the 
Swedish Parliament endorsed certain guidelines. These are highly restrictive, and imply that 
PGD  should  only  be  used  to  screen  for  severe,  progressive,  inherited  disorders  leading  to 
premature  death  and  for  which  there  is  no  cure  or  treatment.  These  guidelines  have  been 
followed  in  Swedish  healthcare,  while  also  being  criticised  as  inappropriate  in  various 
respects.  

In the Opinion, the  Swedish  National Council  on Medical Ethics discussed the medical and 
ethical conditions for PGD. The Council’s deliberations led to the conclusion that the use of 
the PGD technique should be allowed on a somewhat larger scale than what is permitted in 
the  current  guidelines.  The  Council  also  recommended  that  all  cases  of  PGD  use  should  be 
reported to the National Board of Health and Welfare to facilitate monitoring and supervision. 

According to the Council, pre-implantation genetic screening, PGS, should not be used as a 
standard  procedure,  given  the  current  state  of  knowledge.  Before  a  complete  ethical 
assessment  can  be  made,  research  and  findings  are  needed  that  will  identify  possible 
advantages  and  disadvantages  of  this  technique  from  medical,  ethical  and  social  points  of 
view.  However,  the  Council  considered  that  PGS  may,  for  the  time  being,  be  ethically 
acceptable  within  clearly  defined  research  projects  preceded  by  ethical  assessment  in  a 
research ethics committee. The Council recommended an obligation to report to the National 
Board of Health and Welfare.  

In conclusion, the Council found that the PGD technique is under development and new areas 
of application will require further ethical considerations. 

PGD-HLA 

In  September  2004,  the  Council  made  a  statement  concerning  PGD-HLA  typing,  pre-
implantation  genetic  diagnosis  technique  used  in  situations  where  parents  want  a  child  who 
can become donor for a child they already have suffering from a severe disease. The Council 
concluded that PGD-HLA should be permitted only in cases where PGD is required to avoid a 
severe genetic disease. 

Members of the Council 

Chairman 

Daniel Tarschys, Professor of Political Science 

Political members 

Ingrid Andersson (Social Democratic Party) 
Leif Carlson (Moderate Party) 
Kenneth Johansson (Centre Party) 
Tuulikki Koivunen Bylund (Green Party) 
Elina Linna (Left Party) 

17 Available in English at: http://www.smer.se  

48

 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Chatrine Pålsson (Christian Democrats) 
Göran Sjönell (Liberal party) 
Conny Öhman (Social Democratic Party) 

Expert members 

Lena Barrbrink, The National Board of Health and Welfare  
Daniel Brattgård, Hospital Priest 
Sture Gustafson, Science Journalist 
Lisbeth Löpare-Johansson, Reg. Nurse, member of the board of the Swedish Association of 
Health Professionals 
Göran Hermerén, Professor of Medical Ethics, Chairman of the European Group of Ethics in 
Science and New Technologies 
Per-Christian Jersild, Writer, M.D. 
Lena  Jonsson,  Special  Expert  on  medical  ethics  and  research  at  the  Ministry  of  Health  and 
Social Affairs  
Christian Munthe, Professor of Practical Philosophy 
Elisabeth Rynning, Professor of Medical Law 
Jan Wahlström, Professor of Clinical Genetics, Senior Physician 
Ulla  Lönnqvist  Endre,  Jurist,  The  Swedish  Association  of  Local  Authorities  and 
Regions (SALAR) 

Secretariat 

Head of secretariat 
Research officer 
Administrative officer  Birgitta Sjöö 

Vacant 
Lotta Eriksson 

Further Information 

Professor Daniel Tarschys 
Chairman 
Tel: +46 8 16 15 78 | Email: daniel.tarscys@statsvet.su.se 
Lotta Eriksson 
Secretariat 
Tel: + 46 8 405 27 58 | Email: lotta.eriksson@social.ministry.se 
Birgitta Sjöö 
Tel: + 46 8 405 41 18 | Email: birgitta.sjoo@social.ministry.se 

Address 
Ministry of Health and Social Affairs 
Kv. Spektern | SE-103 33 Stockholm 

Website 

WWW.smer.gov.se 

49

 
                                 
 
 
 
 
► News from the United Kingdom 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

 

Nuffield Council on Bioethics 

 

Current work 

The ethics of research involving animals 

Research involving animals has been the subject of intense debate in the UK and elsewhere. 
Too often this debate is presented in a polarised manner, differentiating crudely between those 
opposed to and those in favour of all animal research. Such perceptions are overly simplistic 
and  unhelpful  in  furthering  fruitful  discussion.  There  is  a  wide  range  of  positions  between 
these  two  ends  of  the  spectrum  and  people  differ  in  their  views  on  the  use  of  animals  in 
different  areas,  such  as  basic  or  medical  research,  or  toxicity  testing.  In  May  2005,  the 
Nuffield  Council  on  Bioethics  published  a  Report18  on  “The  ethics  of  research  involving 
animals”, which aims to identify the ethical issues surrounding the debate. The two principal 
questions  considered  in  the  Report  are:  Are  animals  valid  and  useful  scientific  models  of 
human  bodies  and  disease  processes?  And,  is  it  permissible  for  one  species  to  cause  pain, 
suffering  and  death  to  another  to  achieve  aims that  benefit  primarily  the  former  species?  In 
order to find answers to these questions, the Report considers the range of scientific uses of 
animals, the scope and potential of alternative methods, the way in which philosophy can be 
brought  to  bear  on  issues  raised  by  animal  research,  and  the  regulatory  context.  It  makes 
recommendations on the reliability of animal experiments as models for humans, improving 
access 
the  role  of  funding  bodies,  ethical  review  processes  and 
implementation of the 3Rs. 

information, 

to 

The ethics of prolonging life in foetuses and the newborn 

Modern medicine can now sustain the life of extremely premature or critically ill babies who 
in  the  past  would  not  have  survived  birth.  Many  such  babies  do  well  but  it  is  difficult  to 
predict which babies will thrive and how their lives and those of their families will develop. 
This  uncertainty  raises  difficulties  for  parents  and  doctors  when  making  decisions  about 
treatment. The Council established a Working Party in October 2004 to consider the ethical, 
social, legal and economic issues involved. Four meetings and several fact finding visits have 
taken  place  and  further  meetings  will  be  held  over  the  next  twelve  months.  A  consultation 
with the public was launched in March with a closing date of 9 June. The Council expects to 
publish a Report on the topic towards the end of 200619. 

The ethics of research related to healthcare in developing countries 

In  March  2005,  the  Council  published  “The  ethics  of  research  related  to  healthcare  in 
developing countries: a follow-up Discussion Paper”20. Research in developing countries is 
crucial for improving healthcare by providing appropriate treatments and preventing disease. 
However,  lack  of  resources  and  weak  infrastructure  mean  that  researchers  in  developing 
countries  are  often  unable  to  conduct  their  own  studies.  As  they  increasingly  establish 
partnerships  with  groups  from  developed  countries,  a  sound  ethical  framework  is  a  crucial 

18 Available at: http://www.nuffieldbioethics.org/animalresearch  
19 Further information is available at: 
http://www.nuffieldbioethics.org/go/ourwork/prolonginglife/introduction.html 
20 Available at: http://www.nuffieldbioethics.org/go/ourwork/developingcountries/introduction 

50

 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

safeguard to avoid possible exploitation of research participants in these circumstances. The 
Council  published  a  report  on  the  ethics  of  research  related  to  healthcare  in  developing 
countries  in  2002.  Since  then,  a  number  of  international  organisations  have  revised  existing 
guidelines  or  prepared  new  ones.  As  a  follow-up  to  its  2002  report,  the  Council  held  a 
Workshop, co-hosted with the Medical Research Council of South Africa, in February 2004. 
The Workshop aimed to give researchers from around the world the opportunity to exchange 
experiences and consider how the new guidance is implemented in practice. The discussions 
that  took  place  at  the  Workshop  are  presented  in  the  Follow-up  Discussion  Paper,  which 
reports  that  existing  guidelines  are  often  inconsistent  and  inappropriate  for  the  developing 
country setting21. 

Genetic screening 

A  Discussion  Paper  on  the  ethics  of  genetic  screening  has  been  produced  by  a  Steering 
Committee to follow up the Council’s popular 1993 Report on the same topic. The Paper will 
review  the  impact  of  the  Report  since  1993  and  discuss  developments  since  its  publication. 
The Paper has been sent for peer review, with a view to publication later in 2005. 

Future work 

The ethics of public health 

A  Workshop  on  the  ethics  of  public  health  was  held  in  July  2004.  The  main  focus  of  the 
meeting was how to find the right balance between individual choice and community benefit. 
A number of experts were invited to speak on case studies including vaccination and the use 
of  databanks.  These  were  followed  by  a  more  general  discussion  on  public  health.  The 
Council  also  discussed  this  issue  in  November  2003  at  a  bi-lateral  meeting  with  the  French 
Comité Consultatif National d’Éthique and in a similar meeting with members of the German 
Nationaler Ethikrat, held in July 2004. The Council has subsequently agreed to set up a new 
Working Party on the ethics of public health which will commence work later in 2005.  

Previous publications 

– 

– 

– 

– 

– 

– 

– 

– 

– 

– 

– 

The  ethics  of  research  related  to  healthcare  in  developing  countries:  a  follow-up 
Discussion Paper (March 2005) 

The use of genetically modified crops in developing countries: a follow-up discussion 
paper (December 2003) 

Pharmacogenetics: ethical issues (September 2003) 

Genetics and human behaviour: the ethical context (October 2002) 

The ethics of patenting DNA: a discussion paper (July 2002) 

The ethics of research related to developing countries (April 2002) 

Stem cell therapy - the ethical issues: a discussion paper (April 2000) 

The  ethics  of  clinical  research  in  developing  countries:  a  discussion  paper  (October 
1999) 

Genetically modified crops: the ethical and social issues (May 1999) 

Mental disorders and genetics: the ethical context (September 1998) 

Animal-to-human transplants: the ethics of xenotransplantation (March 1996) 

21 Editorial footnote: the EGE published an Opinion on clinical trials in developing countries (N°17) available at 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/avis3_en.htm  

51

 
                                                 
– 

– 

Human tissue: ethical and legal issues (April 1995) 

Genetic Screening: ethical issues (December 1993) 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

All  the  Council’s  publications  are  available  to  download  from  the  Council’s  website  at: 
www.nuffieldbioethics.org/publications 

Members of the Council 

Chairman 

Professor Sir Bob Hepple QC, FBA 

Deputy Chairman 

Professor Catherine Peckham CBE 

Members 

Professor Tom Baldwin 

Professor Margot Brazier OBE 
Professor Roger Brownsword 
Professor Sir Kenneth Calman KCB FRSE 
Professor Peter Harper 
Rt Reverend Richard Harries DD FKC FRSL 
Professor Peter Lipton 
Professor Lord Raymond Plant 
Professor Herbert Sewell 
Professor Peter Smith CBE 
Professor Dame Marilyn Strathern DBE FBA 
Dr Alan Williamson FRSE 

Secretariat 

Director 
Deputy Director 
Assistant Director 
PA to Secretariat 
Communications & External Affairs Manager 
Research Officer 
Secretary 
Information Assistant 

Professor Sandy Thomas 
Dr Catherine Moody 
Harald Schmidt 
Carol Perkins 
Catherine Joynson 
Caroline Rogers 
Elaine Talaat-Abdalla 
Mun-Keat Looi 

Further Information 

Catherine Joynson 
Communications & External Affairs Manager 
Tel: +44 207 681 9619 | Fax: +44 207 637 1712 
Email: bioethics@nuffieldbioethics.org 

Address 
Nuffield Council on Bioethics 
28 Bedford Square | London WC1B 3JS, UK 

Website 

WWW.nuffieldbioethics.org 

52

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
                         
 
 
 
► News from Scotland, the United Kingdom 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

  Scottish Council on Human Bioethics   

Presentation 

The  Scottish  Council  on  Human  Bioethics  was  formed  in  1997  in  order  to  address  the 
biomedical topics coming under the remit of the re-established Scottish Parliament following 
the Scottish referendum of 1997 and the opening of the Scottish Parliament in 1999. 

Under the Scotland Act 1998, all biomedical matters except those which are reserved to the 
UK Parliament are the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament. 

Matters reserved to the UK Parliament are:  

abortion; 

surrogacy arrangements; 

- 
-  xenotransplantation; 
- 
-  human fertilisation and embryology; 
-  human genetics; 
-  medicines for human use. 

The Scottish Council on Human Bioethics is an independent, non-partisan group composed of 
doctors, lawyers, psychologists, ethicists and  other  professionals from  disciplines  associated 
with medical ethics.  

The principles to which the Scottish Council on Human Bioethics subscribe are set out in the 
United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights which was adopted and proclaimed 
by the UN General Assembly by resolution 217A (III) on 10 December 1948. 

The Core Purposes of the Scottish Council on Human Bioethics are 

– 

– 

– 

– 

To collect and evaluate evidence and information relating to ethical issues in medicine 
from which to inform the public debate in Scotland; 
To  engage,  assist  and  advise  Scottish  legislators,  fellow  professionals  and  other 
interested parties with ethical analysis in medicine and comment on these issues; 
To  respond  to  media  interest  in  Scotland  by  the  release  of  relevant  and  reliable 
information and comment; 
To  encourage  Scottish  society  to  engage  in  ethical  discussions  of  relevant  topics  in 
medicine and biology.  

Position statements 

Advance Directives 

The  Scottish  Council  on  Human  Bioethics  has  recently  finalised  a  position  statement  on 
advance directives which will soon be published on its website. 

53

 
Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide 

Following  recent  discussions  in  the  Scottish  Parliament,  the  Scottish  Council  on  Human 
Bioethics will also be preparing position statements on the subject of euthanasia and assisted 
suicide. 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Annual public meetings (day conferences) 

– 
– 

Cloning and the Biotech Future (17 January 2004) 
Euthanasia: A Good Death? (15 January 2005) 

Further Information 

Dr Calum MacKellar 
Director of Research 
Tel: +44 131 447 6394 | Fax: + 44 131 446 3348 

Address 
Scottish Council on Human Bioethics 
15 Morningside Road 
Edinburgh EH10 4DP 
UK 

Website 

                     ,   

WWW.schb.org.uk 

54

 
 
 
 
European Commission Science and 

Technology Representation in external 

EU-Delegations 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

  News from the United States of America   

1.  Can God and Darwin co-Exist in the USA in the 21st Century?22 

On  4 March 2005,  Bruce  Alberts,  President  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences,  felt 
compelled to write to all Academy members alerting them to the increasing challenges to the 
teaching  of  evolution  in  public  schools  and  stressing  that  they  should  be  vigilant  wherever 
they live because the same challenges were likely to reach everywhere in time. 

The  challenges  are  coming  from  proponents  of  the  Intelligent  Design  movement,  which 
claims  that  evolution  alone  is  insufficient  to  explain  the  complexity  of  natural  systems  and 
believes  that  real  intelligent  design  was  involved  in  life.  Although  the  Intelligent  Design 
movement  does  not  dispute  that  evolution  has  occurred,  and  omits  any  mention  of  God  or 
religion, the scientific community believes that it is a sophisticated and thinly veiled modern 
expression  of  creationism  and  that  since  it  cannot  be  proven  or  tested,  it  falls  short  of  the 
criteria to be called science. 

That a warning such as Bruce Alberts’ should be necessary, 5 years into the 21st century may 
seem extraordinary, and even an over-reaction, in a country admirable for its investment and 
belief in the promise of science and technology, but the impact of the November elections on 
the confidence and influence of the religious right should not be underestimated. According to 
articles in the Washington Post and Science, it is estimated that the approach to the teaching 
of the theory of evolution is being re-considered in as many as 40 different school districts – 
across up to 19 States right now.  

It  is  not  only  the  National  Academies,  but  also  the  American  Association  for  the 
Advancement of Science that has weighed in to alert scientists to the risk of the dissolution of 
the separation between church and state. AAAS CEO Alan Leshner wrote in a commentary in 
the  Philadelphia  Enquirer  in  February:  “As  scientists  we  have  at  times  been  insensitive  – 
unwilling  to  hear  and  respect  the  thoughts  of  critics.  But  it  is  impossible  to  ignore  the 
fundamental mistrust of science and the hostility towards it that comes from some quarters of 
the religious community”.  

2005 marks 80 years since the infamous “monkey trials” in which Tennessee officials tried to 
enforce a ban on teaching evolution in schools. But it is not so long ago, only 1987, that the 
Supreme  Court  had  to  rule  that  Louisiana  could  not  make  creationism  a  part  of  the  science 
curriculum  because  of  the  constitutional  separation  of  church  and  state.  Creationism  was 
deemed as a religious belief. As a result of this ruling, the teaching of creationism in science 
classes has been banned throughout the US. The omission of any mention of God or religion 
in the Intelligent Design theory means that it seems not to be covered by the 1987 Supreme 
Court ruling. 

That the current debate is not discussed on a Federal level is because education in the US is 
the responsibility of each State and indeed within each State each school district determines 

22 This article first appeared in the monthly report from the Commission's Washington Delegation: U.S. Science, 
Technology and Education Highlights, March 2005 

56

 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

its  own  curriculum.  Nevertheless,  the  last  few  months  have  seen  major  mainstream  media 
attention to the battle between Darwin and God. 

The recent highly publicized debate stems from the decision in November 2004, by the school 
board in Dover, PA, to require teaching intelligent design in high school biology classes. In 
amongst all  the requirements  regarding the teaching  of  evolution,  the  curriculum  now  reads 
“students will be made aware of gaps/problems in Darwin’s theory and of other theories of 
evolution, including but not limited to Intelligent Design.” Science teachers were required to 
read  a  statement  in  class  pointing  out  problems/gaps  in  Darwin’s  theory  of  evolution  and 
promoting intelligent design as an alternative explanation. In fact the teachers refused to do so 
and  the  statement  was  read  instead  in  all  schools  by  the  Dover  School  Superintendent.  The 
Union  of  Civil  Liberties  and  Americans  United  for  the  Separation  of  Church  and  State  are 
representing  8  families  in  suing  the  school  district  claiming  that  the  curriculum  violates  the 
separation of church and state. The trial is scheduled for September. 

Statements like “If the Bible is right, God created us. If God did it, it's history and it’s also 
science”  from  a  Dover  school  board  member  or  “Teaching  doubts  about  evolution  is  more 
inclusive [of religious children who feel shut out by the teaching of evolution]” from a parent, 
help to explain the current situation. The fact that Liberty University in Virginia is hosting a 
faith-based scientific Creation Mega Conference in July, funded by a group called Answers in 
Genesis (which raised $9 million in 2003) also provides some insight. According to Eugenie 
Scott  of  the  National  Centre  on  Science  Education  and  Lawrence  Krauss  of  Case  Western 
Reserve  University  at  the  recent  AAAS  Science  Policy  Forum  in  DC,  there  is  a  strong 
prevailing  misconception  amongst  even  college  students  in  the  US  that  “only  atheists  can 
believe in evolution”. 

A survey by the National Science Teachers Association in March found that 31% of teachers 
responding  said  that  they  felt  pressured  to  include  creationism,  intelligent  design  or  other 
alternatives  to  evolution  in  the  classroom.  Most  of  the  pressure  comes  from  students  (22%) 
and  parents  (20%).  30%  of  teachers  said  that  they  felt  pushed  to  de-emphasize  or  omit 
evolution  or  evolution-related  topics  from  the  curriculum.  Fortunately  74%  of  the  teachers 
disagreed with the suggestion. 

Although Dover is alone, so far, in mandating the teaching of intelligent design, it is not alone 
in  facing  an  upsurge  of  very  conservative  religious  influence  on  the  teaching  of  science.  In 
February  this  year,  a  federal  judge’s  ruling  ordered  the  removal  of  stickers  which  had  been 
placed on science textbooks in Cobb County, Georgia, labelling evolution as “a theory rather 
than  a  fact”.  A  Georgia  school  district  has  appealed  the  ban.  In  March  a  bill  promoting 
intelligent  design  was  introduced  in  the  Pennsylvania  House  of  Representatives  and  is 
currently  being  considered  by  the  Education  Committee.  Also  in  March  a  similar  bill  was 
introduced in the Arkansas House of Representatives, but it failed to get support. In Kansas 
also  there  is  disagreement  in  the  Board  of  Education  about  how  to  teach  evolution  in  the 
classroom. In some States, according to a recent New York Times editorial, teachers duck the 
controversy  by  either  not  teaching  evolution  at  all  or  by  teaching  evolutionary  concepts 
without  ever  mentioning  the  “e”  word.  Likewise  some  States  refrain  from  using  the  word 
“evolution”  altogether  in  their  published  state  science  standard  curricula.  Nor  is  the 
controversy  original  –  when  the  backbone  of  the  US  Education  system,  the  “No  Child  Left 
Behind”  legislation  was  being  debated  back  in  2002,  Pennsylvania  Senator  Rick  Santorum 
attempted,  unsuccessfully,  to  include  language  along  the  lines  that  “where  topics  are  taught 
that  may  generate  controversy  (such  as  biological  evolution),  the  curriculum  should  help 
students  to  understand  the  full  range  of  scientific  views  that  exist.”.  Last  year  the  National 
Parks Service bookstore at the Grand Canyon was called to task by leaders of the scientific 

57

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

community for selling a book indicating that the Grand Canyon was created by Naoh’s flood, 
6,000 years ago – along with mainstream geological books explaining that it is approximately 
6 million years old. 

The main intellectual proponents for Intelligent Design are based at the Discovery Institute in 
Seattle. This institute spends more than $1 million a year on research, polls and media pieces 
supporting  intelligent  design.  Interestingly  the  institute  opposes  the  Dover  School  Board’s 
decision, saying that the Intelligent Design theory needs to be debated in the scientific sphere 
and that it is too soon to require anyone to teach it in high school.  

According  to  Eugenie  Scott  of  the  National  Centre  on  Science  Education  and  Lawrence 
Krauss of Case Western Reserve University, speaking at the AAAS Science Policy Forum in 
DC in April, Intelligent Design proponents have already won the PR battle by getting so much 
publicity and support for a theory that is disseminated only through non-peer reviewed books 
and articles. They exploit the US system of fair play. Much of the coverage in the press has 
sought, in good journalistic style, to cover the two sides of the story – the problem with issues 
like this is that one side will not just be a different perspective, it will be wrong. As soon as 
there is a “hearing” to hear both sides of the story – Intelligent Design wins by being given 
the same status as the theory of evolution.  

By now the fight over evolution has reached the big screen. The New York Times reported in 
March  that  several  IMAX  theatres,  including  some  in  science  museums  (!)  are  refusing  to 
show movies that mention the subject – or the Big Bang or the geology of the earth – fearing 
protests from people who object to films that contradict biblical descriptions of the origin of 
Earth  and  its  creatures.  The  number  of  theatres  rejecting  them  is  small,  and  mostly  in  the 
South,  but  only  a  few  dozen  IMAX  theatres  routinely  show  science  documentaries  so  this 
may impact the producers’ decisions whether to make such films in the first place. One such 
movie “Volcanoes” about the creatures that live above the deep ocean floor, sponsored in part 
by the National Science Foundation, has been rejected by about a dozen theatres, because of 
its  reference  to  evolution  and  to  the  possibility  that  life  on  Earth  may  have  originated  at 
undersea  vents.  The  Fort  Worth  (TX)  Museum  of  Science  and  History  decided  not  to  show 
the movie after showing it to a sample audience, some of whom said it was blasphemous. 

In  his  letter  to  NAS  members,  Bruce  Alberts  asks  members  to  alert  the  NAS  if  the 
controversy arrives in their state or school district and calls on them to be willing to use their 
position and prestige as a member of the NAS in working locally through speaking at school 
meetings,  writing  op-eds  etc.  However  this  is  an  issue  scientists  will  have  to  handle 
consciously  and  carefully.  A  very  vocal  conservative  minority  can  cause  a  great  deal  of 
damage if not countered effectively. Scientists speaking at a strongly biased school meeting 
could cause more harm than good, lending credence to the opposition.  

The danger of mixing religion and science in the same classroom is very real - yet scientists 
cannot dismiss the importance of people’s faith because it will have a very negative impact. 
Alan Leshner of the AAAS seems to realize this and states in his commentary: “As we search 
for common ground, it is important to remember that science is not by definition opposed to 
religion, and our work is not intended to impose science and its values on religion. Science is 
as  broad  and  diverse  as  our  country  itself,  and  among  the  millions  of  people  working  in 
science based professions, many are guided by their faith.” The answer must lie in finding a 
way for faith and science to co-exist, not in science classes, but in communities, and if people 
want it - in people’s heads. 

58

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

2.  Guidelines for Stem Cell Research23 

On  26 April,  the  National  Academies  -  advisers  to  the  nation  on  science,  engineering  and 
medicine, released a detailed set of comprehensive, though voluntary, guidelines aimed at all 
U.S. researchers who perform experiments with human embryonic stem cells. It is hoped that 
the guidelines will become the “gold standard” for universities, research institutes, privately 
funded scientists and thereby compensate for the absence of federal rules and help overcome 
the patchwork of State rules and regulations that has been developing across the country.  

The  Guidelines  could  accelerate  the  pace  of  research  by  facilitating  collaborations  among 
scientists  around  the  country  who  have  been  working  under  the  varying  rules  and  may 
eventually  help  researchers  gain  faster  Food  and  Drug  Administration  approval  to  try  their 
emerging therapies in patients. 

The  Guidelines  cover:  establishment  of  oversight  committees  in  research  institutions; 
procurement  of  gametes,  blastocysts  or  cells  for  Human  Embryonic  Stem  Cell  (hES) 
generation;  derivation  of  hES  lines;  banking  and  distribution  of  hES  lines;  research  use  of 
hES lines; and international collaboration. 

In summary, the guidelines recommend the following: 

– 

– 

– 

– 

– 

– 

All  research  institutions  create  special  review  boards  to  evaluate  stem  cell  research 
proposals  (Embryonic  Stem  Cell  Research  Oversight  -ESCRO).  This  would  fill  a 
crucial gap, since the federally required Institutional Review Boards already in place 
at facilities across the country review only research on human subjects - not embryos 
or  embryonic  cells.  These  ESCRO  committees  should  include  representatives  of  the 
public  and  experts  in  developmental  biology,  stem  cell  research,  molecular  biology, 
assisted reproduction and ethical and legal issues in hES research. 

Embryos  used  for  stem  cell  research  must  be  freely  donated  by  both  the  biological 
father and mother in  full knowledge that the cells may be cultivated indefinitely and 
turned into commercial products for which they will receive no compensation. Donors 
would also be able to opt out of certain types of research. 

Payments to egg donors, although now common practice at fertility clinics, should be 
banned. 

Embryos  should  be  cultured  for  no  longer  than  14  days  or  until  formation  of  the 
primitive streak (nervous system) begins - whichever occurs first. 

A central repository of hES lines should be established by institutions engaged in hES 
research - or at least an institutional registry of stem cell lines should be maintained. 

Strict  standards  should  be  established  for  traceability,  tracking  and  distribution  in 
facilities obtaining and storing stem cells: Clear IPR policies need to be defined. 

23 This article first appeared in the monthly report from the Commission's Washington Delegation: U.S. Science, 
Technology and Education Highlights, April 2005 

59

 
                                                 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

The  guidelines  allow  for  the  possibility  of  making  various  types  of  animal-human  hybrids 
(chimeras), however: 

– 

– 

– 

– 

Such experiments would face close scrutiny by the ESCRO committees. 

Research in which hES are introduced into nonhuman primate blastocysts or in which 
any embryonic stem cells are introduced into human blastocysts would be banned. 

Introduction  of  hEs  into  other  non-human  mammalian  blastocysts  should  be 
considered  only  under  circumstances  where  no  other  experiment  can  provide  the 
information needed. 

No  animal  into  which  hES  have  been  introduced  at  any  stage  should  be  allowed  to 
breed. 

Regarding  international  co-operation,  an  ESCRO  committee  may  determine  that  the 
procedures  prescribed  by  the  relevant  foreign  institution  afford  protections  consistent  with 
these guidelines. 

(cid:41) 

The full report is available at http://books.nap.edu/catalog/11278.html. 
The recommendations are listed pp80-88. 

Further Information 

Mary Kavanagh 
Science Counsellor 
European Commission Delegation in Washington DC 
Tel.: (1-202) 862.95.00 
Fax: (1-202) 429.17.66 
Email: delegation-washington@cec.eu.int 

Address 
2300 M Street, NW, Washington D.C. 20037-1434, USA 

Website 
on Science, Technology and Education 

WWW.eurunion.org/legislat/ste/stehome.htm 

60

 
 
                              
 
 
 
 
Training Proposals 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ethics Training Proposals 

ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Introduction of a European Master’s Degree in the Philosophy of Medecine, 

Humanism and Basic Bioethics. 

Professor  Claude  Debru,  École  normale  supérieure;  Professor  Norbert  Paul,  University  of 
Mainz; Professor Philippe Meyer, Paris V and the Genshagen Foundation. 

General declaration of intent 

Research and education in the “Philosophy of medecine, humanism and basic bioethics” are 
based on three categories of essential data relating to human life in Europe today. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

The  astounding  progress  made  in  life  sciences  over  a  half  century  has  radically 
changed  the  traditional  perception  of  human  beings.  The  state  of  the  art  medical 
instruments which can treat the human body now bring support from cradle to grave. 
Doubts are expressed about the concepts of freedom, autonomy and human dignity as 
the  available  technology  advances  from  day  to  day.  Human  life  is  loosing  its 
sacredness  through  the  intervention  of  science,  human  will  and  social  conventions. 
The  Hippocratic  philosophy  which  guided  medicine  for  almost  three  millennia  is 
suddenly  called  into  question  as  automatic  computer  managed  functions  enter  the 
scene and medical objectives are more and more commonly set on the basis of human 
society  than  of  the  individuals  who  compose  it.  By  acquiring  new  and  significant 
powers,  medicine  has  prompted  searching  questions  into  its  human  vocation  and 
potential ethical problems. 

In  Europe,  while  the  sciences  progress  at  much  the  same  rate  in  all  European 
countries, there are considerable differences in the way medicine is practised, which is 
all  the  more  thought  provoking  given  that  the  European  philosophical  heritage  is 
common to all its states. Naturally the differences relate to the most sensitive aspects 
of human life - procreation, genetics, development and death - and the very essence of 
human  thinking.  The  time  is  ripe  for  Europe  to  engage  in  a  new  and  intense 
philosophical  debate.  As  western  science  continues  its  headlong  progress,  there  is  a 
new question we must all address: What does European civilisation wish to achieve? 

The new dialogue must perforce be multi-disciplinary, associating scientific thinking, 
medical  thinking,  philosophical  thinking,  sociological  interpretation  and  cultural 
history.  The  time  has  passed  when  a  single  discipline  could  claim  to  resolve  new 
problems.  A  new  form  of  debate  must  be  launched  and  a  new  form  of  truly  cross-
disciplinary teaching, and each and every component of it must be evaluated. 

Franco-German  working  meetings  have  shown  that  the  bases  for  philosophical  questioning 
and the basic bioethical system that we propose are virtually identical in both countries, even 
though  ethical  and  clinical  practices  differ.  The  climate,  we  felt,  was  right  for  a  specific 
Franco-German teaching programme which could lead to convergent medical attitudes. Polish 
philosophers  would  like  to  join  the  Franco-German  group  so  as  to  gain  a  better  grasp  of  a 
research process which diverges sharply from the Polish experience. 

62

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

These conclusions were reached at four international meetings: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Franco-German meeting on bioethics. Genshagen Foundation, January 2002, Towards 
a European bioethical system, Annales d’Histoire et de Philosophie du Vivant, 2002, 
vol. 7 (organisers D. Ganten and Ph. Meyer); 

European  Summer  School  on  Bioethics,  Genshagen  Foundation,  September  2004 
(organisers : D. Ganten and Ph. Meyer); 

Working meeting at the Genshagen Foundation (Ph. Meyer), January 2005; 

Working  meeting.  Department  of  Philosophy,  History  and  Theory  at  the  Gutenberg 
University in Mainz (Norbert Paul). 

Following these meetings, the requisite basis for launching a European Master’s Degree was 
in place 

1. 

Setting up a scientific committee : Organiser : Professor Claude Debru (Ecole normale 
supérieure, rue d’Ulm), Professor Norbert Paul (Mainz University) Professor Philippe 
Meyer  (Paris  &  Genshagen),  Professor  Anne-Marie  Gethmann  (Hagen  University, 
Professor  Detlev  Ganten  (Charité,  Berlin),  Professor  André  Kaniowski  (Dept. 
Philosophy,  University  of  Lodz),  Professor  Felix  Thiele  (Bad  Neuenahr  Ahrweiler 
European academy), Professor J.J. Wunenburger (Lyon III); 

2. 

Drawing  up  a  teaching  programme  covering  four  themes:  General  and  medical 
philosophy; history of medicine; medicine and culture; science and technology. 

General  philosophy:  Nature  and  Culture;  self  and  non-self;  individual  and  person; 
matter  and  spirit;  concept  of  life  from  the  embryo  to  senescence;  human  dignity, 
consent. 

Medical philosophy: Anthropology; medical theories; health and sickness; normal and 
pathological; instrumentalisation of life; research on humans. 

Patient/doctor dialogue: Progress in medicine, outlook and future problems. 

Epistemology  applied  to  medicine:  Argumentation  and  communication;  reasoning  in 
research;  new  diseases;  causality;  “evidence  based  medicine”;  artificial  intelligence; 
scientific progress and medical progress; neuronal man. 

General  history:  History  of  science,  ideas,  diseases,  the  human  body,  life  and  death, 
relations between medicine and society. 

Medical  history:  Hippocratic  tradition;  from  theory  to  practice;  development  and 
medical concepts; versatility of pathology; versatility of medical practice; interaction 
between doctor, patient and disease; medical interventions; symptomatology; cultural 
history of health and disease. 

Culture:  Medicine  and  culture;  medicine  in  cultures;  diseases  in  local  cultures; 
literature  and  art  in  medicine;  the  road  to  recovery;  therapeutic  eclecticism;  medical 
communication;  health  and  society;  cultural  construction  of  medical  value;  medicine 
and art in creativity. 

Science  and  technology:  Medical  reliability;  political  and  financial  assistance; 
advanced  technology;  research  policy  and  individual  talents;  bioscience  and  medical 
technology; technique in relation to life and disease. 

63

 
ETHICALLY SPEAKING | Issue N°5 

Major  technical  progress  and  medical  ethics:  Heredity,  genetics,  neurosciences, 
transplants, reproduction, ageing. 

Science and society: Policy, economics, communication. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

Specific  two  year  or  longer  teaching  programme,  with  1800  hours  European  credits 
per  year.  Selection  of  teachers;  selected  external  collaboration  with  other  Master’s 
degrees or other institutions. 

Budgetary estimate on the basis of the number of students wishing to receive training 
in  the  neighbouring  country,  technical  assistance,  and  secretary,  teachers  from  the 
annual Summer university course in the Genshagen Foundation made available for the 
Master’s degree. 

These  university  summer  courses,  roughly  one  week,  will  enable  students  to  present 
their doctoral research work and to hear a few guest lecturers. 

A further preparatory meeting is planned at the Genshagen Foundation in September 2005 to 
clarify all these points and the purpose of the course. German and French will be the official 
teaching  languages;  English  may  be  used  where  necessary.  Assistance  with  translation  is 
envisaged but not real simultaneous translation, which would be too costly. 

Funding 

We plan to apply to the following for support 

Ministry  for  Research  in  Paris  and  Berlin,  the  European  Commission,  the  Ministries  for 
European  Affairs,  the  Franco-German  University,  the  University  of  Mainz,  the  French 
Embassy  in  Berlin,  and  to  have  their  representatives  attend  the  preparatory  meeting  in 
September 2005. An initial budgetary estimate covering student exchanges, travel by teachers 
and technical assistance amounts to €30 000 to be borne by France and Germany, i.e. a total 
of €60 000 per year. This is only a rough estimate given that the number of students is still not 
known. If many students apply, a selection procedure could be introduced. A modest amount 
will be requested for attendance costs. 

The headquarters of the Master's degree is the department of Philosophy, History and Theory 
at  the  Gütenberg  University  in  Mainz  (Director  Professor  Dr  Norbert  Paul),  as  the  Institute 
has  libraries,  lecture  theatres  and  work  rooms.  The  week-long  summer  course  (Summer 
university) will be given at Schloss Genshagen, which is ideally equipped for the purpose. 

Further Information 

                            

Professor Philippe Meyer 
Paris V 
Email: philippe.meyer75@club-internet.fr

64

 
 
