K
A
-
A
1
-
0
7
-
0
0
8
-
E
N
-
C

The European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies
to the European Commission

A Newsletter providing information
on the activities of the National Ethics Committees
compiled by the Secretariat of the European Group 
on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 
to the European Commission

ISSN 1725-5562

EUROPEAN
COMMISSION

issue8

July 2007
 July 2007

COVER.indd   1

7/25/07   9:32:06 AM

The European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies 
to the European Commission 

Ethically Speaking 

Issue No 8 
July 2007 

Chief Editor 
Maurizio SALVI 

EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

 
 
 
Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers 
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11 

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers or these calls 

may be billed.

More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu). 

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication. 

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, 2007 
ISSN 1725-5562 

© European Communities, 2007 
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. 

Printed in Belgium 

PRINTED ON WHITE CHLORINE-FREE PAPER

(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:55)(cid:40)(cid:49)(cid:55)(cid:54)(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:40)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)

Maurizio Salvi, Head of the EGE Secretariat, Editor,  

Ethically Speaking................................................................................................................................ 3 

(cid:3)

(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)

Council of Europe (CoE)..................................................................................................................... 7 
Task Force on Ethics and Law of the European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology 
(ESHRE) .............................................................................................................................................. 9 
World Health Organizatio (WHO)..................................................................................................... 12 

(cid:36)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:42)(cid:40)(cid:3)

An article by Bánáti, Diána & Tóth, Annamária, Hungary, Central Food Research Institute, 
"Agricultural ethics" ....................................................................................................................... 17 

(cid:49)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)

Cyprus National Bioethics Committee, Cyprus ................................................................................. 21 

Finnish National Ethics Committees, Finland.................................................................................... 24 

German National Ethics Council, Germany ....................................................................................... 28 

Greek National Bioethics Committee, Greece  .................................................................................. 31 

Italian National Bioethics Committee, Italy....................................................................................... 33 

National Research Ethics Council, Romania...................................................................................... 35 

Swedish Council on Medical Ethics, Sweden  ................................................................................... 37 

Nuffield Council on Bioethics, United Kingdom ............................................................................... 40 

(cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)

DG Information Society and Media (INFSO), Evaluation and Monitoring Unit ............................... 45 

1

(cid:40)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)

The Berlin Declaration was adopted in May 2007 by the Heads of State and Government of 
the  European  Union  on  the  occasion  of  the  50th  anniversary  of  the  Treaty  of  Rome.  The 
declaration states that "EU countries are striving for peace and freedom, for democracy and 
the rule of law, for  mutual respect and shared responsibility, for prosperity and security, for 
tolerance and participation, for justice and solidarity." Peace, freedom, democracy, tolerance, 
responsibility, justice… are all values on which Europe is building its policies. 

Fundamental human rights are central to EU policy-making and the Conclusions of the most 
recent Brussels European Council (EU27 Summit, 21-22 June, 2007) indicate that, inter alia, 
the  future  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  Union  will  contain  an  Article  with  'a  cross 
reference1  to  the  Charter  on  fundamental  rights, as  agreed  in  the  2004  Intergovernmental 
Conference (IGC), giving it legally binding value and setting out the scope of its application.' 

The  European  Charter  of  fundamental  values  shows  that,  while  Europe  is  multicultural,  a 
compound of shared values exists, a value platform which is intimately linked to the identity 
of the EU. This may help to nurture not only a European identity but also a European way of 
implementing  policies  based  on  open  debate,  mutual  respect  and  tolerance,  three  axes  on 
which the EU is focusing efforts, actions and initiatives.  

How can we foster pan-European debate, mutual respect and tolerance on bioethics across the 
EU and beyond? 

I  would  like  to  mention  briefly  an  initiative  aimed  at  facilitating  debate  between  the  EU 
National  Ethics  Councils  (NEC)  and  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  of  science  and  new 
technologies (EGE):  The EGE-NEC Forum joint meetings. 

The EGE and NEC Forum met for the first time in December 2004 in Amsterdam under the 
auspices of the Dutch Presidency. The joint meeting was organised by the EC and hosted by 
the Health Council of the Netherlands. Another joint meeting took place in September 2006, 
under the auspices of the Finnish Presidency, organised by Finland's National Advisory Board 
on Research Ethics.  

This  year,  on  May  24,  under  the  auspices  of  the  German  Presidency  and  hosted  by  the 
German National Ethics Council (Nationaler Ethikrat), the European Group on Ethics (EGE) 
met  the  Forum  of  National  Ethics  Councils  (NEC  Forum)  in  a  friendly  and  cooperative 
atmosphere, an initiative2 of the European Commission aimed at bringing together the Chairs 
of the EU27 NECs and other relevant actors in the field (the Council of Europe Conference of 
Ethics  Committees  (COMET),  Unesco,  etc.).  The  event  provided  an  opportunity  for 
interaction and debate between the EGE and the EU27 NECs on issues of mutual interest and 
major significance in the field of bioethics and ethics of science. 

1 
2  

Therefore, the text of the Charter on fundamental rights will not be included in the Treaties. 
http://ec.europa.eu/research/science-society/index.cfm?fuseaction=public.topic&id=75 

3

                                                
At the most recent EGE-NEC Forum meeting in Berlin, the Chair of the Portuguese National 
Ethics  Council  announced  the  Portuguese  Presidency's  decision  to  host  the  next  EGE-NEC 
Forum joint meeting  in Lisbon (10-11 October 2007).  The  intention  of hosting  similar joint 
meetings has been indicated by the NECs of the future rotating Presidencies of the EU. The 
EGE-NEC Forum joint meeting has therefore become a high-level event on the EU's political 
agenda. 

The  EGE-NEC  Forum  joint  meeting  is  just  one  example  of  the  importance  of  establishing 
debate  platforms  assembling  the  relevant  actors  in  the  field  of  bioethics,  where  subsidiarity 
and  the  cultural  heterogeneity  of  the  EU  Member  States  clearly  emerge  and  where  debate, 
mutual respect and tolerance become fundamental to the notion of Europe as a Community of 
values,  based  on  respect  for  human  rights,  ethics  and  pluralism  –  common  milestones 
underpinning the work of the EGE, EU27 NECs and the EU as a whole. 

Maurizio Salvi, PhD 
Policy Adviser to the President, 
Bureau of European Policy Advisers (BEPA) 
 Head of the EGE Secretariat 
Editor, Ethically Speaking 

Further information 

Dr Maurizio Salvi 
Head of the EGE Secretariat   
Editor, Ethically Speaking 

Alessandra Ferrari, Assistant   

Joëlle Bezzan   
Editorial Assistant 

EGE Secretariat 
Tel: +32(0)2 296.19.48 
Fax: +32 (0)2.299.45.65
Email: bepa-ethics-group@ec.europa.eu 
European Commission 

Office: BERL 8/143, B-1049 Brussels 

Website: http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm 

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

5

June  2007  with  medical  doctors,  scientists  and  health  officials.  Particular  emphasis  will  be 
placed on ethics of biomedical research. 

Pedagogical tool on bioethics
The  Council  of  Europe  continues  to  develop  its  pedagogical  tool  for  persons  wishing  to 
initiate  an  open  debate  on  ethical  issues  with  young  people.  After  organ  donation,  genetic 
testing and medically assisted procreation, two new sets of fact sheets are being finalised on 
cloning  and  on  biomedical  research.  They  will  be  available  in  French  in  September  2007. 
Translation  into  other  languages  is  ongoing  and  national  ethics  committees  have  been 
approached  to  find  appropriate  ways  to  facilitate  distribution  of  the  tool  in  the  different 
Member States of the Council of Europe. 

This  pedagogical  tool  provides  relevant  ethical,  legal  and  scientific  information,  as  well  as 
cases which can be used as a basis for such debate. 
The objectives of this tool are:  

-
-
-
-

to raise young people’s awareness on bioethical issues; 
to promote autonomy of reflection;  
to promote active participation in public debate (education in citizenship); 
to show the European dimension of bioethical reflection. 

It  is  composed  of  a  set  of  five  sheets  around  one  topic  (general  introduction,  scientific 
information, legal and ethical information, cases with questions, references and glossary).  

Further information 

Carlos de Sola 
Head of the Bioethics Department 
Secretary of the Steering Committee on Bioethics (CDBI) 
Tel: + 33 (0)3 88 41 24 38 
Email: carlos.desola@coe.int 

Laurence Lwoff
Administrative Officer / Secretary of the Working Party on Human Genetics and of the 
Working Party on the Protection of the Human Embryo and Foetus 
Tel: + 33 (0)3 88 41 22 68  
Fax: + 33 (0)3 88 41 37 45
Email: laurence.lwoff@coe.int 

Website: www.coe.int/Bioethics

8

 
 
 
 
 
(cid:3)
The application of preimplantation genetic diagnosis for  human leucocyte antigen  

(cid:3)

typing of embryos

I.  Scientific background 

Transplantation  of  haematopoietic  stem  cells  (HSCs,  i.e.  cord blood  or bone  marrow)  is  the 
standard treatment in cases of neoplastic (e.g leukaemia) or congenital (e.g. beta-thalassaemia, 
sickle  cell  anaemia)  diseases  affecting  the  haematopoietic  and/or  the  immune  system. 
Transplantation  may  also  be  appropriate  for  some  rare  metabolic  diseases  (e.g.  adreno-
leukodystrophy). Cord blood collected at birth is an established source of HSCs. If no human 
leukocyte  antigen  (HLA)  identical  donor  is  available  in  the  family,  preimplantation  genetic 
diangosis  (PGD)  can  be  used  to  select  an  embryo  that  is  (1)  HLA  identical  and  (2)  free  of 
disease-related  mutations.  The  overall  success  rate  of  HSC  transplantation  with  an  HLA-
matched sibling is significantly higher and has fewer complications than transplantation with 
HSC from an unrelated donor. 
Efficiency,  accuracy  and  limitations:  there  are  several  limitations  at  different  stages  of  the 
process of conceiving and using an HLA-matched child to cure a sibling. 

II. General ethical considerations

In society, there is a presumption that parents will act for  the benefit  of  their children. This 
presumption  underlies  their  right  to  make  decisions  about  what  can  or  should be done  with 
their children. In some cases, the interests of two siblings may conflict. The dilemma for the 
parents is that they have to balance the interests of both children. They may decide that the 
possible harm to  the  future healthy sibling is outweighed by the probable gains  for the  sick 
child. Moreover, the acceptability of this balance can be argued by referring to the notion of 
hypothetical consent: the future sibling on whose behalf the decision to donate is  made will 
agree with the present decision when he/she becomes autonomous.  

The children’s interests 

(i)  For the  sick child,  the benefits are  obvious  since  transplantation of  stem cells  from  cord 
blood is the treatment of choice and offers the only chance of cure.  
(ii)  For  the  future  child,  although  there  may  be  some  psychological  benefits  for  the  donor 
child, no medical benefits result from the donation. However, the risks and inconveniences of 
HSC  donation  for  the  donor  are  considered  as  minimal.  These  risks  are  outweighed  by  the 
benefits for the receiving sibling whose life can be saved. This is a decision to be made by the 
fully informed and counselled parents. 
The parents respect the child’s autonomy if his/her use as a donor is not the only motive for 
the parents to have the child. They should intend to love and care for this child to the same 
extent as they love and care for the affected child. If this condition is fulfilled, the future child 

9

is  not  created  merely  as  an  instrument  for  the  benefit  of  the  older  sick  sibling.  The  lack  of 
instrumentalisation  is  even  more  obvious  when  the  parents  request  PGD  primarily  to  avoid 
having  another  child  affected  by  the  same  disease  and  the  wish  for  HLA  matching  is  only 
added afterwards. 
The  use  of  a  child  as  a  donor  of  HSCs  in  itself is  not  considered  disrespectful  towards  the 
child. This is demonstrated by the fact that the parents may volunteer an already existing child 
to serve as a bone marrow donor for a sibling. One way to check whether the interests of the 
future child are respected is by applying the postnatal test: if it is acceptable to use an existing 
child for a certain reason, it is also acceptable to create a new child for the same reason. 

The physician's responsibility towards the future child 

Since the parental project to conceive a child to cure a sick sibling is morally acceptable, the 
collaboration of the physician in the project is also morally justified. The team involved has 
the responsibility to provide full information, genetic counselling and implication counselling 
to  the  future  parents  (eg.  the  possibility  of  the  affected  child  dying  before  the  birth  of  the 
sibling). 

III. Specific ethical considerations

(i) Based on the above considerations,  the use  of PGD for  the creation of an HLA-matched 
sibling to cure a sick child suffering from a serious non-genetic disease (e.g. some forms of 
leukaemia) is also acceptable. 

(ii) Given the low chance of success of the procedure, it may be inappropriate to recommend 
the technique in cases of advanced maternal age and/or poor ovarian reserve. In practice, the 
physician must evaluate and explain the chances of success for each specific case. The team 
may  conclude  that  the  technique  is  not  advisable  if,  given  the  specific  circumstances,  the 
chance  of  delivering  an  HLA-matched  child  is  estimated  as  very  low.  Decision-making 
should  take  place  in  a  multidisciplinary  team  including  paediatricians,  haematologists, 
geneticists and psychologists. 

(iii) Parents should be urged to think about the disposition of the remaining healthy embryos 
that are not HLA compatible. In these cases, the options should be restricted to freezing for 
future  reproduction  by  themselves,  donation  for  research  or  disposal.  Donation  to  other 
couples is not advisable until sufficient information about the health of children after embryo 
biopsy is available. 

(iv) The creation of a child for the purpose of harvesting non-regenerative organs is extremely 
difficult to justify in view of the risks involved for the donor child. Since solid organ donation 
by children or incompetent adults  is not considered morally acceptable because of the more 
than minimal risk for the donor, creating a child in order to obtain an organ for a sibling is not 
acceptable either. 

(v)  In  order  to  collect  reliable  information  on  the  fate  of  the  children  and  the  families  that 
apply  this  technology,  careful  follow-up  should  be  performed.  Present  concerns  about  the 
psychological  and  social  consequences  for  the  donor  sibling  can  only  be  corroborated  or 
refuted by empirical research. It is therefore advisable to collate a register of such donations 
for this purpose. 

10

(vi) Given the relevance of parental motives for the moral evaluation, the parental intentions 
regarding the upbringing of the future child and the coping capacity of the parents should be 
discussed by a psychologist before the start of treatment. 

For  the  full  statement,  see  ESHRE  Task  Force  on  Ethics  and  Law  (2005)  Taskforce  9:  The 
application  of  preimplantation  genetic  diagnosis  for  human  leukocyte  antigen  typing  of 
embryos. Human Reproduction 20 (4): 845-847. 

Further information 

Mr Guido Pennings
President of the Task Force on Ethics and Law of the European Society of Human 
Reproduction and Embryology (ESHRE) 
Professor of Ethics and Bioethics, Ghent University 

Address 
Ghent University 
Dpt of Philosophy and Moral Science 
Blandijnberg 2 
B – 9000 Gent 
Belgium 
Tel./Fax: + 32 (16) 620767 
Email: Guido.Pennings@Ugent.be         

Website: http://allserv.ugent.be/~gpenning

1
1

Ethics and Health at WHO 

(cid:3)

Public Health Ethics 

HIV/AIDS 

• Ethics  and  Health  participates  in  policy  development  regarding  the  scaling-up  of 
prevention,  testing,  treatment  and  care  for  HIV/AIDS  patients,  advising  the  HIV 
department  on related ethical  issues, notably  in  clinical  care  and  research  (including  the 
standard  of  care)  and  equitable  access  to  antiretroviral  treatment.  A  case  study,  entitled 
Equity and fair process in scaling up antiretroviral therapy: potentials and challenges in 
the  United  Republic  of  Tanzania,  was  published  in  June  2006,  in  collaboration  with  the 
German Technical Cooperation (GTZ) and the Tanzanian Ministry of Health. 

• Ethics  and  Health  has  also  collaborated  with  the  HIV  department  at  WHO  in  the 
development  of  the  new  WHO/UNAIDS  Testing  and  Counselling  Policy,  which  is  now 
available on the web at www.who.int/hiv/topics/vct. 

• Ethics  and  Health  has  also  been  involved  in  analysing  the  issues  surrounding  the 

criminalisation of  HIV transmission. 

• A guidance document entitled "Basic Principles for Treatment and Psychosocial Support 
of  Drug  Dependent  People  Living  with  HIV/AIDS",  produced  in  collaboration  with  the 
Departments of HIV and Mental Health/Substance Abuse, has been published and can be 
found at: 
http://www.who.int/substance_abuse/publications/basic_principles_drug_hiv.pdf. 
Its purpose is to promote equitable access to high-quality HIV care for intravenous drug 
users,  particularly  those  involved  in  drug  treatment  programmes  or  the  criminal  justice 
system.   

Pandemic Preparedness 

•

In collaboration with WHO's Department of Epidemic and Pandemic Alert and Response 
(EPR/CDS),  the  Ethics  and  Health  team  organised  an  international  consultation 
"Addressing  Ethical  Issues  in  Influenza  Pandemic  Planning",  which  took  place  in 
Geneva on 24-25 October 2006. The aim is to provide guidance  for  Member  States and 
other stakeholders on how to include ethical considerations in pandemic preparedness.  

Based on four working  papers already discussed during  a  technical meeting in May, the 
discussion focused on the following topics:  
- Equitable access to treatment and prevention; 
- Isolation, quarantine and social distancing; 
- Obligations of healthcare workers; 
- International cooperation. 

Publication of the WHO report and guiding principles is expected for June 2007. Regional 
and national workshops have been held in Indonesia, France, Cambodia and Saudi Arabia.  

1
2

 
 
 
 
Further information can be found at:  
http://www.who.int/ethics/influenza_project/en/index.html.

Ethics of Research  

• Following  the  NEBRA  project  (Networking  for  Ethics  on  Biomedical  Research  in 
Africa)3, Ethics and Health is involved in three proposals funded by EDCTP4. One is co-
ordinated by the University of Neuchatel (Switzerland) and will provide African countries 
with  tools  for  distance  learning  in  research  ethics.  The  other  two  projects  will  aim  to 
support local research ethics committees in Nigeria and Gabon. 

Training activities:  

•

In collaboration with the WHO Department of Reproductive Health Research, Ethics and 
Health organised a regional training workshop in April 2007. The workshop took place in 
Tunisia with participants from Algeria, Lebanon, Mauritania and Morocco in attendance. 

• A  similar  training  workshop  supported  by  the  Program  for  Appropriate  Technology  in 
Health  (PATH)  will  take  place  in  Ouagadougou  (Burkina  Faso)  in  July  2007  with 
participants from several sub-Saharan African countries. 

• Ethics and Health is part of the steering committee of the Global Forum on Bioethics in 
Research and contributes to the preparation of its yearly meetings.  The next meeting is in 
June this year, in Vilnius, Lithuania. It will  focus on  "building the infrastructure needed 
for ethics review" and, as a sub-topic, the "ethical  aspects  of mental health research". A 
satellite  meeting  organised  jointly  by  Ethics  and  Health  and  the  WHO  Initiative  for 
Vaccine  Research  will  take  place  on  26  June,  focusing  on  specific  issues  related  to 
vaccines trials. 

• Planning is also under way for the 2008 meeting, scheduled for New Zealand in February, 
which will focus on the ethics of indigenous people and cultural responsibility in research, 
and the ethical aspects of research in vulnerable populations. 

Collaboration with other organisations:  

• Ethics  and  Health  enjoys  observer  status  within  the  Steering  Committee  on  Bioethics 

(CDBI) of the Council of Europe. 

• WHO  in  collaboration  with  UNESCO  organised  the  First  Regional  Meeting  of  National 
Bioethics Committees in the Eastern Mediterranean Region, which took place in Cairo on 
5-7  May  2007.  About  50  participants  from  national  committees  attended  and  discussed 
topics ranging from stem cell research to biobanks and pandemic preparedness. Moreover, 
a  strategy  for  strengthening  future  collaboration  amongst  national  committees  in  the 
Region was outlined, and a further meeting is planned for 2009. 

• Ethics and Health represents WHO at the UN Inter Agency Committee on Bioethics, the 
current  issues  being  intellectual  property,  benefit  sharing,  issues  of  capacity  building  in 
research ethics and access to essential medicines. Ethics and Health also participates in the 

3 Project funded by the European Commission (6th Framework Programme,  Science and Society)  
4 European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials Partnership 

3
1

                                                
UNESCO International Bioethics Committee (IBC) as an observer.  

• Ethics and Health provides the permanent secretariat for the Global Summit of National 
Bioethics  Commissions,  which  met  in  Beijing,  China,  in  August  2006,  jointly  with  the 
World  Congress  of  Bioethics.    The  next  summit  will  take  place  in  Paris,  France,  in 
September 2008, just before the World Congress which will be hosted in Croatia. 

Further information 

Ethics and Health at WHO (ETH) 
Professor Alexander Capron 
Director 

Dr Andreas Reis 
Technical officer, reisa@who.int 

Dr Marie-Charlotte Bouësseau 
Technical Officer, bouesseaum@who.int 

Contact: Mrs Anne Newson 
Tel: +41 22 791 1207 | Fax: +41 22 791 1399 
Email: ethics@who.int  

Address 
WHO/SDE/ETH - World Health Organization 
20 Avenue Appia 
CH-1211 Genève 27 

Website: www.who.int/ethics 

1

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

15

(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)

(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)

(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)

Owing  to  the  technical  and  technological  accomplishments  of  the  20th  century,  man's 
influence over the environment has grown immensely. The activities of the participants in the 
food chain affect not  only the natural but also the socio-cultural environment. Has mankind 
utilised rationally the abundant natural resources available for agricultural production to meet 
its own needs? 

As  a  consequence  of  the  fundamental changes  in  agricultural production  over past decades, 
many more foodstuffs can be produced than ever before. The most important factors inducing 
these changes have been: migration of the population from the country to the cities, growing 
mechanisation, better transportation possibilities, improvement of the quality  of propagation 
materials  and  animals’  properties,  development  of  plant  protection,  emerging  new 
technologies as well as international trade and competition in food products and feedstuffs.  

However, these changes in agricultural practices have led to the overuse and deterioration of 
natural  resources  upon  which  agriculture  depends.  For  instance,  in  cereal  production  the 
systematic  use  of  pesticides  has  triggered  the  relative  resistance  of  pests,  increasing  the 
frequency  and  cost  of  future  treatment  and  inducing  additional  soil  and  water  pollution 
problems. In some areas, considerable quantities  of the upper soil levels are lost every  year 
because of erosion resulting from irrational land use.  Landscaping and drainage bring about 
the  death  of  wet  areas  while  also  reducing  biodiversity.  As  a  result  of  the  excessive  use  of 
nitrogen and phosphate-based fertilizers, surface waters are being eutrophicated. Considering 
the genetic uniformity of farm animals and the growing concentration of farms, it is getting 
more and more difficult to overcome the various animal diseases. The overuse of antibiotics 
in  animal  breeding  has  caused  the  development  of  resistance  to  antibiotics  among  certain 
pathogens,  which  is  a  problem  not  only  for  the  environment  but  also  for  human  health. 
Furthermore, intensive livestock keeping raises serious animal welfare issues.  

While  in  the  developed  countries  the  food  industry  has  become  a  large-scale  operation 
underpinned  by  a  completely  new  economic  model  where  new  telecommunication  and 
computerised systems are applied, contracts are concluded on a new global market and new, 
increasingly  refined  urban  consumers  are  targeted,  in  the  developing  regions  poverty  has 
grown to huge dimensions and people are living under extreme climatic conditions struggling 
with  food and drinking water  shortages.  According to the 2001  FAO  Report, a  total  of 792 
million people are starving on Earth while 1.1 billion people are suffering from malnutrition 
or are underweight.  

The  prosperous  societies  have  seen  the  emergence  of  environmentally  aware  and  health-
conscious consumer groups affecting directly both agricultural and food industrial production. 
More and more „consumers” recognise their own responsibilities in preserving and improving 

17

the  environment,  and  expect  the  same  from  agrarian  industries.  In  recent  years,  however, 
consumers’  confidence  in  the  food  industry  and  food  control  institutions  has  waned 
considerably.  

Genetic  engineering,  bioinformatics,  genomics  and  the  new  disciplines  generate  both 
admiration  and  fear  in  society.  They  ensure  unprecedented  opportunity  (e.g.  a  genetically 
tailored diet) but can also carry unforeseen hazards (e.g. the accumulation and wandering of 
nanoparticles transmitted by  foods into  the organism). Given  the new  opportunities recently 
created and due to man's technical accomplishments, the nature and margins of human action 
have  changed  in  such  a way  and  on  such  a  scale  that  the  former  ethics  do  not  cover  them. 
Modern  technology  has  given  mankind  numerous  opportunities  and  we  must  set  its  limits. 
Simultaneously with the appearance of new ethical norms, we must be prepared to analyse the 
likely future consequences. 

Raw-material  production,  animal  husbandry,  food  production  and  commercialisation  have 
numerous  ethical  aspects.  Nevertheless,  up  to  now  we  have  not  dealt  with  ethical  issues 
related to agricultural and food sciences comprehensively and institutionally. Even the experts 
face  only  incidentally  ethical  questions  to  be  answered  from  the  point  of  view  of 
proportionality  and  the  precautionary  principle,  beneficence  (especially  with  regard  to 
improvement and protection of health), the obligation not to harm, human dignity, equity and 
fairness, integrity,  the concept  of prudence,  informed consent, liability,  freedom of research 
(which  must  be  balanced  against  other  fundamental  principles),  which  are  related  to 
genetically modified organisms, animal welfare, food labelling, the intellectual property rights 
connected  with  living  organisms,  the  evolvement  of  agrarian  monopolies,  the  protection  of 
biodiversity  as  well  as  health,  destroying  materials  utilised  or  emerging  in parallel  with  the 
agricultural processes, cultivation and food processing technologies. So agrarian ethics must 
find  its  proper  place  in  the  system  of  modern  ethics  along  with  bioethics,  environmental 
ethics, business ethics and engineering ethics. 

Further Information 

Prof. Dr Diána Bánáti, 
member of EGE 
Director General, Central Food Research Institute 
Budapest, Hungary

Address 
1022 Hungary, Herman Ottó út 15 
Tel.: +36-1-3558 991 
Fax: +36-1-212 9853 
Email: d.banati@cfri.hu

Website: www.cfri.hu 

18

           
(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

19

The Committee 

The Cyprus National Bioethics Committee (CNBC) was established in 2001 by the Law No. 
150 (I) of 2001, Law providing for the Establishment and Function of the National Bioethics 
Committee. 

The  Committee’s  mission  is  the  constant  monitoring,  survey,  systematic  analysis  and 
evaluation  of  the  issues  and  problems  that  relate  to  the  scientific  research,  progress  and 
implementation  of 
the  sciences  of  biotechnology,  biology,  medicine,  genetics  and 
pharmaceutics  as  well  as  to  the  human  intervention  on  the  biological  procedure  and  the 
human  genotype  and  the  investigation  of  their  moral,  deontological,  social,  humanistic  and 
legal dimensions. 

The  CNBC  is  an  independent  body  and  is  not  subject  to  the  administrative  control  of  any 
ministry,  independent  officer,  department  or  service  and  has  the  powers  provided  by  the 
present or any other Law. 

The  CNBC  has  13  members,  including  the  chairman.    The  members  represent  different 
professions and disciplines, and are appointed by the Council of Ministers of the Republic of 
Cyprus  for  a  term  of  office  of  four  years.  According  to  the  provisions  of  the  legislation,  at 
least  four  members  must  emerge  from  the  humanities  and  social  sciences  sector;  four 
members must emerge  from  the  area of medical and biological sciences, and  four  members 
from  the  area  of  any  other  science  or  profession  or  who  are  distinguished  in  any  area  of 
activity for their contribution. 

that  Review  Biomedical  Research”  formulated  by 

The  CNBC  adopted  with  very  few  changes  the  “Operational  Guidelines  for  Ethics 
the  World  Health 
Committees 
Organization, to form the basis of the guidelines issued to the Cyprus Ethics Committees. The 
operational  guidelines  for  the  establishment  of  ethics  committees  in  reviewing  biomedical 
research involving human subjects in Cyprus came in effect on 31.3.2005 ((cid:512).(cid:507).(cid:518). 175/2005). 

In  accordance  with  the  above  operational  guidelines  and  with  the  authority  assigned  to  the 
committee  by  law  150(I)/2001  Law  providing  for  the  establishment  and  function  of  the 
National Bioethics Committee, the Committee formed two Review Bioethics Committee: 

I. The Review Bioethics Committee for Biomedical Research on Human  

Beings and their biological substances, and  

II. The Review Bioethics Committee for the clinical trials on Medicinal  

Products of Human Use. 

21

The Role of the Review Bioethics Committees is: 

(1) Contribute  to  safeguarding  the  dignity,  rights,  safety  and  well-being  of  all  actual  or 

potential research participants. 

(2) Provide independent, competent and timely review of the ethics of proposed studies. 
(3) Responsible  for  carrying  out 

the  review  of  proposal  research  before 

the 

commencement of the research. 

CNBC  monitors,  directs,  coordinates,  and  reviews  the  work  performed  by  the  above  two 
Review  Bioethics  Committees.  The  Members  of  the  Review  Bioethics  Committees  are 
appointed for a period of two years. 

CNBCs Previous Opinions 

• Opinion on Human Organ Donor’s Registries 

• Opinion on transplantation of biological substances of human origin 

• Opinion on PGD and sex selection of the in-vitro procreated embryos 

• Opinion on the use of Preimplation Genetic Diagnosis method 

• Opinion on cord blood banking 

• Opinion on medically assisted human procreation 

Current work and forthcoming opinions 

• Genetically Modified Organisms

• Palliative Care

• Use of predictive genetic tests and relevant information for insurance and employment 

purposes

2

2

Further Information 

Rena Vrahimi- Petridou
President, 
The Cyprus National Bioethics Committee  

Address 
1 Apelli Street 
1403 Nicosia 
Cyprus 
Tel.:  +357 22 889103  
Fax:  +357  22  665080  
Email: repetridou@law.gov.cy  

Website: www.bioethics.gov.cy

(cid:3)

2

3

            
Ethics Committees in Finland – benefits of diversity 

There  are  two  major  factors  that  guarantee  the  important  role  of  science  and  research  in 
society:  accurate  science  communication  in  general  and  research  ethics.  In  Finland,  the 
science in society questions are mostly handled by two expert bodies attached to the Ministry 
of Education - the Committee for Public Information (TJNK, http://www.tjnk.fi/en/), which is 
responsible  for  promoting  the  use  and  dissemination  of  knowledge  in  society,  and  the 
National  Advisory  Board  on  Research  Ethics  (TENK,  www.tenk.fi),  which,  as  a 
multidisciplinary organisation, covers questions related to research integrity.  

In  Finland,  the  ethical  aspects  of  research  are  followed  by  six  national  ethics  committees, 
which are placed under three different ministries: the Ministries of Education, Social Affairs 
and Health, and Agriculture and Forestry. The ethics committees represent different areas of 
expertise:  research  integrity,  bio-  and  gene  technology,  medical  and  healthcare  ethics,  and 
laboratory animal sciences. Each committee has its own responsibilities, but as a network all 
committees benefit from  extensive cooperation. Synergy effects such as increased visibility, 
authority  and  trustworthiness  are  products  of  cooperation.  The  benefits  of  diversity  include 
wide expertise and better comprehension of multiplicity. 

National Advisory Board on Research Ethics 

The National Advisory Board on Research Ethics was founded to deal with ethical questions 
relating to research and to the advancement of research ethics in Finland (Decree 1347 of 15 
November  1991).  The  members  represent  the  most  important  disciplines  and  authorities 
involved with research integrity.  

for 

and 

procedures 

The  most  important  task  of  the Board has  been  to  devise the  guidelines  for  Good  scientific 
practice 
science
(http://www.tenk.fi/ENG/Publicationsguidelines/htkeng.pdf).  The  Board  promotes  research 
integrity by disseminating information and arranging education and seminars on the principles 
of  good  scientific  practice;  assists  research  institutes  in  arranging  education  about  research 
ethics; develops and monitors the investigation of ethical misconduct and fraud in research; 
develops  a  distinct  profile  in  disseminating  public  information  about  research  ethics;  and 

handling  misconduct 

fraud 

and 

in 

24

contributes  actively  to  Finnish  and  international  debates  on  research  ethics.  The  Board’s 
activities are currently focused on ethical issues relating to the humanities and social sciences, 
including  the  role  of  ethical  guidelines  and  ethical  preassessment,  and  the  creation  of  an 
ethically sound research community. 

Finnish National Advisory Board on Biotechnology 

The  primary  task  of  the  Finnish  National  Advisory  Board  on  Biotechnology  (BTNK, 
http://www.biotekniikanneuvottelukunta.fi/english1.htm),  attached  to  the  Ministry  of  Social 
Affairs  and  Health,  is  to  consider  ethical  issues,  follow  public  debate  on  bio-  and  gene 
technology, and promote public participation and perception of gene technology. The duties 
of  BTNK  are  defined  in  the  Gene  Technology  Decree  (928/2004;  http://www.finlex.fi/en/).  
BTNK  does not  give  legally  binding decisions,  but may issue opinions by  request  or  on its 
own initiative. Members of BTNK represent authorities most relevant to the control of gene 
technology, representative organisations of trade, consumers and industry, as well as research 
in the various fields of gene technology. 

BTNK  is  currently  branching  out  from  agricultural  bio-  and  gene  technology  (green 
biotechnology)  to  medical  (red  biotechnology)  and  industrial  biotechnologies  (white 
biotechnology).  These  activities  have  demonstrated  the  importance  of  dialogue  between 
different  interest  groups,  e.g.  the  use  of  food  crops  for  energy  production  have  ethical 
dimensions  that  need  to  be  explored.  Raising  public  awareness  of  the  diversity  of 
biotechnological applications is also considered to be a means of moving on from the dead-
end discussions about gmo issues which hinder fruitful discussion on the other applications of 
biotechnology. 

Board for Gene Technology 

In  Finland  the  use  of  genetically  modified  organisms  is  regulated  by  the  Gene  Technology 
Act (377/1995). 
The  Board  for  Gene  Technology  (GTLK,www.geenitekniikanlautakunta.fi/e/index.html), 
which is subordinated to the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, is the competent authority 
established  by  the  Act.  The  Board  is  appointed  for  five  years  by  the  Government.  The 
members  represent  the  Ministry  of  Trade  and  Industry,  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and 
Forestry,  the  Ministry  of  Social  Affairs  and  Health  and  the  Ministry  of  the  Environment, 
among others. Ethical expertise must also be represented. The priorities of the Board include 
processing notifications concerning the use and release of genetically modified organisms as 
defined by the Act, and leading and co-ordinating the supervision of compliance with the Act. 

National Advisory Board on Health Care Ethics 

The  National  Advisory  Board  on  Health  Care  Ethics  (ETENE,  www.etene.org)  was 
established  in  1998  by  incorporating  the  Board  into  the  Act  on  the  Status  and  Rights  of 
Patients (amendment 330/1998 of 15 May 1998). The Government appoints the Board for a 
four-year term. The members of the Board represent healthcare service users and providers, 
healthcare  professionals,  and  representatives  of  various  scientific  disciplines  such  as  law, 
medicine,  nursing  science  and  ethics,  with  the  addition  of  four  Members  of  Parliament. 
ETENE handles ethical issues and aims to promote societal discussion relating principally to 
healthcare  and  the  status  and  rights  of  patients,  providing  expert  assistance  for  the 
development  of  healthcare  legislation,  and  collects  and  distributes  information  on  ethical 

25

issues and international ethical discourse relating to health care. It can  issue statements and 
recommendations and propose initiatives on matters it considers important. 

Central  issues  in  ETENE’s  work  have  included  the  realisation  of  patients’  rights,  equity, 
justice  and  human  dignity  in  health  care.  In  2005  the  main  topic  was  human  enhancement 
(Publication: “Imago Dei”, Man – an image of God or a product of health care) and in 2006 it 
was needs in health care (Publication: Needs in health care – who or what defines them?). In 
many  of  its  publications  ETENE  has  discussed  equity,  the  right  of  self-determination,  and 
ethical boundaries in health care. 

Sub-Committee on Medical Research Ethics 

Sub-Committee 

According  to  the  Medical  Research  Act  (488/1999,  amended  295/2004),  the  independent 
Ethics  Committees  are  responsible  for  ethical  pre-evaluation  of  medical  research  and 
(TUKIJA, 
amendments.  The 
www.etene.org/e/tukija/index.shtml) evaluates the ethical aspects of international multicentre 
trials  on  medicinal  products.  It  can  also  delegate  that  duty  to  the  Hospital  District  Ethics 
Committee.  As  a  national  Research  Ethics  Committee,  TUKIJA  also  supports  the  Ethics 
Committees  of  Hospital  Districts  in  fundamental  ethical  issues  concerning  medical  or  other 
healthcare  research,  and  assists  in  arranging  training  on  these  issues.  A  research  proposal 
which has been given a negative opinion by a local Ethics Committee can be sent to TUKIJA 
for revaluation. 

on  Medical  Research  Ethics 

TUKIJA  was first established in 1999 and it is nominated by the  Ministry  of Social Affairs 
and  Health  for  a  four-year  mandate.  The  Ethics  Committees  of  Hospital  Districts  are 
appointed by Hospital Districts and are registered by provincial state officers.  The members 
of  Ethics  Committees  work  in  compliance  with  the  principles  of  official  accountability  and 
confidentiality.  Additionally,  some  research  institutes  have  Ethics  Committees  or  Working 
Groups  of  their  own  to  evaluate  the  kind  of  research  on  humans  that  is  not  covered  by  the 
Medical Research Act – such as surveys and questionnaires. 

Cooperation Group for Laboratory Animal Sciences 

The Cooperation Group for Laboratory Animal Sciences (KYTÖ, http://wwwb.mmm.fi/koe-
elaintoiminta/engl.htm) was founded in 2001 as a cooperative undertaking of the Ministries of 
Agriculture  and  Forestry  and  Education  to  deal  with  questions  concerning  animal 
experimentation.  The  cooperation  group,  which  is  nominated  for  a  term  of  three  years  at  a 
time,  consists  of  members  representing  universities,  research  organisations,  industry  and 
governmental authorities. Its task is to coordinate  research, education and  other activities  in 
the  field;  to  promote  laboratory  animal  welfare  and  discussion  on  ethical  considerations  in 
laboratory animal sciences; to promote high educational standards at all levels of animal care 
and research and to raise awareness and increase information available to the general public 
about laboratory animal sciences. 

The  revised  Act  on  Animal  Experimentation  (62/2006)  was  implemented  in  2006.  The 
competent  authority  established  by  the  Act  is  the  Committee  on  Animal  Experimentation, 
which  is  appointed  for  a  five-year  period  by  the  Government.  The  members  represent 
scientific  knowledge,  veterinary  expertise,  expertise  on  care  of  laboratory  animals  and 
expertise in the field of animal protection or on ethical issues. 

26

Further Information 

Outi Konttinen
Senior officer, 
The Sub-Committee on Medical Research Ethics  

Address 
P.O. Box 33 
(Kirkkokatu 14, Helsinki) 
00023 Valtioneuvosto  
Tel.: + 358 9 160 73147 
Fax: + 358 9 160 74312 
Email: outi.konttinen@stm.fi 

Website: www.research.fi/en/viewpoints/research_ethics

27

            
Function 

Following  the  German  Federal  Government’s  decision  of  2  May  2001,  the  National  Ethics 
Council was established on 8 June 2001 as a national forum for dialogue about ethical issues 
in the life sciences. It provides an umbrella for interdisciplinary discourse relating to science, 
medicine, theology, philosophy and the social and legal sciences, expressing its views on both 
the ethical aspects of new developments in the  life  sciences  and  their impact  on  individuals 
and  society  as  a  whole.  The  National  Ethics  Council  consists  of  up  to  25  Members  who 
represent  the  fields  of  science,  medicine,  theology,  philosophy,  society,  law,  ecology  and 
economy,  and  are  appointed  by  the  Federal  Chancellor  for  a  period  of  four  years.  The 
Members generally convene once a month in Berlin. 

The National Ethics Council is an independent body, bound only by its purpose as stipulated 
in the Government decision that established it. It determines the scope and organisation of its 
work independently. The Ethics Council puts great emphasis on its work with the community 
and  makes  its  opinions,  recommendations  and  reports  public.  The  National  Ethics  Council 
cooperates  with  other  ethics  bodies  in  Germany  as  well  as  with  comparable  institutions  of 
other countries and international organisations. 

The  General  Secretariat  of  the  National  Ethics  Council  is  located  on  the  premises  of  the 
Berlin  Brandenburg  Academy  of  Sciences  and  Humanities.  The  Council  and  its  General 
Secretariat are funded by the German Federal Government. 

Recent Opinions 

Predictive health information in the conclusion of insurance contracts (2007-02-01)

The  subject  of  this  Opinion  is  how  far  it  should  be  permissible  for  insurance  companies  to 
make  the  conclusion  of  private  personal  insurance  contracts  and  the  relevant  premiums 
dependent  on  the  collection  and  use  of  predictive  health  information  concerning  proposers. 
Statutory  insurance  schemes,  such  as  statutory  health  or  pension  insurance,  are  beyond  the 
scope of the Opinion.  

Both genetic tests and other modern medical diagnostic procedures can predict health risks or 
diseases  long  before  these  become  manifest.  The  National  Ethics  Council  therefore 
recommends that the principles set out below for the protection of proposers' personal rights 
should  be  applied  to  the  results  not  only  of  genetic  tests  but  also  of  other  predictive 
examinations, such as imaging techniques or biochemical and electrophysiological methods.  

Insurers should be allowed to collect information on a proposer's health only to the extent that 
it  is  necessary  for  an  individual  contract  and  where  the  details  furnished  by  the  proposer 
specifically suggest the existence of risks stemming from earlier or current medical conditions 
or, where applicable, of lifestyle issues with possible health implications.  

The  National  Ethics  Council  favours  the  continuation  of  the  voluntary  formal  commitment 
whereby  the  member  companies  of  the  German  Insurance  Association  (Gesamtverband  der 
Deutschen Versicherungswirtschaft e. V.) have agreed - for the time being until 31 December 
2011 - not to require disclosure, and not to take account, of results of predictive genetic tests 
that  are  known  to  the  proposer.  However,  the  moratorium  should  be  extended  to  predictive 
genetic  information  obtained  by  the  proposer  otherwise  than  from  molecular  genetic  or 
cytogenetic tests - for instance, from biochemical tests or the familial history.  

28

General  questioning  of  attending  physicians  in  the  absence  of  concrete  indications  of  a 
disease or of the risk of a disease should not be permissible. Where attending physicians are 
released  from  their  obligation  of  confidentiality  and  provide  information,  this  should  be 
restricted to a specific situation on which the insurer may request information for the purposes 
of risk calculation.  

The  right  of  insurers  to  require  proposers  to  undergo  a  medical  examination  should  be 
significantly limited. In the case of "ordinary" insurance contracts (i.e. where the sum insured 
is  not  unusually  high),  screening  for  existing  medical  conditions  and  health  risks  that  are 
unknown to the proposer and for which neither the clinical history nor the present condition 
of  the  proposer  afford  concrete  indications  should  never  be  permissible.  This  applies 
particularly to questions on familial history. "Ordinary" insurance contracts should be deemed 
to comprise contracts to cover the cost of medical treatment and other therapeutic measures in 
the  event  of  illness,  as  well  as  contracts  under  which  the  benefit  comprises  a  single  capital 
payment,  an  old-age  pension,  occupational  incapacity  or  permanent  disability  benefit  or 
dependency annuity insurance up to a stated limit.  

The  restrictions  demanded  on  the  right  of  insurers  to  question  proposers  and  to  require 
medical examinations in the case of an "ordinary" policy should not apply to contracts where 
the benefit exceeds the usual levels.  

A  comprehensive  statutory  basis  for  enforcement  of  the  restrictions  recommended  in  this 
Opinion on the collection and use of predictive health information in the conclusion of private 
personal  insurance  contracts  is  not  considered  essential.  The  courts  can  make  judgements 
consistent  with  the  recommendations  by  appropriate  interpretation  of  existing  law.  The 
insurance  industry  too  can  implement  the  recommendations  on  a  de  facto  basis  and  ensure 
that  they  can  be  relied  upon  by  means  of  specimen  contractual  conditions  and  voluntary 
formal commitments.  

Increasing  the  number  of  organ  donations:  a  burning  issue  for  transplant  medicine  in 
Germany (2007-04-24)

The  shortage of  organs is a chronic problem  for transplant  medicine in  many  countries, but 
particularly  so  in  Germany.  When the Transplantation  Law  came  into force  in 1997,  it  was 
hoped  that  organ  donation would  increase, but  this has not happened.  There  are indications 
that this state of affairs is due not only to deficiencies in the organisation of the health system 
but  also  to  the  relevant  legislation,  which  provides  that  organ  donation  after  death  is 
conditional on an explicit declaration of consent by the donor or his or her relatives. 

The present Opinion considers whether a change in the current law to relieve the shortage of 
organs would be ethically and constitutionally justifiable. It discusses various proposals aimed 
at achieving a balance between the right of self-determination of potential donors, the desire 
to save lives and to reduce suffering in others, and established principles of the health system 
such as equal access to care. 

The National Ethics Council proposes a graduated model combining elements of a system of 
declared  consent  with  aspects  of  a  system  of  presumed  consent  with  provision  for  refusal. 
This would require the State to ensure that its citizens: 
1. are called upon by a formal procedure to make a personal declaration as to whether they 

agree to organ donation, and 

2. are  made  aware  that  in  the  absence  of  a  declaration  organ  removal  is  legal  unless  the 

relatives refuse consent. 

The National Ethics Council further recommends the introduction of appropriate legislation to 
ensure  that  hospitals  comply  to  a  greater  extent  than  hitherto  with  their  obligation  to  give 

29

notice  of  potential  non-living  organ  donors.  Provision  must  also  be  made  for  adequate 
reimbursement  to  hospitals  of  the  cost  of  notification  and  of  treatment  of  potential  organ 
donors. 

Conferences in 2007 
• Bioethics: expert advice and public debates (19 April 2007) 
•

In  the  context  of  the  German  Presidency  of  the  European  Council,  from  23  to  25  May 
2007  the  National  Ethics  Council  hosted  the  meetings  of  the  European  Conference  of 
National  Ethics  Committees  (COMETH)  and  the  Forum  of  National  Ethics  Councils
(NEC Forum), as well as the joint sessions with the European Group on Ethics in Sciences 
and New Technologies (EGE). 

Further Information 

Dr Rudolf Teuwsen 
Head of Office 
German National Ethics Council 

Address
Jaegerstrasse 22/23 – 10117 Berlin 
Tel.: +49/30/20370-612  
Fax:+49/30/20370-252 
Email: rteuwsen@ethikrat.org

Website: www.ethikrat.org

Ulrike Florian
Press and public relations officer 

+49/30/20370-246 

florian@ethikrat.org

30

(cid:3)
(cid:3)

Most recently issued  opinions

March 2007:  Opinion on PD, PGD and embryo selection 

The  above-mentioned  opinion  is  expected  to  be  translated  into  English  by  the  end  of  June 
2007. 

 February 2007: Opinion on umbilical cord blood banking 

Abstract 

The  Commission  believes  that  the  major  issue  with  regard  to  umbilical  cord  blood 
banking is how to ensure the widest possible utilisation of the haemopoietic stem cells. 
As things stand, this purpose is better served by heterologous transplantation, which is 
ensured  by  networks  of  collections  (for-  or  non-profit),  and  not  by  autologous 
transplantation.  Since  the  potential  use  of  this  material  exclusively  by  the  donor  or 
his/her  family  members  is  negligible  (and,  conversely,  the  probability  of  final 
destruction  of  cells  very  high),  the  choice  of  private  banking  cannot  be  justified  on 
ethical grounds. All the more so considering that this choice would discourage making 
cells available for common use and would drastically reduce the availability of graft to 
those who need them. 

Furthermore, the Commission stresses that the development of collection and storage 
facilities  for  umbilical  cord  blood  must  meet  certain  quality  standards  as  it  involves 
serious  matters  of  health  protection.  In  particular,  the  following  must  be  ensured:  i) 
accurate and valid information to the public on the particular application either by the 
State or by collecting organisations; ii) certification of these organisations under State 
responsibility;  iii)  guarantee  of  viability  and  preservation  of  material  in  case  of 
operation ceasing. 

Please  note  that  the  full  text  (in  pdf  format)  of  all  opinions  and  reports,  issued  by  the 
Commission, 
following  URL: 
http://www.bioethics.gr/category.php?category_id=55  or  requested  from  the  Secretariat, 
Secretariat@bioethics.gr. 

in  an  English  version,  can  be 

found  at 

the 

MEDIA COVERAGE

The Commission regularly sends press releases to the domestic journals soon after an opinion 
is  issued.  Its  latest  opinion  on  PD,  PGD  and  embryo  selection,  issued  in  March    2007, 
gained  extensive coverage in the national media (press, TV). 

ENGAGEMENT WITH POLICY MAKERS

The
 Parliamentary  Permanent  Committee  on  Social  Issues  invited  the       Commission  to  a 
meeting in March 2007,  in order to express its views on the amendments to the Bill of the 
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare “On transplantations of human tissues and organs”. 

31

PUBLIC EVENTS

The  Commission,  in  collaboration  with  the  M.E.D.E.L.  (Magistrats  Européens  pour  la 
Démocratie et les Libertés, the Greek association) and the Institute of Biological Research of 
the  National  Hellenic  Research  Foundation,  organised  a  Conference  which  was  held  on  9 
February 2007 in Athens, with "Law & Bioethics" as the main topic of discussion.  

The  Conference  attracted  a  wide  range  of  participants  (students,  scientists,  lawyers,  public 
officers, physicians). 

External relations / Future initiatives  

The Commission is planning to organise by the end of 2007 a bioethics film event in Athens, 
the details of which are still being explored.  
The event will target the general public, academics, scientists, social scientists, students and 
pupils, as well as other professionals. Its primary purpose will be to encourage the principle of 
informed decision-making  by  the participants.  Furthermore,  through  this  event  we  intend  to 
encourage  public  debate,  to  increase  public  awareness  of  scientific  and  technological 
advances, and to promote young people’s interest in science.  
For this reason, the Commission is keeping in touch with related bodies, in order to explore 
the  opportunities  for  further  collaboration  on  this  project  (i.e.  the  Scottish  Council  of 
Bioethics, the Rathenau Institute of Netherlands, the E.M.B.O., the Irish Council for Bioethics 
and the Ethics of Science and Technology Section of UNESCO). 

PUBLICATIONS

By  the  end  of  June  2007  a  collection  of  all  Opinions  and  Reports  issued  since  2000  is 
expected to be published by the National Printing Office. 
Since the Commission intends to disseminate the above collection to related ethics bodies, 
academic institutions etc. abroad, the publication will be translated into English as well.  
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)(cid:3)
Further Information 

Mrs Marianna Dracopoulou
Executive Head Secretary 
Hellenic National Bioethics Commission 

Address 
47, Evelpidon str. 
11362- Athens- Greece 
Tel.: +30-210-88.47.700 
Fax : +30-210-88.47.701 
Email: Secretariat@bioethics.gr 

Website: www.bioethics.gr

32

            
(cid:3)

LEGAL BASIS AND MANDATE

The  National Bioethics Committee  (CNB)  was  established  by  a  decree  signed by  the 
President of the Council of Ministers on 28 March 1990 as a consultative body of the 
Presidency of the Council of Ministers. The CNB's composition was recently renewed 
by the President of the Council’s Decree of 18 December 2006.  

The CNB’s mission is “to address the ethical and legal problems that may emerge as a 
result  of  the  progress  of  research and  the  emergence  of  possible  new  applications  of 
clinical interest, taking into account the safeguarding of fundamental human rights and 
human dignity  and the  other  values  as  expressed  in  the  Constitutional  Charter  and  in 
the  international  instruments  supported  by  Italy”.  To  this  end,  the  CNB  provides 
opinions, also upon its own initiative, to the Italian Parliament and Government. 

The statutory bodies of the Committee are the President and the Vice Presidents. The 
activity of the Committee consisting in discussion of specific topics is carried out by ad 
hoc working groups. 

According  to  the  Decree  of  18  December  2006,  the  composition  of  the  CNB  was 
reduced to 35 members who are appointed for a duration of four years. 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

The President of the CNB is Prof. Francesco Paolo Casavola, former President of the Italian 
Constitutional Court and President of the “Istituto dell’Enciclopedia Italiana”. 

The members of the CNB are professors of medicine, philosophy, history and law. The 
structure of the CNB is the  following:  I)  honorary  presidents: Giovanni Berlinguer, 
Adriano Bompiani, Francesco D’Agostino, Rita Levi Montalcini, Adriano Ossicini; II) 
vice  presidents:  Cinzia  Caporale,  Elena  Cattaneo,  Luca  Marini;  III)  members: 
Salvatore Amato, Luisella Battaglia, Stefano Canestrari, Mauro Ceruti, Isabella Coghi, 
Roberto  Colombo,  Gilberto  Corbellini,  Bruno  Dallapiccola,  Antonio  Da  Re,  Lorenzo 
D’Avack, Maria Luisa Di Pietro, Riccardo Di Segni, Emma Fattorini, Carlo Flamigni, 
Romano  Forleo,  Silvio  Garattini,  Marianna  Gensabella,  Laura  Guidoni,  Aldo  Isidori, 
Claudia Mancina, Assunta Morresi, Demetrio Neri, Andrea Nicolussi, Laura Palazzani, 
Alberto Piazza, Vittorio Possenti, Rodolfo Proietti, Lucetta Scaraffia, Monica Toraldo 
di  Francia,  Giancarlo  Umani  Ronchi,  Grazia  Zuffa;(cid:3) IV)  secretariat  coordinator: 
Dott.ssa  Emira  Aloe  Spiriti;  V)  scientific  secretariat:  Grazia  M.  De  Maria,  Stefano 
Marcucci,  Daniela  Marrani;  Mariangela  Topa;  VI)  administrative  secretariat:  Delia 
Amari, Lorella Autizi, Maria Paglia, Anna Piermarini, Stefano Tedesco.  

33

CURRENT WORK   

The new CNB took office on 16 January 2007. The first task of the Committee was to 
review the internal procedures and update the existing regulation. 

Moreover,  the  CNB  has  scheduled  the  hearing  of  institutional  subjects  who  are 
interested in bioethical issues. So far, the CNB hearings have involved the President of 
the  National  Committee  for  Biosafety,  Biotechnology  and  Life  Sciences,  and  the 
hearing  of  the  President  of  the  National  Federation  of  the  Medical  Associations  is 
expected in the next few months.  

The  CNB  has  put  in  place  a  series  of  working  groups  on  the  following  topics: 
extremely  premature  babies  (prof.  D'Agostino);  the  ethics  of  neuroscience  (prof. 
Marini);  cell  therapy  research  (prof.  Neri);  ethics  committees  (prof.  Caporale); 
donation  of  embryo  cells  to  research  (prof.  d'Avack);  alternative  methods  to  animal 
experimentation (prof. Battaglia); chimeras and hybrids (prof. Morresi); doctor-patient 
relationship  and  the  total  or  partial  refusal  of  health  care  (prof.  Canestrari);  equity  in 
access  to  sanitary  resources  (prof.  Forleo);  biometrics  (prof.  Amato/Caporale);  the 
ethics  of  clinical  trials  (prof.  Garattini);  gender  difference  and  bioethics  (prof. 
Palazzani); doping (prof. Isidori). 

Since  its  inception  the  CNB  has  been  dealing  with  the  more  recent  bioethical  issues 
such  as  the  purchase  of  oocytes  and  the  main  aspects  related  to  cord  blood 
conservation. 

With regard to the activity of the Regional and Local Ethics Committees, the relevant 
discipline is provided by the Ministerial Decree of 12 May 2006, which did not make 
changes to the competences  of such committees consisting  in  the  approval of clinical 
drugs trials. 

Further Information 

Dr Emira Aloe Spiriti
Secretariat coordinator 
Italian National Bioethics Committee  

Address 
Via della Mercede, 96 
00187 - Roma 
Tel.: +39 06 67794601 
Fax: +39 06 67794686  
Email: cnbioetica@palazzochigi.it 

Website: www.governo.it/bioetica/index.html 

34

            
The  Romanian  National  Research  Ethics  Council  is  a  national  body  with  an  independent 
status  within  the  Government  offices.  Administratively,  the  Council  is  affiliated  with  the 
National Authority for Scientific Research. The Council is an advisory board to the Romanian 
Government  on  ethical  issues  raised  by  scientific  and  technological  advances  in  research 
activities  and  monitoring  the  application  of  the  moral  and  professional  code  in  research 
activities.  

The National Research Ethics Council was established by Order of the Ministry of Education 
and Research of 22 February 2007. It was enacted in the good research practice law 206/2004. 
The order of 22.02.2007 established the procedures governing appointments, composition and 
function of the National Research Ethics Council. 

The  National  Research  Ethics  Council  (NREC)  is  composed  of  11  members  with  different 
competencies. They are nominated for a period of four years which is only renewable once. 
The president of the NREC is Professor dr. ing Paun Otiman.  

The Council has 3 Commissions for: 
a) Socio-humanistic sciences;  
b) Life sciences; 
c) Technical sciences.  
Each Commission has seven members. 

Matters  for  consideration  are  referred  to  a  Commission  in  written  form  and  resolutions  are 
adopted by a majority vote. 

The National Research Ethics Council has the following tasks: 

-

-

-

to make, if necessary by exercising its faculty to access the required information in the 
existing national operating centres,  

to express opinions and suggest solutions, also for the purpose of preparing legislative 
acts,  to  address  the  ethical  and  legal  problems  that  may  emerge  as  a  result  of  the 
progress of research; 

to promote the drawing up of codes of conduct for practitioners operating in the various 
research sectors concerned and to encourage proper provision of information. 

35

Further Information 

Ioana Ispas  
Advisor for Bioethics Genomics and Health 
National Research Ethics Council-Commission for Life Sciences 
Official title: Consiliul National pentru Etica a Cercetarii Stiintifice, Dezvoltarii Tehnologice 
si Inovarii – Acronym: NREC – Title in English: Romanian National Research Council 
Head secretary: Mr Ggheorghe Asanica / Council secretary: Ms Mihaela Petrica   

Address 
National Authority for Scientific Research  
21-25 Mendeleev street , 010362 Bucharest  
Romania  
Tel.: +4021 212 77 91  
Fax: +4021 318 30 60  
Email:  iispas@mct.ro – gasanica@mct.ro 

Website: www.mct.ro

36

            
(cid:3)

CURRENT WORK 

End-of-life issues

The  Swedish  Council  on  Medical  Ethics  has  on  numerous  occasions  discussed  end-of-life 
related  issues,  and  has  produced  several  opinions  on  these  matters.  The  Council  started  its 
current  work  on  end-of-life  issues  in  autumn  2005.  The  question  was  once  again  raised  in 
Sweden  when  a  young  paralysed  severely  ill  Swedish  citizen  connected  to  a  respirator 
decided  to  end  his  life  in  a  “suicide  clinic”  in  Switzerland.  This  specific  situation  started  a 
debate  in  Sweden  about  the  legal  situation  regarding  end-of-life  decision-making.  The 
discussion revolved around why it would not be possible within the current legal framework 
for a young paralysed person to end his life with assistance.  

According to the Swedish law, persons have the right to decide if they want to continue their 
treatment or not. In the above case, the person could have decided to turn off the respirator, 
leaving him to a painful death by suffocation. The question was then whether the physician in 
charge  would  have  been  legally  entitled  to  put  the  patient  to  sleep  before  shutting  the 
respirator so as to help him to a painless death. The physicians’ involvement in this and other 
issues related to end-of-life decision-making  seemed unclear and was  interpreted  differently 
among  physicians  in  Sweden.  Finally,  The  Delegation  on  Medical  Ethics  of  the  Swedish 
Society of Medicine presented new guidelines about withholding and terminating treatment in 
March 2007. It  was made clear that a physician may terminate treatment in these situations, 
and should also relieve a patient from pain in situations where the patient has decided to end 
his life by refusing further medical treatment. 

The Council considers different types of end-of-life topics with the focus on decision-making 
and patient autonomy. Experts have  been invited  to  discuss the  questions involved with the 
Council. In November 2006, the Council made a study-trip to The Hague to learn more about 
the situation and legal framework in the Netherlands. The Council met representatives of the 
Health Council and other experts in the field for a discussion and information exchange. 

A conference about end-of-life decision-making is being planned for 1 February 2008, and the 
discussions  and  work  of  the  Council  are  expected  to  be  summarised  in  an  opinion  in 
2007/2008. 

Children's rights in medical care and research 

In February 2007  the Council arranged  a conference about children’s rights in  medical care 
and  research.  The  Council  is  expected  to  continue  its  work  on  the  topic  with  the  aim  of 
strengthening children’s rights in medical care.  

37

Neuroethics, chimeric embryos and nanomedicine 

The Council has held initial discussions about the following topics: neuroethics – especially 
brain  scanning,  chimeric  embryos  and  nanomedicine.  These  topics  will  be  under 
consideration in the following year.

RECENT ACTIVITIES 

Opinion on prenatal diagnosis, 2006-11-06

The  Council  discussed  ethical  implications  in  prenatal  diagnosis,  and  pointed  out  that 
continuous follow-up of new methods of prenatal diagnosis is necessary.  A broad debate in 
society  and  considerations  at both  the  individual  and  societal  level  are  of  great importance. 
The  Council  raised  and  discussed  the  following  questions  among  others:  What  kind  of 
prenatal diagnosis should society offer? Who should finance it? Which questions are crucial 
for the individual women/family  when they are to make decisions about prenatal diagnosis? 
The  issue  of  how  information  about  prenatal  diagnosis  is  given  is  crucial  from  an  ethical 
perspective. 

Opinion on advance directives (living wills) 2005-09-02 

This  opinion  was  issued  on  request  by  the  Ministry  of  Justice  and  deals  with  a  report  by  a 
committee that had reviewed legal substitutes for adults. The Council responded specifically 
to a proposal about so called “end-of-life directives”. The Council holds the view that these 
directives should be given more weight than that proposed by the committee. The term “end-
of-life  directive”  is,  however,  inappropriate  for  binding  directives  concerning  future  life-
sustaining  treatment  since,  according  to  the  Council,  this  type  of  document  should  be 
respected  not  only  when  the  patient  is  irreversibly  dying  or  in  a  permanent  state  of 
unconsciousness. The term “care directive”, or more specifically “advance directive  on life-
sustaining  treatment”,  would  therefore  be  preferable.  In  the  opinion,  the  Council  makes  an 
extensive analysis of decision-making situations including case studies. 

Opinion concerning fetal reduction, 2005-10-05 

The  opinion  on  ‘fetal  reduction’  was  issued  on  request  by  the  Ministry  of  Health.  ‘Fetal 
reduction’ is a rarely performed medical intervention when a woman is pregnant with several 
fetuses.  One  or  more,  but  not  all,  fetuses  are  removed.  It  is  performed  when  a  multiple 
pregnancy  contains  a  severely  malformed  fetus  and  the  other(s)  is  (are)  seemingly  healthy. 
When  a  multiple  pregnancy  is  the  result  of  infertility  treatment,  the  objective  of  ‘fetal 
reduction’ can, however, also be only to reduce the number of fetuses. 

The  Council  makes  a  distinction  between  selective  and  non-selective  reduction.  Selective 
reduction should only be performed for special medical reasons. Social factors may also have 
an  influence.  Selective reduction  should be  considered case-by-case and  permission  granted 
by  the  Legal  Council  of  the  National  Board  of  Health.  The  implementation  should  be 
evaluated after some time. 

Non-selective  reduction  should  be  permitted  under  the  same  principles  as  those  governing 
abortion, according to the Abortion Act. Cases of non-selective reduction should be reported 

38

to  the  National  Board  of  Health.  It  is  proposed  to  regulate  ‘fetal reduction’  in the  Abortion 
Act.  

For  further  information  about  the  Council  and  its  work  please  visit  the  Council’s  website: 
www.smer.gov.se  

Ms  Lisbeth  Löpare-Johansson,  Deputy 
chairperson  of  the  Swedish  Association of 
Health Professionals 
Mr Göran Hermerén, Professor of Medical 
Ethics,  President  of  the  European  Group 
on Ethics 
Ms  Karin  Johannisson,  Professor  of 
History of Science and Ideas 
Ms  Lena  Rehnberg,  Special  Expert  on 
medical ethics at the Ministry of Health  
Mr  Niels  Lynöe,  Professor  of  Medical 
ethics 
Ms  Elisabeth  Rynning,  Professor  of 
Medical Law 
Mr  Jan  Wahlström,  Professor  of  Clinical 
Genetics 
Ms  Ulla  Lönnqvist  Endre,  The  Swedish 
Association  of  Local  Authorities  and 
Regions 
Ms Christina Wahrolin, Vice president the 
Swedish Disability Federation 

SECRETARIAT 
Head of secretariat Dr. Erik Forsse 
Council secretary Ms Lotta Eriksson 

MEMBERS OF COUNCIL 
Chairman:  
Mr Daniel Tarschys,  Professor of Political 
Science 

(Social 

Political members: 
Ms  Mona  Berglund  Nilsson 
Democratic Party) 
Mr Leif Carlson  (Moderate Party) 
Mr Sven-Olov Edvinsson (Centre Party) 
Ms  Tuulikki  Koivunen  Bylund  (Green 
Party) 
Ms Elina Linna (Left Party) 
Ms 
Pålsson 
Democrats) 
Mr Barbro Westerholm (Liberal party) 
Mr  Conny  Öhman  (Social  Democratic 
Party) 

(Christian 

Chatrine 

Expert members
Ms Lena Barrbrink, The National Board of 
Health 
Mr Daniel Brattgård, Hospital Priest 

Further information 

Professor Daniel Tarschys 
Chairman 
Tel: +46 8 16 15 78 
Email: daniel.tarschys@statsvet.su.se

Secretariat: 
Dr Erik Forsse, erik.forsse@social.ministry.se , tel: + 46 8 405 17 39 
Ms Lotta Eriksson, lotta.eriksson@social.ministry.se , tel: + 46 8 405 27 58 

Address 
The Swedish Council on Medical Ethics 
Ministry of Health and Social Affairs 
Kv. Spektern 
SE-103 33 Stockholm 
Sweden 

Website: www.smer.gov.se

39

INTRODUCTION 

The Nuffield Council on Bioethics was established by the Trustees of the Nuffield Foundation 
in 1991 to identify, examine and report on the ethical questions raised by recent advances in 
biological  and  medical  research.  Since  1994,  it  has  been  funded  jointly  by  The  Nuffield 
Foundation,  the  Medical  Research  Council  and  The  Wellcome  Trust.  The  Council’s 
independence  of  government  has  become  increasingly  important,  particularly  as  a  result  of 
growing  public  unease  about  aspects  of  biomedicine  and  biotechnology.  The  Council  has 
achieved  an  international  reputation,  providing  advice  that  assists  policy-making,  addresses 
public concerns and stimulates debate in bioethics.  

CURRENT WORK 

The forensic use of bioinformation: ethical issues  

Using  the  National  DNA  Database  to  search  for  DNA  found  at  a  crime  scene  significantly 
increases the chance that the perpetrator  will be identified. However,  this and other forensic 
uses of bioinformation raise ethical questions. For example, is keeping the DNA  profiles of 
victims,  suspects  and  people  who  are  not  eventually  charged  justified  by  the  need  to  fight 
crime? Should children’s profiles be kept on the Database? Is it right to use the Database to 
search  for  family  relationships?  And  should  anyone  other  than  the  police,  e.g.  researchers, 
have access to the Database? A Working Group of the Council, set up in September 2006 to 
consider  these  and other questions, will publish its conclusions in a Discussion Paper on 18 
September 2007.  

Public health: ethical issues 

What are the responsibilities of governments, individuals and other parties, such as industry 
and  the  media,  in  achieving  a  healthy  society?  And  how  can  allowing  individual  choice  be 
balanced with achieving community benefit? The Council set up a Working Party in 2005 to 
consider  the  ethical  and  social  dilemmas  raised  by  public  health,  focusing  on  five  case 
studies:  infectious  diseases  (including  vaccinations),  obesity,  smoking,  alcohol  and  the 
fluoridation of water. Questions to be considered include: could compulsory vaccination ever 
be  justified?  What  are  the  obligations  of  parents,  schools  and  the  government  in  tackling 
childhood obesity? And should the drinks, tobacco and food industries be subjected to stricter 
regulatory  controls?  The  Working  Party  will  publish  its  conclusions  in  a  Report  on  13 
November 2007.  

40

FUTURE WORK 

Neurodegenerative diseases: ethical issues 

Following  a  Workshop  on  the  ethical  issues  raised  by  neuroscience  held  in  May  2006,  the 
Council  has  decided  to  set  up  a  Working  Party  to  consider  the  ethical  issues  raised  by 
neurodegenerative diseases. The issues to be considered include: change or loss of personality 
and  identity;  the  implications  of  a  ‘life  plan’  or  ‘living  will’;  the  adequacy  of  support  for 
patients from different sectors of society; and whether practices vary across different cultures 
or ethnic groups within a country. 

Further information about the Council’s work is available at: www.nuffieldbioethics.org

PREVIOUS PUBLICATIONS: 

• Critical care decisions in fetal and neonatal medicine: ethical issues (November 2006) 
• Supplement to the 1993 Report on Genetic Screening (August 2006) 
• The ethics of research involving animals (May 2005) 
• The ethics of research related to healthcare in developing countries: a follow-up 

discussion paper (March 2005) 

• The use of genetically modified crops in developing countries: a follow-up discussion 

paper (December 2003) 

• Pharmacogenetics: ethical issues (September 2003) 
• Genetics and human behaviour: the ethical context (October 2002) 
• The ethics of patenting DNA: a discussion paper (July 2002) 
• The ethics of research related to developing countries (April 2002) 
• Stem cell therapy: the ethical issues – a discussion paper (April 2000) 
• The ethics of clinical research in developing countries: a discussion paper (October 1999) 
• Genetically modified crops: the ethical and social issues (May 1999) 
• Mental disorders and genetics: the ethical context (September 1998) 
• Animal-to-human transplants: the ethics of xenotransplantation (March 1996) 
• Human tissue: ethical and legal issues (April 1995) 
• Genetic Screening: ethical issues (December 1993) 

All  the  Council’s  publications  are  available  to  download  from  the  Council’s  website  at: 
www.nuffieldbioethics.org/publications  

MEMBERS OF COUNCIL 

Professor Sir Bob Hepple QC, FBA 
(Chairman) 
Professor Peter Smith CBE Deputy 
(Chairman) 
Professor Roger Brownsword 
Professor Sir Kenneth Calman KCB FRSE 
Professor Sian Harding 
Professor Peter Harper 
Rt Reverend Lord Richard Harries DD 
FKC FRSL 
Professor Ray Hill FMedSci 

41

Professor Søren Holm 
Mr Anatole Kaletsky 
Dr Rhona Knight 
Lord Krebs MA DPhil Kt FRS FMedSci 
Professor Peter Lipton 
Professor Alison Murdoch MD FRCOG 
Dr Bronwyn Parry 
Professor Hugh Perry 
Lord Plant of Highfield 
Professor Nikolas Rose 

SECRETARIAT: 

Director: Hugh Whittall 
Deputy Director: Katharine Wright 
Assistant Director: Harald Schmidt 
PA to Secretariat: Carol Perkins 

Communications & External Affairs Manager:  
Catherine Joynson 

Research Officer: Caroline Rogers 
Research Officer: Julia Trusler 
Secretary: Audrey Kelly-Gardner 

Further information 

Ms Catherine Joynson 
Communications & External Affairs Manager 

Address 
Nuffield Council on Bioethics 
28 Bedford Square 
London WC1B 3JS, UK 
Email: bioethics@nuffieldbioethics.org 
Tel: +44 207 681 9619 
Fax: +44 207 637 1712 

Website: www.nuffieldbioethics.org

42

 
 
 
 
(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

43

(cid:3)

DATA PROFILING AND PERSONAL DATA MATCHING 
in the European Information Society 

An everyday occurrence 

We are all familiar with the irritating question 'do you have a loyalty card?' when we reach the 
check-out  of  our  local  supermarket.  Nonetheless,  many  of  us  willingly  sign  up  to  an 
apparently innocent-looking way of gathering 'supermarket points' which can be the basis of a 
powerful  form  of  surveillance  and  'customer  tracking'.  There  are  concerns  with  so  much 
personal information being in the hands of a few private organisations.  

Every time we make a telephone call, send an email, use a search engine, use our credit card, 
withdraw cash from an automatic teller, or even when surfing the web, we leave traces of our 
preferences and lifestyle.  Normally, when data records are directly associated with a specific 
name the subject is protected by European and national data protection legislation (but such 
legislation has a growing list of exceptions and other legislation at times takes preference over 
this5). There are an increasing number of ways in which data about us are gathered without 
our  knowledge  and  consent  (e.g.  video  surveillance  in  shops  and  public  spaces,  the  use  of 
RFID in supermarkets), which will open new routes to building up a profile of an individual 
through, for example, places visited, items purchased and carried, and people met. 

An issue worthy of detailed consideration 

Digital  convergence  coupled  with  this  ever-increasing  tracking  and  collection  of  data  about 
individual  European  citizens  (through,  for  example,  online  activities,  ambient  technologies, 
RFID  and  biometrics)  have  significantly  increased  the  ability  to  undertake  automatic  data 
matching related to both individuals and groups. Whilst such activity might be beneficial and 
legitimate, it can also give rise to some serious concerns about detrimental effects on privacy, 
due process of law and presumption of innocence. It can challenge some fundamental human 
rights6. Actions which appear legitimate under law might not necessarily  be legitimate from 
an ethical standpoint. Once interconnectivity of personal data is established and data matching 
implemented, it becomes very difficult to reverse in the event of a negative impact on citizens 
or  society  being  identified.  It  follows  that  if  the  European  Information  Society  is  to 
“contribute strongly to improvements in the quality of life” and “reinforce  social, economic 
and  territorial  cohesion”7,  then  ICT-enabled  personal  data  matching  must  be  subjected  to 
stringent ethical, social and legal audit. 

5 For example, the European Directive on the retention of data generated or processed in connection 
with the provision of publicly available electronic communications services or of public 
communications networks and amending Directive 2002/58/EC
6 As defined by the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms as 
amended by Protocol No 11 on 1 November 1998 
7 COM(2005) 229 Final  - i2010 – A European Information Society for Growth and Employment 

45 

                                                
Data profiling and personal data matching 

Within  the  context  of  the  European  Information  Society,  data  profiling  is  the  process  of 
automatically analysing data to validate it against expected data formats and values and leads 
to  automatic  action  based  on  the  profiling  outcome.  It  is  often  incorporated  into  quality 
assurance procedures for ICT applications and infrastructure such as ensuring the integrity of 
data communication networks. Data profiling is also commonly used to match personal data 
(as  defined  by  the  European  Directive  on  Data  Privacy8)  against  each  other  or  against  a 
predefined profile. Such personal data are often from a variety of sources and are collected for 
different purposes. Thus data profiling is the key process which underpins and enables  data 
matching. Data matching is widespread, providing or prohibiting access,  enabling selection, 
causing inclusion and exclusion. It is used in areas such as marketing (e.g. customer loyalty 
programmes),  employment,  financial  sector  (e.g.  anti-money-laundering  profiling  and  fraud 
prevention), forensics, education (e.g. application vetting and e-learning), social services (e.g. 
benefit entitlement and tax liability), and government (e.g. democracy and voting, and rule of 
law). 

Ethical concerns about data matching

Data  matching  is  used  to  identify  individuals  and  groups.  Using  data  profiling  techniques, 
categories  of  people  are  targeted  and  individuals  within  those  categories  identified.  The 
amount of personal data that could potentially be used  is huge. For example, it is estimated 
that  in  the  UK  around  115  million  electronic  files,  all  with  the  potential  to  be  accessed  for 
data matching, are held on individual citizens. Across Europe the personal data resource must 
be enormous as it is likely that a similar number of files exists within each of the 27 Member 
States in addition to those held by central European agencies. The types of data collected are 
wide-ranging.  This  is  in  part  due  to  the  growth  in  online  activities  where  personal  data are 
supplied by online users when applying for access or concluding transactions as well as data 
collected through the planting of cookies. It is in part due to growth in tracking offline activity 
through scanner data, customer loyalty cards and transaction data of credit /debit cards.  

Data  matching  is  initiated  not  by  the  suspicion  concerning  an  individual  but  because  the 
profile of a particular group is of interest. This leads, for example, to three issues.  

• Privacy - Data matching is  likely to involve matching personal records compiled for 

unrelated purposes, which may impact upon personal privacy. 

• Due process of the law - Once a matching process has been undertaken it will result in 
a number of positive hits. All those identified are in danger of being found guilty of 
wrongdoing. It is unlikely that these individuals are given any notice of their situation, 
since doing so might affect the investigation, or an opportunity to contest the results of 
the  match  at  an  early  stage.  For  these  reasons  their  right  to  due  process  of  law  is 
curtailed. 

• Presumption  of  innocence  -  The  presumption  of  innocence  is  intended  to  protect 
people  against  having  to  prove  that  they  are  free  from  guilt  whenever  they  are 
investigated. Data matching can reverse this to a presumption of guilt. This is because 
the  technology  of  data  matching  is  so  plausible  and,  for  example,  the  detection  of 
fraud is much applauded. These powerful  influences will  weigh heavily in  favour of 
the notion that those identified must be guilty. 

8 Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995  

46 

                                                
The “permanent” data shadow of citizens left by such files of personal data is concerning and 
raises  many  ethical  issues  (including  the  three  just  discussed).  Clarke9  categorises  these  as 
general  problems  with  personal  data  matching,  dangers  to  the  citizen  of  personal  data 
matching and dangers to society of personal data matching. 

A call for action 

In  a  technology-dependent  world  it  is  inevitable  that  every  citizen  will  be  subjected  to  a 
myriad  of  personal  data  collection.  There  has  to  be  proactive  socially-responsible  action  if 
curtailment  of  movement  and  restrictions  on  unhindered  existence  are  to  be  avoided.  The 
overt  and  covert  tracking  of  citizens  must  be  open  to  scrutiny  by  society.  The  linking  of 
unrelated  personal  data  files  needs  to  be  properly  justified,  the  reasons  for  particular  data 
matching need to be explained in detail, there must be procedures to sever personal data file 
links and halt data matching exercises, and transparency of data matching should be the norm. 
Only  then  will  data  matching  be  acceptable  to  the  citizens  of  the  European  Information 
Society. 

Further Information 

Professor Simon Rogerson 
Director 
Centre for Computing and Social Responsibility 
De Montfort University 
The Gateway, Leicester, LE1 9BH, UK 

Tel +44 116 257 7475 
Email:  srog@dmu.ac.uk

Or  

Mr Frank Cunningham, 
Evaluation & Monitoring Unit, 
DG Information Society and Media, 
European Commission 

Tel + 32-2-296-8119 
Fax + 32-2-296-6613 
Email: frank.cunningham@ec.europa.eu 

9 Clarke R., 1994, “The Digital Persona and its application to Data Surveillance.”, in The Information 
Society, 10 (2), 2.

47 

                                                
European Commission 

Ethically speaking — Issue No 8 

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities 

2007 — I –II, 48 pp. — 21 x 29.7 cm 

ISSN 1725-5562 

K
A
-
A
1
-
0
7
-
0
0
8
-
E
N
-
C

The European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies
to the European Commission

A Newsletter providing information
on the activities of the National Ethics Committees
compiled by the Secretariat of the European Group 
on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 
to the European Commission

ISSN 1725-5562

EUROPEAN
COMMISSION

issue8

July 2007
 July 2007

COVER.indd   1

7/25/07   9:32:06 AM

