K
A
-
A
I
-
0
6
-
0
0
7
-
E
N
-
C

The European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies
to the European Commission 

A Newsletter providing information 
on the activities of the National Ethics Committees 
compiled by the Secretariat of the European Group 
on Ethics in Science and New Technologies
to the European Commission 

ISSN1725-5562

EUROPEAN
COMMISSION

issue7

January 2007
 January 2007

The European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies 
to the European Commission 

Ethically Speaking 

Issue No 7 
January 2007 

Chief Editor 
Maurizio SALVI 

EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

 
 
 
Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers 
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11 

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers or these calls 

may be billed.

More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu). 

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication. 

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, 2007 
ISSN 1725-5562 

© European Communities, 2007 
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. 

Printed in Belgium 

PRINTED ON WHITE CHLORINE-FREE PAPER

CONTENTS

(cid:3)

Editorial

Maurizio Salvi, Head of the EGE Secretariat, Editor,

Ethically Speaking ................................................................................................................................. 3 

International Ethics Committees 

Council of Europe.................................................................................................................................. 6 

World Health Organization ................................................................................................................... 8 

National and Regional Ethics Committees 

Task Force on Ethics and Law of the European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology 
(ESHRE), Belgium .............................................................................................................................. 11 

Science and Technology Ethics Committee (CEST), Quebec, Canada .............................................. 14 

French National Consultative Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (Comité consultatif 

 national d’éthique (CCNE), France .................................................................................................... 17 

German National Ethics Council, Germany ........................................................................................ 25

Greek National Bioethics Committee, Greece  ................................................................................... 32

Latvian Central Medical Ethics Committee, Latvia ............................................................................ 36 

Maltese Bioethics Consultative Committee, Malta ............................................................................. 42 

Norwegian National Committee for Medical Research Ethics, Central Norway................................ 44 

Scottish Council on Human Bioethics, Scotland ................................................................................ 46

Swiss Ethics Committee on Non-Human Gene Technology, Switzerland ......................................... 48 

Nuffield Council on Bioethics, United Kingdom................................................................................ 52

Individuals Communications 

Danish Centre for Bioethics and Risk Assessment, the Royal Veterinary and Agricultural 

University, Denmark ........................................................................................................................... 56 

European Commission 

Research Directorate-General (RTD): Unit L3, Governance and Ethics ............................................ 60 

Erratum

Bureau de l’Enseignement de l’éthique, Montréal .............................................................................. 61

1

Editorial

This  issue  of  Ethically  Speaking  welcomes  contributions  not  only  from  National  Ethics 
Councils  in  the  EU  and  beyond,  and  experts  in  the  fields,  but  also  from  Commission 
departments active in the areas of ethics and human rights protection and other international 
organisations that play a major role in work on ethics and bioethics. The reason for this can be 
found in Commission policy, where ethics and human rights protection play a key role.

Let me now explain how the complex and sophisticated European machine is shouldering this 
task.

In  full  observance  of  the  EU's  competence  as  laid  down  in  the  Treaty,1  as  well  as  the 
institutional role of the European Parliament and the Council, the Commission is promoting 
fundamental  values  and  human  rights  protection  in  a  range  of  policy  areas,2  from 
biotechnology  to  security,  from  ICT  to  patenting,  from  emerging  technology  to  the  EU 
research  programme.3  Several  policy  papers  and  initiatives  being  promoted  by  the 
Commission4 illustrate this effort, which aims, inter alia, to ensure that the values enshrined in 
the European Charter of Fundamental Rights are reflected in EU policies.

The  EU  is  therefore  promoting  ethics,  freedom,  democracy  and  human  rights  as  well  as 
responsible science among its policy activities. 

However,  to  reinforce  actions  planned  in  the  area  of  promoting  human  rights  and  bioethics 
both within and beyond the Commission, the following initiatives have recently been decided: 

(cid:120) An inter-service platform on ethics and EU policies was established in October. The 
platform aims (1) to facilitate the work of Commission services in the fields of ethics 
and human rights protection and EU policies, (2) to guarantee that the Commission is 
promoting  actions  and  interactions  with  relevant  third  parties  which  are  fully 
responsive  to  the  needs  of  the  different  Commission  services,  and  (3)  to  ensure  that 
the  President  or  other  relevant  Commissioners  are  fully  informed  about  current 
developments  in  this  policy  field. The  platform  is  chaired  by  the  Head  of  the  EGE 
Secretariat.

(cid:120) An international platform on ethics bringing together National Ethics Committees or 
similar  bodies  dealing  with  bioethics  will  be  established  in  2007.  The  countries  that 
are to take part in this initiative include the US, Canada, China, Brazil, India, Japan, 
Australia,  South  Africa  and  Korea,  along  with  some  regional  Bioethics  Associations 
grouping relevant bodies in Africa, South America, Asia, etc. The platform is intended 
to encourage discussions and debate on the ethics (ethical, legal and social aspects) of 
several  international  policies  as  well  as  to  further  the  EU's  approach  to  promoting 

1 Provisions of the Treaty relating to (a) public health: Articles 152-154; (b) research: Article 164; (c) the principle of 
subsidiarity: Article 5. 
2 The list of relevant EU directives or legislation covers several policy areas, from research to pharmaceuticals, from 
patenting to biotechnology, from medicine to animal protection, from the environment to public health (see 
http://ec.europa.eu/research/science-society/page_en.cfm?id=2995).
3 The Commission has the responsibility, inter alia, to carry out an ethical review, on a case-by-case basis, of those EU-
funded research projects that may raise sensitive ethical issues (e.g. use of human biological material, involvement of 
vulnerable people in research activities – children, elderly people etc., use of non-human primates). 
4 To mention but a few: the communication "A citizens' agenda: Delivering results for Europe" (10 May 2006), the EU 
Strategy “The EU and Africa, Towards a Strategic Partnership” (SEC(2005)1255), the Science and Society Action Plan, the 
Action Plan Life Sciences and Technology, the Nanotechnology Action Plan, the EU Strategy on Human Rights protection. 

3

                                                
peace, human rights and democracy worldwide. The Secretary of the platform will be 
the Head of the EGE Secretariat. 

The main goal of the above initiatives is to promote debate, synergy and information sharing 
among bodies dealing with ethics and bioethics issues within the EU and beyond. An effort 
that calls for strong interaction with international organisations that have an institutional remit 
in the field of ethics.

As you all know, a key player in this process is the European Group on Ethics in Science and 
New  Technologies  (EGE).5  Further  action  will  be  taken  to  strengthen  the  link  between  the 
EGE,  the  Forum  of  National  Ethics  Councils  (NEC  Forum6)  and  other  relevant  parties,  in 
particular  international  organisations.  For  example,  the  next  meeting  of  the  UN  Interagency 
Committee  on  Bioethics  will  be  hosted  by  the  Commission,  and  in  May  2007  the  German 
Presidency will host a joint EGE - NEC Forum meeting, as did the Finnish Presidency. 

In addition, the EGE is to issue two new Opinions in 2007: 

(cid:120) An Opinion on the implementing measures required during the ethics review of EU-
funded  research  projects  on  human  embryonic  stem  cells.  This  Opinion  will  provide 
guidance (in relation to the values and principles to be applied) for the ethics review 
within  the  framework  of  the  programme  approved  by  the  Council  and  the  European 
Parliament.

(cid:120) An  Opinion  on  the  ethics  of  modern  developments  in  agriculture,  with  special 
reference  to  sustainable  agriculture.  The  Opinion  may  also  address  issues  related  to 
the ethics of animal cloning for food production. 

Having  given  you  some  insights  into  the  current  work  of  the  EGE,  its  Secretariat  and  the 
Commission, allow me to conclude this editorial by wishing you all a serene, prosperous and 
healthy 2007. 

Further information 

Dr Maurizio Salvi 
Head of the EGE Secretariat   
Editor, Ethically Speaking 

Joëlle Bezzan   
Editorial Assistant 

Maurizio Salvi, PhD 
Policy Adviser to the President, 
Bureau of European Policy Advisers (BEPA) 
 Head of the EGE Secretariat 
Editor, Ethically Speaking 

EGE Secretariat 
Tel: +32(0)2 296.19.48 
Fax: +32 (0)2.299.45.65
Email: bepa-ethics-group@ec.europa.eu 
European Commission 
Attention: New address: 
Office: BERL 8/143, B-1049 Brussels 

Website: http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm

5 The EGE is an independent and pluralist advisory group on the ethical aspects of science and new technologies. The Group 
has an institutional remit (see Directive 98/44/Ec of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 1998 on the legal 
protection of biotechnological inventions:
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31998L0044:EN:HTML) to issue opinions to the 
Commission regarding ethical questions and policy design. See: 
 http://ec.europa.eu:8082/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm. 
6 http://ec.europa.eu/research/science-society/page_en.cfm?id=3161. 

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
5

Recommendation on Research on Biological Materials of Human Origin (Rec (2006) 4)

The  Committee  of  Ministers  of  the  Council  of  Europe  adopted  on  15  March  2006  its 
Recommendation  (2006)  4  to  the  Member  States  on  research  on  biological  materials  of 
human  origin.  The  Recommendation  applies  to  the  full  range  of  research  activities  in  the 
health field that involve: 

-
-

the removal of human biological materials to be stored for research use; or
the use of human biological materials initially removed for a purpose other 
than research storage.

Two  chapters  of  the  Recommendation  deal  with  collections  of  biological  materials  and 
population biobanks. The text of the Recommendation and the Explanatory Memorandum is 
available on the following website: http://www.coe.int/bioethics

Draft Additional Protocol on Genetic Testing

The Steering Committee on Bioethics decided to focus its current normative work on genetic 
tests  for  health  purposes  and  modified  the  scope  of  the  draft  Protocol  accordingly.  Genetic 
testing  in  the  field  of  employment  and  insurance  would  be  addressed  in  another  (other) 
instrument(s).

Discussion on the provisions of the preliminary draft Protocol on genetic tests in the field of 
health  continued.  Genetic  counselling,  directly  accessible  tests  and  genetic  tests  on  persons 
not able to consent for the benefit of family members are among the issues addressed in this 
draft  additional  Protocol  to  the  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine  (Oviedo 
Convention), which is due to be finalised in spring 2007. 

Regional meeting in Georgia

The Council of Europe organised a regional meeting in Tbilisi on 9-10 October 2006 on the 
ethics  of  biomedical  research.  Medical  doctors,  scientists,  lawyers,  representatives  of  the 
competent  Georgian  Ministries  as  well  as  parliamentarians  from  Georgia  attended  the 
meeting.  Other  participants  came  from  Moldova,  Azerbaijan,  Armenia  and  Ukraine.  The 
conclusions of an expert assessment carried out by the Council of Europe on a Georgian bill 
on biomedical research were also presented and discussed.

Educational tool on bioethics

The  Council  of  Europe  has  developed  an  educational  tool  for  persons  wishing  to  initiate  an 
open debate on ethical issues with young people. This tool provides relevant ethical, legal and 
scientific information, as well as cases which can be used as a basis for such debate. 

The objectives of this tool are to: 

-
-
-

raise young people’s awareness of bioethical issues; 
promote independent thought;
promote active participation in public debate (education for citizenship); 

6

-

show the European dimension of bioethical reflection. 

It  is  composed  of  a  set  of  five  sheets  around  one  topic  (general  introduction,  scientific 
information,  legal  and  ethical  information,  cases  with  questions,  and  finally  references  and 
glossary).

In 2006, three sets have been published in French in conjunction with Belin (a French school 
publisher),  on  organ  donation,  genetic  testing  and  medically  assisted  procreation.  Two  new 
sets  are  being  prepared  for  2007  on  cloning  and  biomedical  research.  The  objective  of  the 
Council of Europe is to translate this educational tool into different languages so that it can be 
distributed  in  the  Member  States  of  the  Council  of  Europe  as  well  as  in  other  countries. 
Translations into English, German and Italian are already under way.

Further information 

Carlos de Sola 
Head of the Bioethics Department 
Secretary of the Steering Committee on Bioethics (CDBI) 
Tel: + 33 (0)3 88 41 24 38 
Email: carlos.desola@coe.int 

Laurence Lwoff
Administrative Officer / Secretary of the Working Party on Human Genetics and of the 
Working Party on the Protection of the Human Embryo and Foetus 
Tel: + 33 (0)3 88 41 22 68 | Fax: + 33 (0)3 88 41 37 45 
Email: laurence.lwoff@coe.int 

Website: www.coe.int/Bioethics

7

Ethics and Health at the World Health Organization 

Public health ethics

(cid:120) Ethics  and  Health  participates  in  policy  development  regarding  the  scaling-up  of 
prevention,  testing,  treatment  and  care  for  HIV/AIDS  patients,  advising  the  HIV 
department  on  related  ethical  issues,  with  special  reference  to  clinical  care  and  research 
(including  the  standard  of  care)  and  equitable  access  to  antiretroviral  treatment.  A  case 
study entitled Equity and fair process in scaling up antiretroviral therapy: potentials and 
challenges  in  the  United  Republic  of  Tanzania,  was  published  in  June  2006,  in 
collaboration with German Technical Cooperation (GTZ) and the Tanzanian Ministry of 
Health.  Further  work  on  developing  and  implementing  a  policy  of  equitable  access  to 
antiretroviral  treatments  is  under  way  in  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo,  as  well  as 
collaboration  towards  the  new  WHO/UNAIDS  Testing  and  Counselling  policy  and 
manual to be published by end 2006. 

(cid:120)

(cid:120) A  guidance  document  entitled  “Basic  Principles  For  Treatment  and  Psychosocial 
Support of Drug Dependent People Living with HIV/AIDS”, produced in collaboration 
with the Departments of HIV and Mental health/Substance abuse, is in print. Its purpose is 
to  promote  equitable  access  to  high-quality  HIV  care  for  intravenous  drug  users, 
particularly those involved in drug treatment programmes or the criminal justice system.
In collaboration with WHO’s department of Epidemic and Pandemic Alert and Response 
(EPR/CDS),  the  Ethics  and  Health  team  organised  an  international  consultation 
“Addressing  Ethical  Issues  in  Influenza  Pandemic  Planning”,  which  took  place  in 
Geneva on 24-25 October 2006. The aim is to provide guidance for Member States and 
other  stakeholders  on  how  to  include  ethical  considerations  in  pandemic  preparedness. 
Based on four working papers already discussed during a technical meeting in May, the 
discussion focussed on the following topics:

- equitable access to treatment and prevention;  
- isolation, quarantine and social distancing; 
- obligations of health care workers to do service; 
- international cooperation. 

Publication  of  the  WHO  report  and  guiding  principles  is  expected  for  the  beginning  of 
2007.

Regional and national consultations are being planned. 

(cid:120) Ethics  and  Health  is  involved  in  an  initiative  to  promote  access  to  opioid  drugs  for 
palliative care in developing countries. The topics on the agenda include equity in access, 
informed consent, cultural perceptions and barriers, and end-of-life issues. A background 
paper  on  these  issues  is  being  prepared,  which  will  lay  the  ground  for  an  international 
consultation on this topic.

8

 
 
 
 
Ethics of research 
(cid:120) Based on collaboration with the Initiative for Vaccine Research (IVR), Ethics and Health 
contributed to the latest regional consultation on “Ethical Considerations related to the 
Provision  of  Care  and  Treatment  in  Vaccine  Trials”  which  took  place  in  Saint 
Petersburg in September 2006. Follow-up activities are being planned. This collaboration 
also  includes  the  elaboration  of  guidance  for  the  participation  of  adolescents  in  HIV 
vaccine trials.
In the context of NEBRA (Networking for Ethics on Biomedical Research in Africa),7 a 
strategic plan is being finalised for strengthening ethical review of research in Africa. This 
document  is  based  on  the  results  of  a  survey  implemented  in  15  African  countries  and 
discussed during the last NEBRA plenary meeting held in Mali in July 2006.

(cid:120)

(cid:120) Ethics  and  Health  is  part  of  three  proposals  submitted  to  EDCTP;8  one  of  them  is 
coordinated by the University of Neuchatel and will provide African countries with tools 
for  distance  learning  in  research  ethics.  The  other  two  projects  aim  to  support  local 
research ethics committees in Nigeria and Gabon. 

Collaboration with other organisations
(cid:120) Ethics  and  Health  represents  WHO  at  the  UN  Inter  Agency  Committee  on  Bioethics,
whose  next  meeting  scheduled  in  November  2006  will  finalise  an  issue  paper  on  ethics, 
intellectual  property  and  benefit  sharing  and  address  the  issues  of  capacity  building  in 
research ethics and access to essential medicines. Ethics and Health is also taking part in 
Unesco’s International Bioethics Committee (IBC) as an observer.

(cid:120) Ethics and Health enjoys observer status with the Council of Europe’s Steering Committee 

on Bioethics (CDBI).

(cid:120) Global  Forum  for  Bioethics  in  Research.  Ethics  and  Health  is  part  of  the  forum’s 
steering committee and is contributing to preparations for the next meeting in June 2007 in 
Lithuania, focused on “building the infrastructure needed for ethics review” and, as a sub-
topic, “ethical aspects of mental health research”. 

(cid:120) Ethics and Health provides the permanent secretariat for the Global Summit of National 
Bioethics  Commissions, which  met  in  Beijing,  China,  in  August  2006,  jointly  with  the 
World Congress of Bioethics. 

Further information 

Ethics and Health at WHO (ETH) 
Professor Alexander Capron 
Director

Dr Andreas Reis 
Technical officer, reisa@who.int 

Dr Marie-Charlotte Bouësseau 
Technical Officer, bouesseaum@who.int 

Contact: Mrs Anne Newson 
Tel: +41 22 791 1207 | Fax: +41 22 791 1399 
Email: ethics@who.int  

Address
WHO/SDE/ETH - World Health Organization 
20 Avenue Appia 
CH-1211 Genève 27 

Website: www.who.int/ethics

7 Project funded by the European Commission (6th Framework Programme,  Science and Society).
8 European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials Partnership. 

9

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
10

Ethics of medically assisted fertility treatment for HIV-positive men and women 

Improvements  in  treatment  have  brought  about  a  major  increase  in  the  life  expectancy  and 
quality  of  life  of  HIV-infected  persons.  These  changes  mean  that  HIV-positive  people  who 
often  avoided  or  were  advised  to  avoid  procreation  have  reconsidered  their  reproductive 
plans.  A  significant  reduction  in  the  perinatal  transmission  of  the  virus  has  also  made  such 
plans  more  acceptable.  A  greater  number  of  HIV-positive  men  or  women  are  thus  seeking 
advice and/or treatment in order to create their family. 

Fundamental ethical principles
The  question  of  treating  HIV-positive  men  and  women  generates  conflicts  between  two 
ethical  principles,  namely  respect  for  patients’  autonomy  to  take  decisions  about  their 
reproduction, and the principle of beneficence as expressed in the concern for the welfare of 
the child.

- Information and autonomy 
Information is generally considered to be the key to enhancing patients’ autonomy. There is a 
need for good quality information for the public in general as the issue is in constant flux: the 
risk of transmission, progress of the disease, and treatment are rapidly changing. These factors 
are  relevant  to  the  evaluation  of  the  ethical  aspects  of  treating  these  patients.  Informing  the 
public will also indirectly contribute to reducing the spread of the disease. 

- Responsibility 
There  are  several  dimensions  of  responsibility  to  be  considered.  Patients  have  a  duty  to 
inform  the  team  of  their  HIV  status,  so  that  necessary  precautions  can  be  taken  by  all 
concerned. Patients should also comply with the most effective treatment for their condition, 
both  for  their  partner’s  and  for  the  future  child’s  sake.  The  physician  has  a  responsibility 
towards  the  couple  and  their  future  offspring.  The  specific  risks  involved  in  this  treatment 
should  be  fully  explained  to,  and  accepted  by,  the  patients.  Nevertheless,  the  welfare  of  the 
child is a joint responsibility of the physicians and intentional parents. 
In the case of HIV infection we have to distinguish between two groups with their different 
needs: fertile and infertile couples. 
(i) The rationale for intervention in fertile couples is avoiding harm to the uninfected spouse 
and,  indirectly,  to  the  future  offspring.  Since  these  couples  are  able  to  procreate  by 
themselves, the contribution of the physician is directed at risk reduction rather than helping 
with  conception.  Risk  reduction  per  se  is  part  of  the  physician’s  obligation  and  is  itself 
relevant to the ethical decision-making process. This is why it is considered good practice to 
use  insemination  with  washed  sperm  in  fertile  couples  where  the  male  partner  is  HIV-

11

positive.  When  the  woman  is  pregnant  and  infected,  she  should  accept  treatment  with  anti-
retroviral agents, agree to a Caesarean section if necessary and agree to bottle feeding. 
(ii) When the couple also suffers from infertility, the goals of contributing to the conception 
and of reducing horizontal risk conflate. By offering treatment, the physician assumes special 
responsibility  for  the  future  offspring,  since  that  particular  child  would  not  be  conceived 
without medical intervention. To determine the acceptability of any risk, we should take into 
account  its  gravity  (short-  and  long-term  consequences  and  outlook  of  the  disease)  for  the 
parents and offspring, and its probability for the offspring. 

There  is  no  reason  to  exclude  these  couples  from  the  usual  considerations  applied  to  all 
couples seeking infertility treatment. Per se, the additional risk of transmitting the disease to 
the child linked to the HIV infection is not excessively high at present, compared to the risk 
accepted for older women, people with chromosomal abnormalities, or multiple pregnancies, 
and  to  the  base  rate  risk  of  congenital  abnormalities  in  the  general  population.  This  risk  is 
considered acceptable. 

The welfare of the child is not only physical, but also includes a psycho-social dimension, i.e. 
the  risk  of  being  orphaned  at  a  vulnerable  age  and  of  growing  up  in  a  family  which  is 
confronted with a serious illness. There is agreement that, in general, the death of a parent is 
one of the most devastating traumas a child can experience. Nevertheless, the life expectancy 
of an HIV-positive parent may be comparable to that of a parent who suffers from cancer, or 
from a genetic disease like cystic fibrosis. However, it is suggested that medical assistance in 
ART should only be considered for the time being for sero-discordant couples so that at least 
one parent is likely to be able to raise the child until adulthood.

Specific problems

-  Engaging  in  fertility  treatment  implies  agreement  to  disclose  the  HIV  status  to  the 
reproductive  partner.  Confidentiality  of  private  medical  information  cannot  be  respected 
within this context. 
- Taking into account the risks to the future child, the partner, the other fertility patients and 
the  caring  team,  it  is  recommended  that  all  infertility  patients  are  screened  for  HIV.  Efforts 
should  be  made  to  convince  patients  of  the  benefits  of  knowing  their  HIV  status.  Those 
patients  who  refuse  screening  after  full  information  should  be  treated  with  the  same 
precautions as if HIV-positive. 
- Specific life style risks 
The physician has the right to refuse collaboration in cases which may compromise parental 
competence  and/or  jeopardise  the  welfare  of  the  child,  such  as  non-compliance  with  HIV 
treatment, drug abuse, etc. Such conditions should be evaluated case by case. 
- Rigorously tested large studies with follow-up of couples and their children are necessary to 
assess the long-term safety of the methods of treatment. 

For the full statement, see ESHRE Task Force on Ethics and Law (2004) Taskforce 8: Ethics 
of  medically  assisted  fertility  treatment  for  HIV-positive  men  and  women.  Human 
Reproduction 19: 2454-2456. 

12

Further information 

Mr Guido Pennings
President of the Task Force on Ethics and Law of the European Society of Human 
Reproduction and Embryology (ESHRE) 
Professor of Ethics and Bioethics, Ghent University 

Address
Ghent University 
Dpt of Philosophy and Moral Science 
Blandijnberg 2 
B – 9000 Gent 
Belgium
Tel./Fax: + 32 (16) 620767 
Email: Guido.Pennings@Ugent.be
Website: http://allserv.ugent.be/~gpenning

13

Publications and events

Position Statement on ethics and nanotechnologies.  In November 2006, the CEST released 
a  position  statement  entitled  Éthique  et  nanotechnologies:  se  donner  les  moyens  d’agir 
(Ethics  and  Nanotechnology:  a  Basis  for  Action).  Nanotechnology  arises  from  the 
convergence of basic research in physics, chemistry, biology and computer science; it is often 
considered one of the most promising technologies for the future of humanity.

The  four  main  sectors  of  research  and  innovation  in  nanotechnology  are  nanomaterials, 
nanoelectronics,  nanobiotechnology  and  nanometrology.  If  nanotechnology  fulfils  current 
expectations,  it  could  produce  benefits  in  a  multitude  of  areas  from  medicine  to  the 
environment,  and  from  information  technology  to  food  and  agriculture.  Some  aspects  of 
nanotechnology  have  been  considered  quite  important  by  the  CEST,  particularly  the  size  of 
nanometric  particles,  the  means  of  manipulating  materials  (top-down  and  bottom-up 
approaches),  multidisciplinarity  and  the  convergence  of  disciplines  with  respect  to 
nanotechnology  as  well  as  a  certain  fascination  with  nanotechnology.  They  provide  the 
foundation of the ethical questions addressed in this statement.

The  CEST  statement  consists  of  three  chapters  devoted  to  the  scientific,  legal  and  ethical 
implications  of  nanotechnology.  In  its  ethical  assessment  of  nanotechnology,  the  CEST 
upholds the protection of health and the environment, as well as respect for many values such 
as dignity, liberty, the integrity of the person, respect for the person, quality of life, respect for 
privacy, justice and equity, transparency and democracy. The ethical concerns addressed are 
related  to  human  health  and  safety,  the  environment,  security  (military  and  civil),  human 
identity and the human being’s relationship with nature. Other ethical concerns not restricted 
to nanotechnologies, but that nanotechnologies may heighten, are also considered in the fields 
of  governance,  economic  activity  associated  with  nanotechnologies  (for  example,  the 
nanodivide, intellectual property), and citizenship.

A  total  of  eight  recommendations  have  been  made  to  political  decision-makers  and  other 
stakeholders.  However,  as  it  appeared  sometimes  impossible  to  formulate  a  specific 
recommendation  on  a  given  subject,  the  CEST  issued  a  formal  “commentary”  in  order  to 
highlight the implications of a particular question. These should help Quebec society and the 
public to be in a better position to act and take informed decisions about nanotechnologies. 

The CEST’s first recommendation asks the Quebec government to adopt a life-cycle approach 
in  its  policies  on  nanotechnology,  guided  by  the  principle  of  precaution  and  sustainable 
development,  in  order  to  avoid  any  damaging  impact  of  technological  innovation  on  health 
and the environment. Other recommendations concern the necessity to assess the toxicity of 
processes  and  products  derived  from  nanotechnologies  prior 
their 
commercialisation,  the  support  needed  by  research  ethics  committees  for  the  ethical 
assessment  of  research  protocols  concerning  nanotechnology,  the  creation  of  a  system  to 
monitor the potential effects of nanotechnologies on the environment as well as a procedure to 
ensure  the  rapid  recall  of  products  in  the  event  of  harmful  effects  on  the  environment,  the 
necessity to correctly inform and listen to the population, the creation of a multidisciplinary 

to  authorising 

14

research  programme  on  the  impacts  of  new  technologies  and  the  management  of  risks,  the 
importance  of  taking  into  account  the  ethical  and  social  questions  concerning  employment 
and  workforce  in  a  nanotechnology  development  strategy,  and  the  creation  of  an  internet 
portal devoted to nanotechnology. 

This  position  statement  is  available  in  French  on  the  CEST  website,  together  with 
English and Spanish summaries.

“Supplement 2006” to the CEST Position Statement on organ donation and transplantation
In December 2006, two years after its position statement, the CEST published a supplement 
that  addresses  the  ethical  issues  associated  with  kidney  paired-exchanges  and  list-paired 
exchanges. Such practices make it possible for patients who cannot receive a kidney from a 
living  intended  donor  (a  family  member,  spouse  or  friend),  due  to  ABO  blood-type 
incompatibility or to a positive crossmatch, to exchange donors in order to receive a kidney. 
The Committee worked on ethical issues surrounding this new way to donate and transplant 
kidneys:  management  of  a  national  kidney  exchange  programme,  anonymity  of  the  gift, 
equity and consent.

The  CEST  is  confident  that  its  three  recommendations  will  help  guide  stakeholders  in  the 
process  of  decision  making.  The  first  one  points  to  the  need  to  establish  an  independent 
central body that will manage a possible national kidney exchange programme in Canada with 
transparency  and  according  to  ethical  guidelines.  The  second  recommendation  calls  for  a 
mechanism  to  ensure  equity  in  list-paired  exchanges.  Finally,  the  Committee  recommends 
that the new option of kidney exchanges be explained early and clearly to patients in need of a 
kidney so that only donors who are willing to participate in an exchange would express their 
interest.

The supplement is available on the Committee website in French. A short summary with the 
CEST recommendations is also available in English and Spanish. 

CEST YOUTH  2007: a second edition of this biennial project 

The  initial  project,  CEST  Youth  2005  –  devoted  to  electronic  plagiarism  in  school  work  –, 
was presented in Ethically Speaking No 5 and its results in No 6 (the statement produced is 
available in French on the CEST website). As a reminder, the objectives of the project are the 
following:
(cid:31)

to  give  CEGEP  students  (post-secondary  education  –  students  aged  17  to  20)  the 
opportunity to focus on ethical issues related to a specific application of science and 
technology as part of an ethics course and to prepare a draft position statement on the 
subject, accompanied by recommendations, for the Quebec government; 
to  provide  an  opportunity  for  15  of  these  students  to  experiment  how  the  CEST 
develops  a  position  statement  by  getting  together  to  discuss  a  given  subject  and 
propose recommendations that will be tabled with the CEST.

(cid:31)

This second edition, to take place from January to April 2007, will address the ethical issues 
of  neuromarketing.  A  field  of  study  using  neuroscience  technology,  such  as  functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), neuromarketing works on people’s brains to see how it 
responds to stimuli from advertising and other messages. Some fear that neuromarketing may 
ultimately  be  used  to  manipulate  consumers  and  citizens.  Depending  on  the  work  done  by 

15

CEST  Youth  2007  and  the  results  obtained,  a  position  statement  should  be  published  in 
November 2007. 

CEST work in progress 

Position  statement  on  ethical  issues  associated  with  new  technologies  used  for 
surveillance and control

Following  the  forum  on  ethics  and  biometrics,  and  the  work  done  on  the  convergence  of 
nanotechnology with information technology, the CEST has decided to broaden the subject of 
biometrics  so  as  to  cover  some  other  new  technologies  such  as  videosurveillance,  RFID 
technology, cybersurveillance and geolocalisation that are also used for security purposes. A 
working  group  was  created  in  December  and  the  publication  of  a  position  statement  is 
planned for February 2008.

Further information 

Diane Duquet, PhD 
Commission coordinator 

Address
Commission de l’éthique de la science et de la technologie (CEST) 
1200 route de l’Église, 3rd Floor - Office 3.45 
CA - Sainte-Foy (Québec) G1V 4Z2 
Tel: +1-418-528-0965 
Fax: +1-418-646-0920 
Email: ethique@ethique.gouv.qc.ca

Website: www.ethique.gouv.qc.ca

16

LEGAL BASIS AND MANDATE

The  National  Consultative  Ethics  Committee  for  Health  and  Life  Sciences  (CCNE)  was 
established by presidential decree on 23 February 1983, as an independent authority linked to the 
Ministries  of  Research  and  Health.  Set  up  under  the  Law  of  29  July  1994,  the  CCNE  now 
operates within the framework of the Law of 6 August 2004. 

(cid:391) Taking an ethical view on health and life sciences issues 
The CCNE’s mission is to “provide opinions on the ethical problems and societal questions 
raised  by  progress  in  the  fields  of  biology,  medicine  and  health,  and  to  publish 
recommendations on these issues.”9

(cid:391) The CCNE at work 
Decree  No  2005-390  of  28  April  2005  established  the  composition,  organisation  and 
operation of the Committee, and specified how it can be tasked. 
A  purely  consultative  body,  the  CCNE  receives  requests  submitted  by  presidents  of 
parliamentary  assemblies,  government  representatives,  higher  education  establishments, 
public  institutions  and  officially  recognised  foundations  working  in  research,  technological 
development  or  the  promotion  and  protection  of  health.  The  Committee  may  also  address 
various issues raised by people other than those listed above. 
The CCNE’s highest decision-making authority is the plenary committee, composed of all its 
members.
Cases  are  investigated  by  the  technical  section,  which  includes  12  members  chosen  by  the 
Committee  on  the  basis  of  nominations  by  the  CCNE  president.  Each  issue  is  handled  by  a 
working group made up of Committee members, who may request help from outside experts 
in  order  to  shed  new  light  on  a  subject.  The  technical  section  then  examines  the  case  and 
presents  it  to  the  plenary  committee.  Meetings  of  the  plenary  committee  and  the  technical 
session  are  closed  to  the  public.  After  the  case  is  examined,  a  final  report  is  published, 
including recommendations or opinions.

(cid:391) DECREE NO 2005-390  OF  28 AUGUST 2005  DETERMINING  THE  COMPOSITION  OF  THE 
COMMITTEE
- The  CCNE  president  and  two  honorary  presidents  are  designated  by  the  President  of  the 

French Republic. 

- Five  key  figures  from  the  main  philosophies  and  religious  faiths  are  appointed  by  the 

President of the French Republic. 

- Nineteen  members  are  chosen  for  their  expertise  and  interest  in  ethical  issues,  fifteen  are 
designated by various ministers concerned by biology and health issues, the four remaining 
members are named respectively by the presidents of France’s two parliamentary chambers, 

9 Article 1412 of Law No 2004-800 of 6 August 2004. 

17

                                                
the  vice-president  of  the  Conseil  d’Etat  (France’s  highest  administrative  court)  and  the 
president of the Cour de Cassation (supreme court of appeal). 

- Fifteen representatives from the research sector are designated by their peers. 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(cid:391) President:

Didier Sicard 
HONORARY PRESIDENT:
Jean-Pierre Changeux 

(cid:391) Five members belonging to the main philosophies and religious faiths: 

Sadek Béloucif, Olivier Abel, Olivier de Dinechin, Haïm Korsia, Blandine Kriegel 

(cid:391) Nineteen members chosen for their expertise and their interest in ethical issues: 

Jean  Bardet,  Alain  Grimfeld,  Dominique  Stoppa-Lyonnet,  Lucien  Neuwirth,  Monique 
Canto-Sperber,  Chantal  Deschamps,  Marie-Jeanne  Dien,  Hélène  Gaumont-Prat,  Christian 
de  Rouffignac,  Chantal  Lebatard,  Pierre  Le  Coz,  Marie-Thérèse  Hermange,  Jacqueline 
Mandelbaum, Bernard Kanovitch, Michel Roux, Philippe Rouvillois, Alain-Gérard Slama, 
Mario Stasi, Philippe Waquet 

(cid:391) Fifteen members engaged in scientific research: 

Jean-Claude  Ameisen,  Jean-Paul  Caverni,  Claude  Kordon,  Claude  Burlet,  Pierre  Le 
Neindre,  Pascale  Cossart,  Mireille  Delmas-Marty,  Jean-Antoine  Lepesant,  Martine 
Loizeau, Carole Moquin-Pattey, Claude Sureau, Alain Fischer, Maxime Seligmann 

(cid:391) General Secretary 

Marie-Hélène Mouneyrat 

THE  NATIONAL  CONSULTATIVE  ETHICS  COMMITTEE  ON  THE 
INTERNATIONAL SCENE 

(cid:391) Ethical concerns related to health: a global preoccupation 

The  first  national  consultative  ethics  committee  was  created  in  France,  in  1983.  Since  then, 
many  countries  have  established  similar  consultative  bodies  to  reflect  on  the  latest  issues 
raised by progress in science and medicine: Denmark in 1987, Luxembourg in 1988, Italy and 
Portugal in 1990, and Belgium in 1993. Beyond Europe, national ethics committees operate in 
countries  such  as  Argentina,  Japan  and  the  United  States.  All  these  national  consultative 
bodies  have  similar  missions,  but  their  structures  vary  from  one  country  to  another.  Some 
countries choose to establish multidisciplinary national consultative committees while others 
create ad hoc bodies to deal with specific ethical issues. 

(cid:391) Building a common project 

Even  though  each  committee  deals  with  ethical  issues  according  to  the  national,  cultural, 
historic, religious and legal specificities of its country, they all share common concerns. 
For  this  reason,  numerous  opportunities  for  exchange  are  organised  between  the  various 
national  bodies.  The  Global  Summit  of  National  Ethics  Committees  and  the  Permanent 
European Conference of National Ethics Committees exemplify the will to share thoughts and 
best  practice,  and  regular  informal  relations  reinforce  this  approach.  Meetings  between  the 
German and French committees have highlighted the desire to progress at European level. 
Although the scientific and legal contexts vary extensively from one country to another, the 
development of a common international project seems necessary today. “It would be senseless 
to imagine a global ethics committee. But the difficulty of the task should not deter us from 

18

working towards a shared forum in the international scientific community, even if we don’t 
always agree”, comments CCNE president Didier Sicard. 

CURRENT WORK

(cid:391) Ethical questions raised by nanotechnologies 
(cid:391) Neurosciences
(cid:391) Medicine in prisons 
(cid:391) Ethical considerations regarding cost savings in hospitals 
(cid:391) Human rights and identifying data 
(cid:391) Precariousness, exclusion, ethics and healthcare 
(cid:391) The management of autistic persons and social attitudes towards them 
(cid:391) Commercialisation of human cell lines 

RECENT PUBLICATIONS (ABSTRACTS)

10

(cid:391) OPINION NO 90: ACCESS TO ORIGINS, ANONYMITY AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF FILIATION
Why should this issue of anonymity, of confidentiality of filiation and access to origins loom 
larger  in  contemporary  society  than  it  ever  has  before?  More  particularly,  is  this  due  to 
progress in medically assisted reproduction (MAR) techniques and their growing incidence? 
To social demands encouraged by different cultures? To developments in international law? 
Questions may arise at different times in the personal history of a child or of an adult, in a medical 
context or as part of a process of identity-building.  Ethical reflection must attempt to find the best 
way of coping with the possibilities that today’s medical science offers, with a view to having a 
beneficial effect on the lives of the various actors involved in family relationships.  It must also 
seek  to  examine  the  significance  of  human  parenthood  with  the  help  of  the  social  sciences  in 
particular.

RECOMMENDATIONS
In  the  complex  circumstances  of  each  type  of  situation,  the  balanced  solution  best  suited  to 
the interest of the child, to equity for those concerned and to lasting serenity within families 
must be actively sought.  The important thing is to remember that this voluntary dissociation 
of the biological and social dimensions of filiation must not obscure the fact that the child’s 
inheritance  is  made  up  of  both  these  dimensions  and  of  the  entire  process  which  led  to  a 
single filiation and to his conception.  The various situations must be considered separately. 

l. Anonymous childbirth
It would be preferable to try and limit the use of this possibility by giving better psychological 
counselling to future mothers during pregnancy and birth. 
The ethical values presiding over new legislation led to the Law of 22 January 2002 and to the 
creation of CNAOP11.  The balance is fragile and should be carefully preserved.  It would be 
best to wait for clearer feedback before initiating any changes.  It is important that the mother 
should be well informed of the possibility of registering at some point, if she wishes to do so, 
a  sealed  envelope  containing  non-identifying  information,  or  identifying  information, 
whichever she prefers, or of being able to reveal identifying information at a later date. But it 
should  be  made  clear  that  she  will  always  be  free  to  refuse.  A  system  where  a  mother’s 

10 24 November 2005. 
11 Conseil National pour l’Accès aux Origines Personnelles (National Council for Access to Personal Origins). 

19

                                                
identity would never be disclosed unless she had consented to it during her lifetime would be 
a favourable move. Finally, more attention should be paid to obtaining any existing data on 
paternal origins. 

2.  Fertilisation with a third-party donor and embryo hosting

2.1 Encourage disclosure of the secret of the conceptional mode - Inform parents of 

the benefits of early disclosure and the risks of tardy information.
Members  of  the  medical  professions  (doctors  and  psychologists  specialising  in 
reproduction, paediatricians and child psychiatrists, etc.) should give parents the fullest 
possible  information  on  the  risks  for  the  psyche  connected  to  the  establishment  and 
continuation of secrecy.  They should of course avoid any guilt-inducing statements but 
help to make clear the devastating effects of tardy disclosure of a secret so that parents 
are  fully  aware  of  the  consequences  of  their  action.    With  no  intention  of  interfering 
with  parental  responsibilities,  which  would  be  an  unwelcome  form  of  “enlightened 
paternalism”, the Committee sounds a warning regarding the dangers of putting off to a 
later date a decision which becomes of graver consequence as time goes by. It would be 
advisable to encourage couples to think ahead regarding the question of what their child 
should know about how he was conceived. Should he be told?  If so, when and how?
This attitude is all the more desirable because of the genetic screening facilities that are 
being  created  (DNA  “shops”  abroad,  advertising  via  the  internet)  and  the  financial 
profit-seeking trends sparked by these new technologies, so that couples wishing to use 
MAR  should  understand  that  there  is  little  likelihood  that  any  secret  would  be  kept 
inviolate  and  that  this  represents  a  danger  for  family  harmony.  It  is  preferable  to 
anticipate  a  situation  which  can  become  explosive  by  dispelling  the  secrecy  of  the 
situation without necessarily disclosing identities. 

2.2 Respect the principle of anonymity of donors and beneficiaries, regardless of what 
other changes in the law may become necessary.  Revealing anonymous identities would 
probably be more disruptive than disclosing the secret. Gametes are not “parents”. 
-  The  “double  gate”  principle,  which  gives  gamete  donors  of  both  sexes  a  choice 
between  an  anonymous  or  an  identified  donation,  and  at  the  same  time  gives  the 
beneficiary couples a choice between anonymous or identifiable gametes, could appear 
to  be  a  system  allowing  freedom  of  choice.  However,  this  apparent  freedom  seems  to 
have  generated  a  number  of  international  failures  leading  to  later  preferences  for  total 
secrecy  or  absolute  transparency.  The  existence  of  informed  or  non-informed  children 
depending  on  the  sole  goodwill  of  parents  is  an  ethical  issue  insofar  as  it  gives 
preference  to  the  freedom  of  parents  to  the  detriment  of  the  freedom  of  children  and 
necessarily creates discrimination. 

2.3 Allow the child to have access to non-identifying data while maintaining the principle 

of donor anonymity.
It should be possible to give non-identifying data to a child who has reached the age of 
majority,  if  he  so  wishes.  Information  on  the  reasons  for  the  donation  (gametes  or 
embryo)  should  be  registered  and  could  facilitate  mediation  if  required.  CNAOP’s 
mission could be extended to enable access to personal origins. Since mediation is part 
of  its  mission,  it  could  reveal  non-identifying  data  to  an  adult  child  in  an  in-depth 
dialogue  and  the  case  of  children  born  of  embryo  donation  could  receive  similar 
attention.

2.4 Specific aspects connected to embryo hosting

-  Reinforcement  of  discretion;  changes  to  the  social  services  enquiry;  the  decision  to 
inform  about  the  reproduction  mode  must  remain  in  the  hands  of  the  hosting  couple 
without  fear  of  disclosures  by  the  multiple  social  and  judicial  participants  involved  in 
the procedure. 

20

-  Keeping  the  identity  of  the  original  couple  anonymous  or,  in  this  situation  which  is 
akin to adoption to some extent (prenatal adoption), creation of an extension to CNAOP 
to  be  tasked  with  researching  the  origins  of  children  born  of  embryo  hosting,  on  the 
condition, of course, that the genetic parents agree. 
- Review the legislation on the question of the hosting of frozen embryos posthumously, on 
the  basis  of  the  two  arguments  which  add  to  the  number  previously  mentioned,  among 
others by the CCNE (Opinion No 40 of 17 December 1993). 

3.  In the case of double donation of gametes, a review of legislation is perhaps timely and 
should not raise opposition in the present context: far from being connected to commercial 
interests  (which  have  been  effectively  controlled  in  France  as  regards  single  donation, 
thanks to the experience of CECOS), double donation of gametes should be viewed as the 
expression of a dual altruistic action, on the part of each of the two donors. 
Furthermore, there is some degree of inconsistency if the law allows embryo hosting while 
the double donation of gametes is still illegal. 

4.  As regards adoption

All steps should be taken to inform a child that he has been adopted. 

5.  As regards surrogate mothering

The fact that this is practised in other countries and is legal in some of them (California, 
United Kingdom, Belgium) justifies continued reflection in France. 
It will not be possible to institute legal proceedings against French nationals who have used 
surrogate  mothering  in  another  country,  which  in  itself  introduces  the  possibility  of  this 
mode  of  reproduction.  The  civil  law  procedure  of  recognition  of  filiation  or  adoption  by 
the  wife  of  the  beneficiary  couple  is  denied,  however.  Such  uncertainty  regarding  the 
filiation of children born of this maternal reproduction process is a problem. 
The  value  of  the  ethical  arguments  which  led  Parliament,  and  before  it  other  national 
institutions, including the CCNE, to refuse the creation of such situations, is not disputed.  
Assimilating nine months of pregnancy by another woman to gamete donation is perhaps a 
little  hasty;  even  if  oocyte  donation  represents  a  greater  biological  (or  at  least  genetic) 
transgression than surrogate gestation, it also all but disregards the bond that may develop 
between  a  woman  and  the  child  she  bears  and  the  alienation  she  may  experience,  albeit 
voluntarily. Furthermore, there is a real and obvious risk that there could be a market for, 
and commercial exploitation of, surrogate mothers, even if it cannot become widespread. 

6.  Multiparental and homoparental situations

These two cases raise in rather different terms some fundamental issues. 
To research one’s origins means first of all to be able to piece together a background, give 
it the unity it was missing and fill in the gaps.  Multiple parenthood means making all these 
missing  links  part  of  the  child’s  life  and  making  them  visible.  Will  the  child  be  able  to 
construct  his  filiation  on  this  foundation?  The  corollary  of  multiple  parenthood  is  a 
multiplied and splintered filiation.  Does this allow a child to construct himself as a person 
and to find unity? 
In  parallel  with  use  of  the  word  “multiparental”,  the  expression  “homoparental”  is 
voluntarily sexless so that the difference in sex can be categorised as non-significant.  The 
issue  in  this  case  is  the  paternal  function  and  the  maternal  function  and  their 
complementarity in a constructive human-building parental/filiation relationship. 
Rather  than  encouraging  multiparental  or  homoparental  situations,  everything  should  be 
done to ensure that children living in these situations are spared a critical or discriminating 
attitude from society. 

21

7.  Prospective and retroactive thinking

This  reflection  has  an  eye  to  the  future  and  not  to  the  past.    That  is  what  makes  it  so 
complex.    This  Opinion  does  not  seek  to  cast  doubt  on  the  origins  of  a  filiation  and  it 
would be disastrous if, suddenly, every child was to question his origins and, supported by 
“ethical  legitimacy”,  demand  information  which  existed  at  a  different  time  and  in  a 
different culture. Since it was created, CNAOP has had the task of allowing individuals to 
access  data  regarding  their  mother,  if  she  accepts,  not  of  trying  to  solve  the  painful 
problems  of  a  time  past.  This  temporal  vision  is  sometimes  misunderstood.    The  CCNE 
stresses that the aim of this Opinion is not to bring about drastic changes in our common 
culture, but rather to face the future confidently while taking account of the considerable 
changes that have taken place in our modes of reproduction. 

8.  Taking into account the request of the applicant

Regardless  of  the  mode  of  conception,  when  the  question  of  origins  arises  and  the  reply 
seems enveloped in secrecy, there is potential for deep distress.  Society cannot respond to 
such a request with indifference.  It is true that such situations are infrequent, but their very 
existence, which is the crux of this Opinion, justifies serious attention being paid to them.  
For this reason, it is important that a structure, which should be part of CNAOP, be set up 
to  provide  mediation  facilities  sufficiently  accessible  and  known  to  transmit  non-
identifying  -  or  in  some  particularly  agonising  cases,  identifying  -  data.    This  structure 
should not confine itself to simple questions of identity.  It should be able to hear the pleas 
or  the  distress  of  applicants  and  assist  them,  because  when  there  is  a  longing  to  do  so, 
return to one’s origins becomes a need, even though, as Véronique Margron notes, to allow 
people to believe that a return to one’s beginnings leads directly to origins is misleading. 
Origins are arrived at by a story told, a message delivered, not by science.12

CONCLUSION
Today  the  possibility  of  dissociating  filiation,  sexuality  and  procreation  continues  to  raise 
ethical  issues.  Filiation,  singular  or  plural,  has  never  previously  been  subjected  to  as  much 
attention as now, at a time when there are a multiplicity of participants. Children’s interests 
are being forcibly rearranged, to put it mildly, by these dissociations where priority seems to 
be  given  to  the  notion  of  “parental  project”  which  has  taken  over  for  its  sole  benefit  the 
child’s status. 
The  debate  on  various  origins  and  various  reproduction  modes  is  certainly  important  and 
absorbing, but it could reduce the arrival of human beings into the world to the sole aspect of 
their  conceptional  mode.  In  the  complex  situations  considered  above,  the  important  point 
seems to be to make sure that the child, or the adult that child has become, does not remain 
isolated  in  this  quest  for  origins  and  is  included  in  a  rich,  aware  and  committed  human 
relationship where he can face in truth his conceptional background the better to accept it. 
It  is  reassuring  to  note,  at  a  time  when  couples  are  in  crisis  and  individualism  is  on  the 
increase, that the emotional relationship of parents who bring up children is still a firm ethical 
reference.  Let us hope that it inspires the responsibilities that need to be shouldered. 

(cid:391) OPINION NO 92: OPINION ON SCREENING FOR TUBERCULOSIS AND BCG VACCINATION
In view of changes in tuberculosis (TB) control policies in France, medical recommendations 
aiming specifically to help highly vulnerable people may militate in favour of ensuring that an 
active  screening  policy  and  the  vaccination  policy  with  which  it  must  be  connected  are 
coherent.

13

12 La Croix, 30 November 2005. 
13 22 June 2006. 

22

                                                
Although  the  targeting  concept  is  designed  to  benefit  at-risk  sections  of  the  population,  it 
raises  many  ethical  issues  which  are  by  no  means  confined  to  the  purely  scientific  and 
medical concerns involved. The onset of TB is facilitated by precarious living conditions and 
migration  from  a  country  where  the  disease  is  endemic.    Its  appearance  can  therefore  also 
reveal a social context. 

RECOMMENDATIONS
The CCNE’s recommendations are the following: 

1. Even though the Committee does not wish to take a stand in the debate concerning the cost-
effectiveness  of  this  kind  of  vaccination  (although  it  considers  that,  taking  into  account 
recently published epidemiological studies carried out in countries which have conducted an 
effective  screening,  prevention  and  evaluation  programme,  the  elimination  at  some  future 
point  of  the  mandatory  features  which  now  prevail  could  be  reviewed),  it  recommends  the 
utmost caution in processing plans to suppress the generalised BCG vaccination, because the 
ex  abrupto  cessation  of  this  systematic  vaccination,  without  prior  implementation  of  well-
organised  screening  on  a  national  scale,  would  inevitably  lead  to  an  increase  in  the  risk  of 
tuberculosis, in particular in its severe forms.
2. The Committee therefore recommends that any change in BCG vaccination policy should 
be  preceded  by  a  stepping-up  of  generalised  screening  practices,  particularly  for 
schoolchildren  (school-based  healthcare  should  be  a  primary  concern),  in  geographic  areas 
which are particularly exposed (the greater Paris area (Ile de France) and large conurbations 
in particular) and for persons judged to be at risk because they come from countries where TB 
is highly endemic or are living with contaminated persons. 
3.  Since  the  existence  of  people  who  are  particularly  exposed  to  risk  is  indisputable,  the 
Committee recommends that specific attention paid to such persons as regards both screening
and  vaccination  does  not  become  a  policy  applicable  in  particular  to  any  given  population.  
Targeting based on purely social, economic and geographic criteria could be seen as a form of 
discrimination or serve as an alibi for disguised discrimination. 
4.  The  Committee  recommends  that  vaccination,  if  it  is  to  be  reserved  for  certain  persons, 
should  only  be  practised  in  the  case  of  infants  and  children  for  strictly  medical  reasons,
evaluated  by  the  physician  exclusively  (in  schools,  healthcare  centres  for  mothers  and 
children, by paediatricians and general practitioners) who would need of course to take into 
account specific social situations, to the exclusion of any negative discriminating procedure. 
5. The CCNE recommends that anyone professionally exposed to a risk of contamination be 
able  to  apply  for  screening,  without  necessarily  targeting  persons  whose  work  puts  them  in 
contact  with  socially  vulnerable  children  or  persons  from  particularly  exposed  countries.  
Furthermore, only physicians, assisted by social workers and nursing staff, should be allowed 
to evaluate the specific conditions of a high-risk situation. 
6. The CCNE would hope that on this occasion, when thoughts turn to public health matters, 
some  consideration  could  be  given  to  reinforcing  the  resources  available  for  school-based 
healthcare,  occupational  medicine  and  training  general  practitioners  for  assistance  to 
vulnerable persons, rather than making such persons bear the blame for an ever-present risk. 
7.  The  Committee  would  like  to  awaken  more  interest  in  the  usefulness  of  intradermal 
tuberculin skin test screening being generalised for all schoolchildren and not just limited to 
children  described  as  targets.    The  CCNE  recommends  that  the  intradermal  injection 
technique should be encouraged and revived and that nursing staff should be trained in this 
technique, which is necessary, according to present international recommendations, for BCG 
vaccinations and verifying cutaneous reactions to tuberculin. 
8.  It  recommends  that  screening  for  tuberculosis  should  reach  out  to  people  by  facilitating 
access to “anonymous and free” healthcare structures, managed by social institutions (“street 
medicine”) to avoid the fears that some people may have that their health status could lead to 
negative consequences for their social reintegration. 

23

9. The CCNE recommends that cost-benefit evaluation of generalised screening be carried out 
and  renewed  at  intervals  for  a  certain  period  of  time,  given  that  such  screening  would 
represent an essential preamble to eliminating generalised vaccination. 

Further information 

Ms Marie-Hélène Mouneyrat 
Secretary General 

Address
Comité consultatif national d’éthique 
7, rue Saint-Georges 
75009 - PARIS 
Tel. : + 33 (0)1 53 86 11 49 / 52 
Fax : + 33 (0)1 53 86 11 40 
Email : contact@comite-ethique.fr

Website: www.ccne-ethique.fr

24

Role

Following  the  German  Federal  Government’s  decision  of  2  May  2001  the  National  Ethics 
Council was established on 8 June 2001 as a national forum for dialogue about ethical issues 
in the life sciences. It provides an umbrella for interdisciplinary discourse relating to science, 
medicine, theology, philosophy and the social and legal sciences, expressing its views on both 
the ethical aspects of new developments in the life sciences and their impact on individuals 
and  society  as  a  whole.  The  National  Ethics  Council  consists  of  up  to  25  members  who 
represent the fields of science, medicine, theology, philosophy, sociology, law, ecology and 
economics, and are appointed by the Federal Chancellor for a period of four years. Members 
generally convene once a month in Berlin. 

The National Ethics Council is an independent body, bound only by its purpose as stipulated 
in the Government decision that established it. It determines the scope and organisation of its 
work independently. 

The  Ethics  Council  puts  great  emphasis  on  its  work  with  the  community  and  makes  its 
opinions, recommendations and reports public. 

The National Ethics Council cooperates with other ethics bodies in Germany as well as with 
comparable institutions in other countries and international organisations. 

The  General  Secretariat  of  the  National  Ethics  Council  is  located  on  the  premises  of  the 
Berlin  Brandenburg  Academy  of  Sciences  and  Humanities.  The  Council  and  its  General 
Secretariat are funded by the German Federal Government. 

Previous opinions 

The import of human embryonic stem cells (20.12.2001)

The National Ethics Council published its Opinion on the import of human embryonic stem 
cells for research purposes on 20 December 2001. 
In conclusion, this comprehensive document offers the following options: 

A The  temporary  import  of  pluripotent  human  stem  cells  is  deemed  ethically  acceptable  under 
strict conditions (described in detail in the Opinion), as the production of such stem cells using 
surplus  embryos  is  held  to  be  ethically  permissible.  Therefore,  the  production  of  such  stem 
cells using surplus embryos within Germany would also be acceptable. The import conditions 
mentioned  would  have  to  apply  in  equal  measure  to  both  publicly  and  privately  funded 
research.

B The Council advocates the provisional and temporary import of human embryonic stem cells 
under  strict  conditions  as  described  in  the  Opinion.  All  conditions  must  apply  in  equal 
measure to both publicly and privately funded research, and must be met prior to import. 
C A provisional ban (moratorium) should be imposed on stem cell import. The legislator must 
arrive at an explicit decision on imports, but not before having clarified a number of issues, 
individually listed in the Opinion. These issues should be examined before the end of 2004. 
D Stem  cell  import  is  deemed  ethically  impermissible,  mainly  due  to  the  basic  considerations 
surrounding  the  production  of  stem  cells  using  human  embryos.  As  this  is  deemed  an 
impermissible  instrumentalisation  (destruction)  of  human  life,  it  follows  that  the  import  of 
such stem cells must be rejected. The imported cells carry the stigma of the conditions under 

25

which they were produced. Their import would lead to an increase in demand, thereby directly 
promoting  consumption  of  embryos  in  the  exporting  countries.  Eventually  the  level  of 
protection afforded to embryos would be lowered also in Germany. 

Bearing  in  mind  that  the  National  Ethics  Council  is  yet  to  express  its  opinions  on  the  basic 
issues surrounding stem cell research, and while decisions regarding the import of embryonic 
stem  cells  are  still  pending,  fifteen  members  have  moved  in  favour  of  tightly  restricted 
temporary  import  of  embryonic  stem  cells  (Option  B).  Nine  among  these  fifteen  also 
advocated  Option  A.  Ten  members  favour  a  moratorium  on  stem  cell  imports  for  the  time 
being (Option C), among these four who are also in favour of Option D. 

Genetic diagnosis before and during pregnancy (23.10.2003)

to  examine 

the  arguments  behind 

Germany’s National Ethics Council unanimously recommends regulating the use of prenatal 
diagnosis  (PND)  and  pre-implantation  genetic  diagnosis  (PGD)  in  a  special  comprehensive 
reproductive medicine law.
The Council’s 24 members once again urge an open discussion of the ethical, legal and social 
issues arising from advances being made in medicine and the life sciences, a discussion that 
acknowledges existing differences of opinion. The Council points out that mutual respect is a 
prerequisite  for  reaching  a  convincing  political  solution  to  the  conflicts  that  have  come  to 
light  in  the  course  of  this  discussion.  This  calls  in  particular  for  a  willingness  to  respect 
differing  opinions  and 
these  opinions  equally 
conscientiously and objectively. 
As already stated in its first Opinion on the import of human embryonic stem cells, issued in 
December 2001, the National Ethics Council consequently does not consider it to be its task 
to embrace a particular regulatory arrangement or indeed to recommend that arrangement to 
lawmakers as ultimately the only possible option.
The Council’s job is, rather, to develop arguments and point out possible solutions connected 
with these arguments. It must be left to parliament to choose the legislative path that, in its 
view and in cognizance of these arguments, is appropriate. 
Based on this understanding, the Opinion presents and discusses what are, from the Council’s 
perspective,  the  two  possible  responses  to  pre-implantation  genetic  diagnosis,  namely  strict 
rejection or allowing PGD only as an exception when stringent requirements have been met. 
As part of the possible regulatory arrangements it outlines, the Opinion also highlights various 
approaches  that  could  be  taken  and,  in  doing  so,  further  broadens  the  scope  of  its  critical 
analysis.
The  Council’s  members  have  therefore  decided  to  dispense  with  a  vote  and  have  confined 
themselves instead to indicating their own position by signing the approaches they support. 
With the Opinion issued today, the Council presents a document that: 

(cid:120) describes  the  medical  basis  for  PND  and  PGD  and  outlines  the  legal  and  social 

framework for their actual or possible use; 

(cid:120) assesses various arguments in favour of or against allowing PGD; and
(cid:120) critically discusses the current practice of PND. 

Biobanks for research (17.3.2004)

The  National  Ethics  Council  examined  the  scientific  status  of  biobanks  by  reference  to 
concrete  examples,  established  ethical  principles  for  their  evaluation,  put  forward  a 
framework of legal conditions to govern their operation, and formulated conclusions on how 
they should be regulated.  The Opinion is preceded by 30 regulatory proposals. 

26

For the purposes of this Opinion, biobanks are defined as collections of specimens of human 
bodily  substances  associated,  or  associatable,  with  personal  data  and  information  on  their 
donors.  The Opinion deals exclusively with biobanks intended for medical research. 

Biobanks  are  an  important  resource  for  identifying  the  causes  and  mechanisms  of  a  large 
number of diseases, and in that respect could lead to significant breakthroughs in medical and 
pharmaceutical research.  However, they also arouse anxiety and distrust.  The main concern 
is donor protection.  What is feared is the uncontrolled use of specimens and data, together 
with the possibility that potential donors might be pressured into assuming unreasonable risks 
or imprudently divulging personal information. 
The  National  Ethics  Council  therefore  considers  it  essential  for  explicit  information  to  be 
given  to  those  concerned  and  regards  their  consent  as  being  of  central  importance.    At  the 
same time the Ethics Council is aware that the full scientific potential of biobank specimens 
and data can often be exploited only if their use is not restricted to individual, predetermined 
research projects.  For this reason, it must also be possible for donors to consent to the use of 
their  specimens  and  data  for  medical  research  in  general  and  for  an  indefinite  period.    The 
risks to donors presented by the greater flexibility thus afforded to research must, however, be 
offset by a legal requirement of confidentiality on the part of the researchers. 

The problems and issues raised by biobanks are outlined in a joint declaration by the National 
Ethics Councils of Germany and France (2.10.2003).
The large-scale collection and comparison of body materials and the data derived from them 
make it possible to establish correlations that may in the long term yield a valuable diagnostic 
and therapeutic return. However, there is a risk that the data and samples could be used for 
purposes other than those to which the donor has consented or be passed on to third parties.
The following aspects are of paramount importance in the regulation of biobanks:

(cid:120) the  existence  of  a  guaranteed  continuous  “chain  of  responsibility”  in  relation  to  the 

derivation, storage, handling and use of body materials and personal data;

(cid:120) a clear definition of the donor’s free and informed consent; and
(cid:120) issues of solidarity, altruism and justice.

The conclusion is that a new regulatory framework must be established in both countries to 
reconcile the development and utilisation of research with protection of the individual. This is 
not only a task confronting Germany and France, but must also be addressed internationally.

Polar body diagnosis (16.6.2004)

The German National Ethics Council does not see any need for specific legislation on polar 
body diagnosis at present, but continues to recommend the passing of a reproductive medicine 
law to regulate the entire field of reproductive medicine. 
In its Opinion on genetic diagnosis before and during pregnancy (2003) the Council already 
discussed  the  possibilities  and  limits  of  polar  body  diagnosis  and  evaluated  its  ethical  and 
legal aspects in the context of pre-implantation genetic diagnosis. 
Polar body diagnosis is deemed to be permissible, and is practised, in Germany because the 
egg cell is examined at the “pronuclear stage” – that is, before an embryo as defined by the 
German Embryo Protection Law has come into being. 
Against  this  background  the  National  Ethics  Council  convened  a  group  of  experts  for  a 
hearing  on  19  February  2004  to  obtain  information  on  advances  in  the  technique,  its 
application in the field of reproductive medical therapy and its use under the conditions laid 
down by the Embryo Protection Law. 

27

The Council welcomes the initiative of the centres that conduct polar body diagnosis in using 
the procedure only in the context of a joint scientific study. 

Cloning  for  reproductive  purposes  and  cloning  for  the  purposes  of  biomedical  research
(13.9.2004)
The German National Ethics Council issued its Opinion on cloning for reproductive purposes 
and cloning for the purposes of biomedical research on 13 September 2004. 

The Council unanimously takes the view that a worldwide ban should be imposed on human 
cloning for reproductive purposes and that the legal situation in Germany should be clarified 
by the adoption of criminal-law provisions prohibiting the practice. 
Three positions have emerged on human cloning for research purposes: 

A 
B 
C 

Retention of the prohibition of research cloning; 
Limited sanctioning of research cloning; 
Prohibition of research cloning for the time being. 

Notwithstanding these three positions, the National Ethics Council has reached a consensus to 
the effect that human cloning for research purposes should not be allowed at present. 
The Council’s ethical and constitutional assessments on reproductive and research cloning are 
based  on  a  thoroughgoing  analysis  of  the  scientific  state  of  the  art  and  of  the  current  legal 
situation.
As  with  the  Opinion  on  genetic  diagnosis  before  and  during  pregnancy  (2003),  the  Council 
again decided to dispense with a vote.  The differing positions on research cloning are each 
signed by the members who subscribe to them. 

The  patenting  of  biotechnological  inventions  involving  the  use  of  biological  material
of human origin (6.10.2004)

The German National Ethics Council issued its Opinion on the patenting of biotechnological 
inventions involving the use of biological material of human origin on 6 October 2004. 
The majority recommendation of the National Ethics Council is that the EU Directive on the 
legal protection of biotechnological inventions should be transposed into national law as soon 
as  possible.    This  recommendation  is  based  on  the  view  that  the  purpose  of  the  draft  law 
presented by the Federal Government is to limit the content that can be protected by a patent.  
The  majority  also  recommends  the  adoption  of  measures  –  if  necessary  outside  the  field  of 
patent  law  –  to  ensure  that  donors  are  given  adequate  information  and  that  due  evidence  of 
their consent is furnished.  There is no need for any further measures: the practical treatment 
of  substance  protection  on  the  one  hand  and  the  limitation  and  concrete  shaping  of  patent 
protection  on  the  other  can  be  left  to  patent  practice.    However,  future  trends  and,  in 
particular, the practice of the courts and patent offices should be closely monitored, especially 
with  respect  to  the  handling  of  substance  protection  and  of  the  prohibition  of  granting  on 
ordre public grounds, and as regards the facilitation of compulsory licensing provided for in 
the  draft  law.    Any  concerns  arising  should  give  rise  to  attempts  to  secure  changes  and 
clarifications at EU level. 
In  a  more  far-reaching  position  statement,  eleven  members  of  the  Council  recommend  that 
Germany  make  full  use  of  the  existing  arrangements  allowing  the  adoption  of  individual 
national  provisions,  as  in  other  EU  Member  States,  and  regret  that  considerations  of  time 
preclude  a  review  of  a  number  of  fundamental  elements  of  the  Directive.    They  therefore 
suggest that any necessary corrections be set out in the explanatory memorandum to the law 
and communicated to the European Commission as soon as possible.  With regard to the legal 
instrument itself, they recommend that: 

28

(cid:120) the  extent  of  protection  afforded  by  a  claim  should  be  limited  to  the  technical 

application of a function as specifically set forth in the description;

(cid:120) explicit  provisions  should  be  adopted  stipulating  that  reproductive  human  substances, 

human organs, human embryonic stem cells and stem cell lines are not patentable;

(cid:120) it  should  be  obligatory  to  furnish  evidence  of  the  provenance  of  the  biological 

substances of human and non-human origin used in each case;

(cid:120) it should be compulsory to obtain free and informed donor consent; and 
(cid:120) the  need  for  as  restrictive  as  possible  an  interpretation  of  inventions  should  be 

emphasised.

The advance directive. An instrument of self-determination (2.6.2005)

The National Ethics Council published its Opinion on advance directives on 2 June 2005. 

The  recommendations  on  advance  directives  form  part  of  a  comprehensive  Opinion  on  the 
ethical, legal and social background to, and the reality of, end-of-life care which is currently 
being drawn up by the National Ethics Council. 

The Council emphasises that the debate on the scope and binding nature of advance directives 
does not call into question the ban on euthanasia. 

A mentally competent person must have the right to make an advance directive providing for 
acceptance or refusal of medical treatment in the event of his or her no longer being mentally 
competent at some future date. 

Statutory  regulation  of  the  conditions  and  scope  of  an  advance  directive  is  desirable  in  the 
interests  of  legal  certainty.    The  powers  of  legal  representatives  and  attorneys  should  be 
specified at the same time. 

In  the  view  of  the  majority  of  the  members  of  the  Council,  the  relevant  legislation  should 
make  it  clear  that  an  advance  directive  is  binding  on  doctors  and  nursing  staff  and  that  the 
scope  and  binding  nature  of  an  advance  directive  are  not  confined  to  certain  phases  of  the 
patient’s illness. 

The legislation should provide that an advance directive, in order to be legally valid, must be 
drawn up in writing or documented in comparably reliable form. 

The  legislation  should  in  addition  clearly  specify  that,  with  very  few  exceptions,  signs  of  a 
will to live in a person who is no longer mentally competent invalidate the binding nature of 
an advance directive refusing treatment. 

Predictive health information in pre-employment medical examinations (16.8.2005)

The  National  Ethics  Council  published  its  Opinion  on  predictive  health  information  in  the 
world of work on 16 August 2005. 

The issue addressed by the Opinion is the extent to which it should be permissible to make the 
conclusion  of  a  contract  of  employment  or  appointment  as  a  civil  servant  dependent  on  the 
determination  and  use  of  information  concerning  the  future  course  of  a  past  or  present 
medical condition or the risk of a disease that has not yet become manifest. Such probabilities 
can  be  established  increasingly  accurately  by  means  not  only  of  genetic  but  also  of  other 
techniques  of  medical  examination,  such  as  analyses  of  blood  chemistry  or  radiology. 
Medicine  can  also  offer  prognoses  in  relation  to  conditions  from  which  job  applicants  have 
suffered in the past or are currently suffering. For this reason, widespread concerns have been 

29

voiced for some time that employers might make use of the potential of predictive diagnosis 
in decisions on the filling of a given post. 

In the view of the National Ethics Council, it is legitimate for an employer, prior to deciding 
whether  to  engage  a  candidate,  to  consider  whether  he  or  she  is  fit  for  the  relevant  duties 
physically, mentally and in terms of health. Questions about an applicant’s health status and 
personal  medical  history,  as  well  as  medical  examinations,  are  therefore  permissible  where 
necessary at the time of appointment for determining fitness for the proposed activity. 

Conversely,  limitations  should  be  imposed  on  the  use  of  health  information  obtained  from 
questionnaires  or  from  a  pre-employment  medical  examination  where  such  information 
relates  to  the  future  fitness  of  a  candidate.  It  should  be  confined  to  conditions  and 
predispositions  with  a  probability  exceeding  50%  of  having  non-negligible  effects  on  the 
candidate’s fitness for the post in question within a period following engagement to be set by 
law or collective bargaining – e.g. on the basis of the usual six-month probationary period.  In 
particular,  examinations  of  candidates  should  not  be  allowed  for  “screening”  purposes,  but 
only  if  there  is  reason  to  suspect  the  possible  presence  of  a  specific  condition  or 
predisposition.

More  extensive  examinations  for  currently  symptom-free  conditions  or  ones  of  predictable 
onset  should  be  permissible  if  they  are  necessary  to  preclude  risks  to  third  parties,  as  for 
example in the case of pilots. 

The  principles  outlined  above  cannot  be  applied  without  reservation  to  the  appointment  of 
civil servants. In this instance the employer assumes a duty of care towards, and an obligation 
to  provide  for  the  welfare  of,  a  civil  servant  that  persist  throughout  the  employee’s  life.  As 
provided in the regulations obtaining in the individual German Länder on the appointment of 
severely  disabled  persons  as  civil  servants,  it  should  be  permissible  for  predictive  and 
prognostic  information  to  be  demanded  and  used  only  in  the  case  of  conditions  and 
predispositions  with  more  than  a  50%  probability  of  having  a  non-negligible  effect  on  an 
applicant’s health-related fitness within the next five years. 

The  National  Ethics  Council  will  shortly  be  considering  issues  of  predictive  health 
information in the insurance sector. 

Self-determination and care at the end of life (13.7.2006)

The National Ethics Council issued its Opinion on self-determination and care at the end of 
life on 13 July 2006. This document continues the discussion of the themes addressed in the 
Council’s Opinion on the advance directive published in June 2005. 
The  Council  has  thoroughly  discussed  the  issues  involved  in  dealing  responsibly  with  the 
process  of  dying.  It  has  perused  a  large  volume  of  material,  obtained  expert  opinions, 
consulted  with  doctors  and  other  medical  specialists,  and  held  meetings  in  Augsburg  and 
Münster  at  which  it  exposed  itself  to  the  ongoing  vigorous  public  debate.  The  outcome  is 
enshrined in the recommendations now presented. 
The  National  Ethics  Council  proposes  that  the  current  terminology  of  active  euthanasia, 
passive  euthanasia  and  indirect  euthanasia  be  abandoned  on  the  grounds  that  it  is  not  only 
open to misunderstanding but also in certain respects misleading. Decisions and actions at the 
end of life which directly or indirectly affect the dying process and the onset of death can be 
appropriately described and distinguished by the use of the following terms: end-of-life care; 
therapy at the end of life; letting die; assisted suicide; and killing on demand. 
With regard to end-of-life care and therapies at the end of life, the Council emphasises that 
everyone  who  is  incurably  ill  and  dying  is  entitled  to  be  treated,  nursed  and  cared  for  in 
conditions of respect for his or her human dignity. All measures involved in end-of-life care 

30

and  therapies  at  the  end  of  life  must  be  subject  to  the  wishes  of  the  patient  concerned. 
Adequate palliative care must be provided for every incurably sick and dying individual. For 
this purpose, doctors must be able without fear of prosecution to give priority to the patient’s 
quality  of  life  over  the  maximum  possible  prolongation  of  life.  Sufficient  provision  of 
inpatient and outpatient care in nursing homes, palliative care wards and hospices is urgently 
necessary, and the availability of interdisciplinary training and advanced training for doctors 
and nurses who treat the seriously ill and the dying must also be increased on an urgent basis. 
The  role  of  the  voluntary  sector  in  end-of-life  care  should  be  actively  promoted  and 
supported, and family members should have access to competent advice on the availability of 
nursing and other care for the seriously ill. The employment laws should provide for leave so 
as to allow close relatives to care for a dying person. 
One aspect of “letting die” is that everyone has the right to refuse a medical measure even if it 
has the potential to prolong his or her life. The same applies where a patient is incapable of 
expressing his or her wishes provided that the refusal can be inferred with sufficient certainty 
from an advance directive or other reliable indication. In the absence of definite information 
on  a  patient’s  wishes  or  if  the  patient  has  been  unable  to  formulate  such  wishes,  penal  and 
professional sanctions should not be applied if, having regard to the prospects of success, to 
the patient’s suffering and to the patient’s probable life expectancy, a medical treatment is no 
longer indicated and is therefore withheld, limited or withdrawn. The preservation of life must 
take precedence in cases of doubt. 
With  regard  to  suicide,  suicide  intervention  and  assisted  suicide,  both  the  law  and  social 
practice should continue to be directed towards dissuading people, even if seriously ill, from 
taking  their  own  lives  and  towards  offering  them  prospects  for  life.  If,  where  a  gravely  ill 
person attempts suicide, there are clear indications that the attempt is underlain by a seriously 
considered decision and that the individual concerned does not wish to be rescued, then, in the 
view of the majority of the members of the National Ethics Council, persons such as doctors 
or  family  members  who  have  a  particular  duty  in  relation  to  the  welfare  of  that  individual 
should  be  allowed  to  desist  from  intervening  without  fear  of  prosecution.  Some  Council 
members consider it necessary to restrict this possibility to situations in which death from the 
serious illness is manifestly imminent. 
Opinions  within  the  National  Ethics  Council  on  the  permissibility  of  physician-assisted 
suicide  and  organised  assisted  suicide  diverge.  However,  the  Council  unanimously  declares 
its  opposition  to  the  assistance  of  suicide  for  profit,  which  in  its  view  should  be  a  criminal 
offence.
Killing on request (Section 216 of the Penal Code) should remain a punishable offence. 

Current work and forthcoming opinions 

(cid:120) The use of predictive health information when taking out personal insurance 

Annual public meetings 

(cid:120) Biobanks – a chance for progress in science or a sellout of the human body “resource”? 

(24.10.2002)

(cid:120) The attitudes of non-Western cultures to prenatal life (23.10.2003) 
(cid:120) What  kind  of  doctors  does  our  society  want?  The  medical  treatment  contract  today 

(21.10.2004)

(cid:120) Geriatric  dementia  and  Alzheimer’s  disease  –  medical,  social  and  ethical  challenges 

(27.10.2005)

(cid:120) Health for all – but for how much longer? Rationing and equity in the healthcare system 

(26.10.2006)

31

Other all-day meetings

(cid:120) Pills  for  happiness?  How  should  we  deal  with  depression  and  hyperactivity? 

(22.11.2006)

Further information 

Dr Rudolf Teuwsen 
Head of Office
Tel. +49/30/20370-612 
Fax: +49/30/20370-252 
Email: rteuwsen@ethikrat.org

Ulrike Florian 
Press and public relations officer 
Tel. +49/30/20370-246 
Fax: +49/30/20370-252 
Email: florian@ethikrat.org

Address
German National Ethics Council 
Jaegerstrasse 22/23 
D – 10117 Berlin 
Website:

Website: http://www.ethikrat.org

32

A. Most recently issued recommendations

June 2006 
Recommendation on human biobanks (abstract)

The major bioethical issues raised by human biobanks are the relationship between personal 
autonomy and social solidarity as well as the commercial exploitation of the results obtained 
through  research.  The  Commission  believes  that  the  prospects  of  significant  benefits  for 
public  health  justify  the  operation  of  biobanks.  It  also  believes  that  any  state-promulgated 
rules  should  encourage  the  dimension  of  social  solidarity  while  safeguarding  personal 
autonomy. The Commission endorses the social demand for partaking in the benefits arising 
from  research  and  its  applications  according  to  the  Unesco  Declarations  on  Genetic  Data 
(Article  19)  and  Bioethics  (Article  15).  Aside  from  responding  to  an  obvious  demand  for 
justice, this approach ensures further incentives to encourage research and promote the public 
interest through the operation of biobanks. 
The  Commission  further  points  to  specific  practical  implications  for  the  development  and 
operation of human biobanks with regard to consent, ownership of samples and control over 
personal data, commercial exploitation, third party access and state licences. The Commission 
recommends  the  adoption  of  specific  criteria  for  licensing  human  biobanks  as  well  as  the 
creation  of  a  single  registry  open  to  the  public  that  would  provide  crucial  information  on 
operating human biobanks. 

B. Recent past

December 2005

(a) The Commission issued comments regarding the legislative initiative to update the Code
of  Medical  Ethics.  The  Commission  welcomed  this  initiative  and  made  the  point  that  the 
Ministry  of  Health  should  further  support  the  ethical  debate  by  organising  seminars  and 
lectures  in  hospitals  and  biomedical  research  institutions.  The  Commission  stressed  that  the 
principle  of  patient  autonomy  should  take  precedence  over  the  protection  of  the  medical 
profession  and  proposed  some  minor  changes  in  order  to  promote  clarity  of  the  Code  and 
secure compliance with constitutional principles. 

(b)  The  Commission  issued  comments  regarding  proposed  changes  to  the  Human
Transplantations  Act.  The  proposed  changes  concerned  three  points:  (a)  expanding  the 
circle  of  potential  living  donors  from  first  to  fourth  degree  relatives  as  well  as  including 
persons having emotional bonds with the patient, (b) prioritisation of patients on the waiting 
list  for  organ  transplantation  where  a  relative  of  theirs  has  become  a  donor  to  the  National 
Agency and (c) introducing presumed consent for organ removal from deceased persons. The 
Commission  took  the  view  that  the  proposed  changes  were  inappropriate.  Concerning  point 
(a) the Commission stressed that expanding the circle of living donors could engender undue 
pressure  on  family  members  while  the  inclusion  of  living  donors  on  the  basis  of  emotional 
bonds with the patient would increase the risk of illicit organ trade. With regard to point (b) 
the  Commission  considered  that  the  proposed  change  could  further  increase  undue  pressure 
on family members while it would also violate the principle of justice on which the national 

33

transplantation  system  is  based.  Finally,  the  Commission  rejected  the  proposed  point  (c)  as 
inapplicable  in  medical  practice,  even  in  countries  that  have  incorporated  similar  clauses  in 
their legislation. 

January 2006

Recommendation on artificial prolongation of life (abstract) 

The  Commission  recognised  that  the  decision  to  provide  medical  care  to  patients  at  an 
irreversible stage of disease is crucial since it affects both the duration and the quality of their 
lives. As with any medical act, all the more so on these specific occasions, the decision must 
be taken by the patients themselves, provided they are capable of voicing their opinion, or by 
their  relatives  who  assume  the  legal  and  moral  responsibility  for  these  decisions.  The 
physician’s  sole  responsibility  is  to  provide  information  and  support  to  patients  (or  to  their 
family members) so that any decision is made in accordance with the patient’s interest in the 
best possible way. The Commission underlined that even when all curative benefits have been 
ruled out with certainty, the relationship between patient and physician still holds. “Medical 
futility” does not entail abandonment of the patient by the attending physician. This must also 
be  stated  clearly  when  information  is  given  to  patients  and  families.  The  Commission 
considered  that  even  when  no  curative  benefits  may  be  expected  the  goal  of  medical  care 
continues  to  be  governed  by  the  fundamental  principle  of  “to  benefit  -  not  to  harm” 
(Hippocrates).  In  this  case,  however,  the  only  undisputable  benefit  to  the  patient  is  the 
alleviation  of  pain  and  suffering.  By  contrast,  the  artificial  prolongation  of  biological 
functions  with  no  hope  of  recovery  can  be  viewed  as  “harm”  and  indeed  be  experienced  as 
such by the patient. By their nature, decisions on artificial prolongation of life are emotionally 
heavily charged. At the stage preceding the decision, there may be a conflict of opinion based 
on diverging beliefs and value judgements or differences in the psychological management of 
the situation among the persons involved (attending physician, patient, family members). For 
this reason, the Commission held that it is meaningful to adopt specific procedures in order to 
prevent  and/or  resolve  conflict,  although  the  eventuality  of  unresolved  conflict  cannot  be 
ruled  out.  In  the  case  of  patient/physician  or  physician/family  members  conflict,  the 
Commission stressed the role of the hospital’s board of ethics or/and the engagement of the 
hospital’s  social  workers,  which  could  help  the  parties  to  approach  each  other,  while  it 
recognised  that  a  second  medical  opinion  might  be  sought.  In  the  case  of  conflict  between 
relatives  of  an  incapacitated  patient,  the  attending  physician  must  determine  the  source  of 
disagreement  and  seek  the  involvement  of  experts  as  the  case  may  require  (e.g.  a  social 
worker  or  a  psychologist).  The  Commission  took  the  view  that  the  best  way  to  avoid  such 
disagreement is appointment by the patient of a proxy specifically for these issues in due time. 
The Commission therefore suggested that legislation be passed to sanction this option. If the 
patient has not appointed a proxy, as suggested above, the Commission considers that in the 
event of unresolved conflict between the patient’s relatives, the decision must be in favour of 
artificial prolongation of life, according to the patient’s best interests. 

The  full  text  of  the  recommendations  issued  by  the  National  Bioethics  Commission  can  be 
found at the following URL: 
http://www.bioethics.gr/category.php?category_id=55 or  requested  at  the  Secretariat 
(Secretariat@bioethics.gr).

34

C. Future agenda

The Commission is currently exploring the possibility of dealing with the issue of prenatal
genetic tests. 

D. Composition of the Commission

Chairman
Professor George Koumantos, Emeritus Professor of Civil Law, University of Athens 
Deputy Chairman 
Professor George Maniatis, Emeritus Professor of General Biology, University of Patras 
Members
Mr Savas Agouridis, Emeritus Professor of Theology, University of Athens 
Mrs Myrto Dragona-Monachou, Emeritus Professor of Philosophy, University of Athens 
Mr  Costas  Krimbas,  Member  of  the  Academy  of  Athens,  Professor  h.c.  of  Genetics, 
Agricultural  University  of  Athens  and  Emeritus  Professor  of  History  and  Philosophy  of 
Biology, University of Athens 
Mr Dimitrios Roupakias, Professor of Plant Breeding, Agricultural University of Thessaloniki 
Mr Pavlos Sourlas, Professor of Philosophy of Law, University of Athens 
Mr Constantinos Tsoukalas, Emeritus Professor of Sociology, University of Athens 
Mr Ioannis Vlahoyiannis, Professor of Medicine and Nephrology, University of Athens 

Further information 

Ms Marianna Dracopoulou 
Executive Head Secretary 
Tel.: +30 210 88 47 700 
Fax: +30 210 88.47 701 
Email: Secretariat@bioethics.gr, 

Address
Evelpidon 47. T.K., GR-11362 Athens 

Website: www.bioethics.gr

35

During two days in October 2006 the Latvian Central Medical Ethics Committee, the Centre 
for Practical Ethics of the University of Latvia and the Ethics Committee and Department of 
Humanities  of  Riga  Stradi(cid:444)š  University  organised  the  International  Conference  “Bioethical 
Aspects of Human Health”. The conference was supported by the European Commission and 
the pharmaceutical company Berlin-Chemie. It was attended by over 150 participants – REC 
members, ethicists, researchers, physicians and students. The conference was opened by the 
Rector  of  Riga  Stradi(cid:444)š  University  and  a  representative  from  the  Ministry  of  Health  Care. 
Over two days, 29 reports from Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania, the United Kingdom, the United 
States,  Germany,  Denmark,  Finland,  Russia,  Ukraine  and  the  European  Commission  were 
discussed among the participants.

The plenary sessions focused on the following issues: 

(cid:120) Ethics committees on scientific research projects; 
(cid:120) Stem cell research; 
(cid:120) Euthanasia: pros and cons; 
(cid:120) Reproductive health and bioethical challenges; 
(cid:120) Health and quality of life; 
(cid:120) Genome research; 
(cid:120) A  final  plenary  session  related  to  ethical  engagement  and  participation  in  emerging 
nanotechnologies, the importance of the research integrity debate, disease and health 
as normative concepts, methodological approaches to ethical expertise, and the main 
ethical challenges of the Latvian pharmaceutical industry. 

All  attendees  received  a  52-page  booklet  “Bioethical  Aspects  of  Human  Health”  (printed 
conference theses), which covered the main report topics. 
As  a  result  of  the  conference  and  at  the  initiative  of  the  Latvian  Central  Medical  Ethics 
Committee,  Latvian  national  radio  will  be  broadcasting  several  programmes  discussing  the 
bioethical aspects of health. 

The  Latvian  point  of  view  regarding  the  topics  discussed  at  the  International  Conference 
“Bioethical Aspects of Human Health”, 5-6 October 2006: 

(cid:120) Ethics committees in Latvia (L. Aberberga Augškalne) 

In Latvia there are six Research Ethics Committees, which presented the data about protocols 
reviewed, appointment and rotation of members, training of members and candidates, solving 
financial  problems,  archives  and  documentation  and  problems.  A  general  conclusion  can  be 
drawn about problems faced:

- no support from Government for Latvian Central Medical Ethics Committee;
- informed consent (if more than 20 pp.);
- refused project is submitted to another EC; 
- participation in EC training, training candidates and students;
- no standard payment for expertise, no fixed registration fee;
- paid technical secretary;
- scant public information about research in bioethics; 

36

- need for or lack of additional capacity for archives. 

Issues outstanding:

participation in the organisation of EC training; 
promoting the consideration of ethical issues and informed consent; 

-
-
-    handling guidelines related to bioethics in Latvian; 
-    promoting training and organisation for members, candidates and others; 
-    thinking about the certification of EC members. 

(cid:120) Stem cell usage – the ethical aspects (S. Lejniece)
If a patient’s own stem cells are transplanted, usually there are no ethical problems. But 
autologous transplantation cannot be used in all diseases (restricted possibilities). Voluntary 
donors: family or outside family. The donor wishes to help; his or her free will, not forced - a 
donation in the best sense of the word. 

Private  cord  blood  banking  or  state  cord  blood  banking?  Private:  the  stored  cord  blood 
used only for the child himself or herself, in case of necessity, or for siblings. State: any cord 
blood is available for the sick child who needs it most acutely (in terms of time). There can be 
situations where the cord blood is used for another child before the cord blood donors fall ill. 

Thinking  about  the  treatment  of  patients  from  the  standpoint  of  the  state,  a  cord  blood 
bank should be accessible to the whole community/to specific patients. Private:  used only by 
specific families. 

At  present  many  private  cord  blood  banks  are  profiteering  from  future  hopes.  For 
example, in the future it will be possible to treat also neurological diseases, etc. (no proof of 
this at present). 
Who is the owner of cord blood: the child or the parents? 

Stem cell research, especially research using embryonic stem cells, has come up against 
religious  and  political  beliefs.  The  price  –  destruction  of  a  human  embryo,  that  might  have 
become a human being. Very diverse views. 
What is more important? 

1. Embryos, that might potentially turn into human beings. Reality: in in vitro fertilisation 
at present there are numerous “redundant” embryos that will never be used. 
2. Humans, who have a severe disease and hope for and expect the potential treatment. 
Perhaps this interference has already gone too far? Reproductive medicine, genetics and 
transplantation have faced not only medical problems that need a shared solution, but also 
major  ethical  problems.  For  me  as  a  doctor  facing  a  patient  with  severe  illness  it  is 
important  to  provide  maximum  assistance  to  him  or  her,  not  to  wait  for  the  possible 
production of the “redundant” embryo (which in the majority of cases will not happen). 
For each perspective – its own answer. 

Stem cell research is a branch of science, which studies the way an organism develops from a 
single  cell  and  the  way  in  which  healthy  cells  replace  damaged  cells  in  an  organism.  Cell-
based  therapy  =  regenerative  or  reparative  medicine.  Ethical  problems  –  still  a  contentious 
issue.

(cid:120) Euthanasia (E): pros and cons (V. Sosars)
Good death. Death without suffering. Mercy killing. 
Physically (Medically)–Assisted Suicide (MAS): prescribing a lethal dose of drugs to patient 
(Morphine, sedatives etc.). 
For: Fatal disease, uncontrolled pain, intolerable suffering, severe depression, anxiety, cancer 
fatigue, physical symptoms. 
Against:  Optimal  multidisciplinary  palliative  care  (PC)  offered;  Multimodality  –  different 
treatment methods. 
For: Social problems; financial limits; poverty + fatal illness + concurrent diseases. 

37

Against: Professional  multidisciplinary  PC  offered;  PC  as  a  system  on  different  levels 
(primary, specialised, bio-psycho-social (!) model required). 
For: Not everybody is a believer, existential pain and distress, autonomy, self-determination, 
iatrogenic syndrome: “nothing more can be done”. 
Against: Situations  can  occur  if  patients  are  not  referred  to  PC.  The  existence  of  a  right  to 
request and receive E is always controversial. 

(cid:120) Psychosocial support. 

(cid:120) Spiritual counselling if necessary. Requires professional education! 

Prognosis  is  often  uncertain.  Patients  can  change  their  minds.  Many  E  requests  because  no 
adequate  symptom  relief.  Persistent  requests  –  often  depressive  illness.  Voluntary  E  will 
extend number of non-voluntary E. If E permitted, it will not be restricted to the terminally ill. 
If  E  permitted,  the  terminally  ill  and  elderly  will  feel  at  risk.  Pressure  from  relatives  on 
doctors could be tough. Medical failure could lead to imposing E. Budgetary constraints – one 
of the reasons for legalising E. Political approach – E/MAS: E is the cheaper and easier way 
for the State. Option of E/MAS – fall in PC requirements, standards, and degradation of the 
whole  system.  Good  quality  of  life  is  the  basic  value  leading  to  existential  meaning  and 
motivation  to  live  regardless  of  fatal  disease.  This  can  be  guaranteed  by  an  effective  PC 
system  at  all  levels.  Multidisciplinary  approach,  multimodality  using  bio-psycho-social-
spiritual  model.  Positive  results:  decrease  in  severe  pain,  suffering,  existential  distress, 
disability. Only complete prohibition can avoid all deviations of legalised E/MAS. 

(cid:120) Human health and the respect for prenatal life (G. Br(cid:407)zma)

Conclusion:

The essential characteristic of an embryo and foetus from the moral point of view is 

the inherent potentiality that in typical cases appears as a result of fertilisation. 
An  emphasis  on  rights-based  moral  language  seems  unable  to  deal  with  ethical  problems 
concerning prenatal life adequately, because rights-based moral language facilitates the desire 
to  reason  about  moral  decisions  almost  exclusively  from  the  legal  rights  point  of  view, 
ignoring other aspects of morality, such as values or virtues. Although most moral rights are 
not regarded as absolute, rights-based moral language is leading to the polarisation of views 
and a lack of genuine dialogue. 

There is no contradiction in acknowledging that an embryo and foetus has significant 
moral status, therefore termination of prenatal life should not be regarded as morally neutral. 
Termination of life of an embryo or foetus is not as tragic as the death or suffering of a person 
who  has  already  existing  plans  and  intentions,  and  who  has  engaged  in  social  relationships 
with other people. 

Understanding of different positions and moral dilemmas concerning human embryo 

and foetus should be based on the notions of “value” and “moral status” rather than “rights”. 

(cid:120) Ethical aspects of genetic testing (A. Kr(cid:460)mi(cid:444)a)

The practices of genetic testing are becoming increasingly frequent. Main ethical principles in 
genetic  testing:  respect  for  the  autonomy  of  a  person,  respect  for  the  individual,  privacy, 
informed  consent,  confidentiality,  beneficence,  non-malfeasance,  justice,  equity  of  access  to 
testing, equity of access to appropriate genetic counselling. 
Informed consent for DNA testing: two documents - Information and Consent form. 
Information: purpose, explanation of study and procedure, voluntary participation, withdrawal 
of  samples,  benefits,  risk,  discomfort,  storage  of  samples,  confidentiality  (how  it  would  be 
maintained), new findings, problems and questions. 
Consent  form:  confirmation  of  having  been  informed,  indication  of  limited  or  non-limited 
scope of studies, indication of whether willing or not willing to find out about new findings. 

38

 
Main  problems  in  genetic  testing  related  to  ethical  aspects:  funding,  provision  of  adequate 
genetic counselling when it is needed before and after the testing, quality assurance, education 
of health care providers and lay persons. Important for right decisions on the need for testing 
as well as for understanding its results. 

(cid:120) Ethical aspects of health prevention (G. Anc(cid:407)ne)
In health maintenance three factor groups are interacting:
1.  Attitude  of  person  to  his/her  own  health.  The  person  has  the  responsibility  to  maintain 
his/her health. Does the environment support? Should it support? To what degree? 
2.  Social  and  cultural  environment:  overwhelmed  with  work;  social  life  features  “fast 
culture”;  “fast  time”  (M.  Kule,  2006);  instead  of  elaborating  feelings  people  are  overfilled 
with  sensations;  feelings  of  loneliness,  perilousness,  unsafety;  phobia  of  old  age  and  death; 
anxiety  about  the  person’s  body.  This  is  expressed  in  body  cult.  Life  becomes  more 
superficial,  careless,  less  humane.  To  be  sick  is  not  accepted  socially,  is  to  be  exhausted, 
burned  out,  fatigued.  This  starts  already  in  family  –  childhoods  experience  social  cultural 
processes;  it  is  “ethical”  to  be  burned  out;  through  somatisation  to  develop  fashionable 
diagnoses (C. Ford, 1997).
3. Quality of medical system and physicians’ work: high technological level correlates with 
the physician’s emotional and physical withdrawal from the patient; time pressure, business 
thinking  makes  the  treatment  more  and  more  aggressive;  no  more  time  left  to  analyse  the 
patient  as  a  whole,  only  separate  parts  of  body  are  treated,  no  longer  the  human  being  as  a 
personality.
How much responsibility can we ask from the individual today? And how we can help him? 
And should we help him?

(cid:120) The concept of quality of life and bioethical argumentation (S. Mežinska)

The role of public discourse on bioethics in improving health-related quality of life: academic 
bioethics, professional bioethics, bioethics as form of public discourse (component of “social 
intelligence” - Dewey). 
Improving  health-related  quality  of  life:  health  promotion,  health  care,  environmental 
protection, information and knowledge. 
The  aim  of  the  research  was  to  analyse  the  public  bioethical  discourse  in  the  Latvian  press 
(2002-June 2006). 
Discourse analysis focuses on speech and texts as social practices and on the resources that 
are needed to make those practices possible.
The structure of discourse: Which social groups and organisations are/are not represented in 
the discourse? Who are the authors of articles (journalists, scientists, physicians, philosophers 
etc.)? Whose interests have been represented? 
What is the relationship between the public and scientific discourse? How is information on 
bioethics presented (comprehensively, in a biased way, regularly, as a campaign etc.)? 
The contents of discourse: What are the topics of publications? What arguments and attitudes 
have  been  represented?  How  does  understanding  and  misunderstanding  between  different 
attitudes show? What are the titles of articles? 

39

topics

art. insemination

stem cells

euthanasia

genomics

cloning

topics

art. insemination

stem cells

euthanasia

genomics

cloning

40

30

20

10

0

t
n
u
o
C

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

year

30

20

10

t
n
u
o
C

0

analytical article

reader's opinion

interview

new s

the type of the publications

40

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

argumentation

not included

included

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

year of publication

Conclusions:
A narrow range of people and groups is involved in the public bioethical discourse in Latvia. 
The public bioethical discourse is not influential enough to affect political decision-making. 
There  is  no  close  connection  between  the  public,  academic  and  professional  discourse. 
Extending  the  public  bioethical  discourse  could  promote  health-related  quality  of  life. 
Discourse  is  mostly  created  using  emotional  and  sensationally  oriented  language  instead  of 
logical argumentation. Information on biomedicine and bioethics appears as a campaign – in 
connection with specific events and incidents. There is no reflection on the responsibility of 
journalists, scientists or professionals in the forming of public bioethical discourse. 

Further information 

Dr Laitma Rudze
Chairman of the Latvian Central Medical Ethics Committee 
Email: laima.rudze@voava.gov.lv 

Address
Baznicas Street 25 
LV - Riga LV 1010 
Tel: +371 704 3721 - Fax: +371 702 16 51 

41

Amphimixis

Between the essence and the descent, falls the 
shadow - T. S. Eliot, The Hollow Men 

Although everyone is entitled to their own opinion, I cannot follow the logic of those who are 
saying that a human individual exists from the moment of sperm penetration into the ovum. 
Incidentally  the  process  of  penetration  itself  takes  about  an  hour  to  finalize!  The  Catholic 
Magisterium  leaves  this  issue  open  for  science  to  answer.  It  seems  to  be  pointing  to  active 
conception  or  fertilisation,  but  does  not  define  exactly  when,  considering  that  science  has 
shown  us  that  it  is  a  24  hr  process.  Anybody  with  the  least  knowledge  of  biology,  cannot 
possibly hold that there is a human individual being at penetration, now that certain scientific 
facts  have  become  much  clearer  than  a  couple  of  years  back.  Those  who  contend  for 
potentiality  as  a  singularly  sufficient  reason  have  to  realise  that  this  reason  alone  is  not 
enough. Potentiality must be crossed by actual individual existence to become Act, otherwise 
it  is  still  a  Potency  or  Potency  in  Act,  to  use  Aristotle’s  definition!  As  for  the  argument  of 
process having begun or whatnot, well the whole of life is a process and therefore the whole 
of biological development. Ever heard of the circle of life? If life is a circle, then ontological 
continuity  and  development  is  also  a  circle!  What  is  not  a  circle  is  individual  ontological
development or ontogeny. There is a specific beginning to every physical individual human 
being and a specific end. Our individual life is not a circus. One must take a closer look at the 
philosophy of process itself, but this is not the place for it. 

Donum  Vitae  (1987),  not  to  mention  the  earlier  Declaration  on  Procured  Abortion  insist 
specifically  that  “The  zygote  is  a  cell  produced  when  the  nuclei  of  the  two  gametes  have 
fused”.  Both  documents  produced  by  the  same  Congregation  for  the  Doctrine  of  the  Faith. 
Even the more recent dated encyclical (1995) Evangelium Vitae by John Paul II, clearly states 
that  “from  the  time  that  the  ovum  is  fertilised  (not  penetrated  –  my  italics),  a  life  is  begun 
which  is….the  life  of  a  new  human  being  with  its  own  growth….modern  genetic  science 
offers clear confirmation…that from the first instant (of the human being – my italics) there is 
established the structure or genetic programme of what this living being will be: a man and 
indeed this individual man, with his characteristic aspects already well determined”. 

I have no doubt scientifically that for human individuation to be in Act, fertilisation must be 
completed.  This  is  furthermore  most  important  when  considering  the  new  ways  that 
fertilisation  may  today  be  circumscribed  by  such  processes  as  various  cloning  techniques, 
pronuclear  transfers  between  different  cells,  and  embryonic  stem  cells  obtained  at  the 
totipotent stage! None of these procedures requires penetration of the ovum by the sperm to 
produce  the  full  complement  of  genes  necessary  for  development.  Does  that  mean  that  the 
cloned  human  being  is  not  a  full  or  real  human  being?  No  pronuclear  stages  or  earlier 
development including penetration occurs here! There is the creation of a de facto cell with an 
instant new complete 46 chromosome genome. That would be a dangerous presumption!

42

Back  to  science  which  is  my  field  of  competence,  it  has  been  proven  since  1988  by  Peter 
Brande  et  al  1,  that  the  expression  of  the  newly  established  human  genome  in  the  fertilised 
ovum  or  zygote,  first  occurs  between  the  four  and  eight  cell  stages  of  preimplantation 
development.  It  is  only  at  this  stage  that  the  newly  set  up  genome  starts  to  be  physically 
expressed  (translation)  by  the  laying  down  of  new  polypeptide  proteins,  that  is,  actual 
physical  development  under  the  control  of  the  new  genome  starts  to  take  place.  The  same 
article  proves  beyond  doubt  that  the  development  up  to  the  four  cell  stage  is  directly 
controlled  by  the  prior  transcripts  already  existing  in  the  ovum  prior  to  fertilisation  and 
therefore  maternally  regulated.    This  is  not  to  say  that  before  the  four  cell  stage  there  is  no 
human individual. A living individual is defined by function and form. The observed function 
starts  to  unravel  at  the  four  cell  stage  and  maybe  even  earlier  but  the  form  is  established  at 
amphimixis2, that is the pronuclear coming together in the single cell. At amphimixis, one has 
the  normal  human  complement  of  chromosomes  that  is  46  (23  pairs),  contained  within  one
nucleus (or complete nuclear coming together as both pronuclear walls break down) which is 
the normal human number at that stage of development. Normal human cells at that stage of 
development  do  not  contain  two  nuclei!  Furthermore,  at  penetration,  although  there  are 
passive  catalytic  reactions  occurring  as  in  all  normal  living  cells,  the  chromosome 
complement is 69, which is not normal. That is not counting the 46 chromosomes of the first 
polar body in the same ovum, which may themselves be potentially fertilised by other sperm. 
This  is  not  to  forget  that  before  amphimixis  occurs  there  is  no  coupling  of  transcription  to 
translation processes.

I am sure that with all this scientific and also philosophical evidence working together, one 
would want to avoid the situation similar to where Galileo was forced to retract the statement 
that  the  Earth  rotated  round  the  Sun,  rather  than  the  inverse  as  held  up  to  that  time.  In  fact 
scientifically the former position was shown to be the correct one. One would also be tempted 
to ask whether one may be 100 % sure of oneself to maintain this position. Voltaire had a lot 
to  say  about  people  being  hundred  per  cent  sure.  “Doubt  is  not  pleasant,  but  complete 
certitude  is  ridiculous.  Only  imbeciles  are  perfectly  sure  of  what  they  say”.  However,  as 
things  scientifically  present  themselves  in  a  well  informed  manner,  I  am  conscientiously, 
fairly and sufficiently sure of myself about this matter as are many others. 

Dr. Michael Asciak MD., M.Phil, MP. 
Chairman National Bioethics Consultative Committee. 

1.
2.

Braude, P., Bolton, V., Moore, S., Nature Vol 332 31 March 1988. 
Busnelli,  F.D.,  Genazzani,  A.R.,  Ripepe,  E.,  Fertilizzazione  Assistita.  Una  Proposta  di  Legged  a 
Discutere. CIC Edizioni Internazionali, Roma, 1997, pg 19-32.

Further information 

Dr Michael Asciak MD, MPhil, MP 
Chairman of the Bioethics Consultative Committee 
Email: michael.asciak@gov.mt 

Address
Palazzo Castellania 
15 Merchant’s Street 
MT - Valletta 
Website: www.sahha.gov.mt

43

 
New ethical measures

In Commitment to Research (Government White Paper to Parliament, 2004-2005) the focus is 
on the importance of research for a modern society, prioritising energy and the environment, 
oceans, food and health, while at the same time duly noting that research can have negative 
effects or can be misused. In the context of science and society it notes the important function 
of the ethics committee system. 

Negative effects of scientific and technological developments have been discussed fiercely for 
many  years  within  areas  such  as  fisheries  and  the  environment,  and  more  recently  within 
biotechnology, while there had been little discussion of misuse. In a report we conducted on 
epidemiological research in 2004 we could even conclude that there had been no instances of 
misuse  of  data  from  this  kind  of  research  over  the  past  60  years.  Though  we  had  sporadic 
knowledge  of  cases  of  scientific  misconduct,  it  was  almost  considered  a  non-problem.  This 
situation  changed  dramatically  in  January  2006,  when  a  fraud  case  was  publicly  disclosed. 
The investigation showed that a researcher had fabricated data for several articles published in 
in  English 
very 
(www.rikshospitalet.no/content/res_bibl/6876.pdf).

journals.  The  147-page 

is  available 

reputable 

inquiry 

report 

In the wake of this fraud case there was an intensive public debate and political discussions 
about  possible  measures  to  reduce  fraud  and  enhance  ethical  awareness  among  researchers 
and research institutions. 

Up  until  then  Norway  had  a  functional  ethical  review  and  advisory  system  for  all  research 
areas (www.etikkom.no/English). It had, however, no national organisation for dealing with 
scientific misconduct. Among higher education institutions training in research ethics is also 
highly diverse. Plans to rectify some of these shortcomings that had been made earlier now 
proved useful. Among other things two (competing) legislative proposals had been drawn up 
by  different  ministries,  and  the  ethics  committees  had  completed  a  template  for  a  standard 
contract  for  sponsored  research  and  had  established  different  kinds  of  teaching  modules  for 
research ethics in cooperation with the University of Oslo. The committee on social sciences 
had 
at 
English 
www.etikkom.no/English/NESH/guidelines).  The  fraud  case  re-activated  all  of 
these 
proposals  and  activities.  The  political  process  to  establish  robust  measures  was  rapid  and 
swift.

guidelines 

(available 

revised 

their 

also 

just 

in 

The  Government  proposed  legislation  on  establishing  a  comprehensive  research  ethics 
committee  system,  including  a  national  system  for  all  research  areas  to  deal  with  scientific 
misconduct.  This legislation, called the ethics and honesty in research act (not yet available 
in English), was passed by Parliament in June 2006 and is to be implemented by 1 July 2007. 

A  ministerial  working  group  (with  the  mandate  to  work  rapidly  during  the  spring  of  2006) 
proposed  significant  improvements  to  the  ethical  review  system  so  that  it  could  offer 
qualitative  and  robust  services,  by  adding  new  committees,  strengthening  secretariats  and 
improving conditions for the chairpersons of these committees. It also included a functional 

44

database which will make it possible for anyone to be informed about what kind of research is 
now  being  done  in  Norway,  by  whom,  for  what  reason,  with  what  kind  of  subjects  and  so 
forth.  This  was  implemented  in  the  proposed  state  budget  for  2007,  presented  in  October 
2006.
The  template  for  standard  contracts  was  made  publicly  available  during  the  spring  of  2006. 
The Ministry now urged research institutions to make contracts on the basis of the template 
(not  yet  available  in  English).  The  template  seeks  to  assure  the  principles  of  independence, 
responsibility and public availability in all kinds of sponsored research. 

Regarding  implementation  of  the  measures  dealing  with  scientific  misconduct  it  is  worth 
noting  that  the  reports  and  the  legislation  place  primary  responsibility  on  the  research 
institutions and the Research Council.

institutions  must 

Research 
take  both  organisational  and  educational  measures. 
Organisationally, institutions must have in place some kind of quality assurance for research 
projects  and  they  must  have  transparent  procedures  in  place  to  handle  accusations  of 
misconduct. Any accusation becomes a case which must be dealt with in an orderly manner. 
If  it  cannot  be  handled  at  the  institutional  level  it  must  be  forwarded  to  an  umbrella 
organisation  (e.g.  a  university)  or  to  the  National  Committee.  Institutions  must  also  offer 
ethical  instruction  for  their  students,  scholarship  holders  and  researchers  –  and  ensure  the 
quality of such training. We are now in the process of assembling a survey of what teaching 
courses are available and for whom. 
The Research Council was specifically instructed to contribute to the public research debate, 
and also to make researchers aware of their responsibilities to society and individuals when 
conducting research. Interestingly, the Research Council is also charged with the integration 
of  the  precautionary  principle  in  its  work  on  research  programmes.  Application  of  the 
principle  has  been  recommended  by  the  ethics  committees  since  the  1997  report  “The 
precautionary  principle:  between 
in  English: 
www.etikkom.no/HvaGjorVi/Publikasjoner/pcp).

and  politics” 

(available 

ethics 

Further information 

Prof. Dr Knut W. Ruyter, PhD
Head of Secretariat, 
National Committee for Medical Research Ethics 

Address
Post Office Box 522, Sentrum 
NO – 0105 Oslo, Norway 
Tel.: + 47 23318300 
Fax: + 47 23328301 

Email: knut.ruyter@etikkom.no

Website: www.etikkom.no 

45

Presentation

The  Scottish  Council  on  Human  Bioethics  was  formed  in  1997  in  order  to  address  the 
biomedical topics coming under the remit of the re-established Scottish parliament following 
the Scottish referendum of 1997 and the re-opening of this parliament in 1999. 

Under the Scotland Act 1998, all biomedical matters except those which are reserved to the 
UK parliament are the responsibility of the Scottish parliament. 
Matters reserved to the UK parliament are:

- abortion; 
- xenotransplantation; 
- surrogacy arrangements; 
- human fertilisation and embryology; 
- human genetics; 
- medicines for human use. 

The  Scottish  Council  on  Human  Bioethics  is  an  independent,  non-partisan,  non-religious 
registered  Scottish  charity  composed  of  doctors,  lawyers,  psychologists,  ethicists  and  other 
professionals from disciplines associated with medical ethics.
The principles to which the Scottish Council on Human Bioethics subscribe are set out in the 
United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights which was adopted and proclaimed 
by the UN General Assembly by resolution 217A (III) on 10 December 1948. 

The core purposes of the Scottish Council on Human Bioethics are: 

- To collect and evaluate evidence and information relating to ethical issues in medicine from 
which to inform public debate in Scotland; 

-  To  engage,  assist  and  advise  Scottish  legislators,  fellow  professionals  and  other  interested 
parties with ethical analysis in medicine and comment on these issues; 

- To respond to media interest in Scotland by the release of relevant and reliable information 
and comment; 

- To encourage Scottish society to engage in ethical discussions of relevant topics in medicine 
and biology.

Current work

Preparing  a  response  to  the  Adult  Support  and  Protection  (Scotland)  Bill  consultation  from 
the Scottish Parliament 

Preparing a Position Statement on the “Definition of death”. 

46

Position Statements

- Advance directives 
- Euthanasia
- Assisted suicide 
- Withdrawing or withholding of nutrition and/or hydration 

Publications

- Informing Choice – A New Approach and Ethics for Sex and Relationships Education 
in Scotland, Philip Boydell, Calum MacKellar, Scottish Council on Human Bioethics, ISBN 
0-9546830-5, 2004. 

-  Embryonic,  Fetal  and  Post-natal  Animal-Human  Mixtures:  An  Ethical  Discussion, 
2006, www.schb.org.uk

Annual Public Meetings (Day Conferences)

- Cloning and the Biotech Future (17 January 2004)
- Euthanasia: A Good Death? (15 January 2005) 
- To Be or Not to Be? Exploring the Ethical Implications of Embryo Selection
(14 January 2006) 

Biomedical Ethics Film Festival

- Cloning  Questions:  A  biomedical  ethics  film  festival  on  the  topic  of  human 
reproductive and therapeutic cloning (11-13 November 2005) 
- Transplantation  Questions: A  biomedical  ethics  film  festival  on  the  topic  of  human 
transplantation, organ trafficking and xenotransplantation (10-12 November 2006) 

Further information 

Address:
Scottish Council on Human Bioethics 
15 Morningside Road 
Edinburgh EH10 4DP 

Contact:
Dr Calum MacKellar 
Director of Research 
Tel: 00 44 131 447 6394 
Fax: 00 44 131 446 3348 

Email: mail@schb.org.uk
Website: www.schb.org.uk

47

THE COMMITTEE 

The  ECNH  was  commissioned  by  the  Federal  Council  in  1998  to  monitor  and  evaluate 
developments and applications in the field of non-human biotechnology and gene technology 
from an ethical perspective. As such, its mandate covers all applications of biotechnology and 
gene technology on animals, plants and other organisms and the effects of such applications 
on human beings and the environment. The ECNH issues statements regarding forthcoming 
draft legislation and specific applications for permits of exemplary or fundamental relevance. 
It also addresses issues in the field of non-human biotechnology with a view to assessing the 
ethical  aspects  of  future  legislation  and  drafting  recommendations.  Additionally,  it  informs 
the public about the questions and topics it addresses and promotes dialogue. 

Statements issued by the ECNH are of an advisory nature and are drawn up for submission to 
the federal office responsible for the relevant legislative proposal or permit application. They 
are not necessarily unanimous, and minority opinions are registered as such. The statements 
are communicated to the public, with the exception of approval procedures which are still in 
progress or advisory statements within the framework of an internal administrative procedure 
based on confidential documents. 

The  ECNH  comprises  a  maximum  of  12  members  representing  different  professions  and 
disciplines.  At  least  half  of  these  members  must  be  professionals  in  the  fields  of  ethics, 
philosophy  or  theology.  The  Committee  is  chaired  by  Klaus  Peter  Rippe,  a  Zurich-based 
philosopher.

RECENT PUBLICATIONS AND CURRENT WORK 

Research on primates – an ethical evaluation 

The full report is available in English, French, German and Italian at www.ekah.ch.

The ECNH published together with the Swiss Committee on Animal Experiments a report on 
the ethical implications of research on primates. The general discussion had been initiated by 
an  application  to  the  cantonal  authorities  to  study  the  long-term  effects  of  deprivation  on 
young  marmosets  with  a  view  to  developing  a  primate  model  for  depression.  The  main 
concerns  were  that  (1)  the  animals  used  are  primates,  (2)  the  experiments  were  particularly 
distressing for the animals on account of the associated long-term effects, and (3) if proven 
successful the animal model could be routinely used for tests involving active agents, which 
could increase the number of experimental animals, especially primates. At the beginning, the 

48

central  question  was  the  extent  to  which  the  use  of  primate  models  should,  in  principle,  be 
permitted  for  the  purposes  of  research  into  depression.  However,  it  became  apparent  very 
early  on  that  the  question  of  the  ethical  permissibility  of  experiments  involving  primates  in 
general  had  to  be  discussed.  The  permissibility  of  primate  experiments  in  the  field  of 
depression research was discussed in three successive stages.

The first stage was to examine whether, on the grounds of fundamental ethical positions, an 
evaluation  of  interests  is  appropriate  for  experiments  on  primates.  This  evaluation  is 
contingent on the question of who counts morally, i.e. whom we classify as requiring moral 
consideration  for  their  own  sake.  For  some  the  distinction  between  great  apes  and  other 
primates  plays  a  decisive  role  in  the  discussion  on  moral  status.  The  second  question  for 
determining  the  fundamental  position  is:  How  much  do  those  to  be  accorded  moral 
consideration  count?  Two  variants  were  distinguished:  the  egalitarian  and  the  hierarchical 
variant. Due to their fundamental positions, a clear majority of members of both Committees 
regarded  any  evaluation  of  interests  as  ethically  not  permissible  for  experiments  involving 
anthropoid apes. Accordingly, this position favours an absolute ban on experiments involving 
anthropoid  apes.  For  all  other  primates,  however,  the  majority  regarded  an  evaluation  of 
interests as permissible.

The second stage was to examine the criteria for an evaluation of interests. This must weigh 
the human interests in primate research against the stress to which the experimental animals 
are  exposed  or  their  interest  in  remaining  free  of  stress.  The  higher  the  stress  on  animals  is 
rated,  the  higher  the  requirements  for  grounds  that  justify  the  effect  of  such  research  on 
animals.  The  experiment  which  prompted  the  discussion  used  the  deprivation  method  to 
trigger phenomena in the marmoset’s brains that are comparable to those exhibited by humans 
with  depressive  symptoms.  The  animals  were  observed  to  enter  a  state  of  extreme  stress 
during every procedure. Although no direct life-threatening effects or organic damage to the 
animals can be observed, the experiments have lifelong consequences for the animal’s brain 
and therefore for its behaviour, reactions and ability to learn. This fundamental condition can 
no longer be corrected. On the contrary, it is the aim of the deprivation procedure to induce an 
overtaxing of the adaptability of the animal’s brain.

In  assessing  the  stress  imposed  in  marmosets  one  faces  the  question  of  whether  self-
awareness should be ascribed to primates. Self-awareness is defined as the ability to generate 
a synthesis (a type of conceptualisation) of oneself when experiencing consecutive moments 
of  awareness.  Among  other  things,  depression  affects  the  social  binding  abilities  which  are 
inordinately  important  for  marmosets.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  social  bonding  without  any 
degree  of  self-awareness.  However,  consideration  must  be  given  to  the  fact  that  marmosets 
are used in research into depression because, as primates, they are closest to humans in terms 
of  their  social-familial  structure,  specific  behavioural  patterns,  and  neuro-physiological 
attributes. This begs the question of whether such research at the epistemic level is based on a 
de facto but non-explicit assumption of self-awareness on the part of the primates. However, 
this would mean justifying such research from a scientific standpoint without revealing that it 
is not ethically permissible. 

On the basis of the current classification of severity rating of strain caused to animals through 
experiments, the two Committees concluded unanimously that (1) deprivation of marmosets 
and the related consequences for the young animals should be rated as of the severest level. 
(2)  As  such  it  belongs  according  to  the  great  majority  to  a  category  of  experiments  that 
impose  suffering  to  an  extent  that  is  considered  unacceptable.  According  to  this  view,  the 
permissibility of the experiments fails to meet the criterion of acceptability. 

49

For the minority of members the permissibility of such harmful animal experiments remains a 
question of appropriateness. According to this opinion and under the terms of the current law, 
which  does  not  recognise  the  criterion  of  acceptability,  only  the  results  of  an  evaluation  of 
interests  can  determine  whether  or  not  an  experiment  is  permissible.  Therefore,  the  third
stage  of  the  discussion  dealt  with  the  human  interest  in  the  primate  research  and  the 
evaluation of its weight against the strain on the animals. On the side of the human interests 
the  following  aspects  were  identified  and  considered:  (1)  evaluation  of  research  aim,  (2) 
potential  consequential  problems,  (3)  scientific  nature  of  research  project,  (4)  chances  of 
success, and (5) alternative research approaches.

In  the  evaluation  of  interests  (as  considered  permissible  by  the  minority  opinion)  the 
majority  took  the  view  that  the  work  involving  the  marmoset  model  and  related  application 
pursue  an  important  objective,  i.e.  obtaining  additional  results  on  depression.  It  rated  the 
chances of such an animal model being successfully developed as relatively low. It felt unable 
to  assess  whether  or  not  equivalent  or  comparable  research  alternatives  to  the  marmoset 
model  exist.  The  stress  to  which  the  animals  would  be  exposed  was  rated  unanimously  as 
high. The members also took the unanimous view that the high level of stress outweighed the 
intended  benefit  and  hence  rendered  the  experiment  unjustifiable.  The  two  Committees 
therefore  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  stress  to  which  primates  were  exposed  in  the 
experiment under discussion was unreasonable and that consequently this research approach 
should  be  refrained  from.  If  a  question  can  only  be  effectively  answered  on  an 
interdisciplinary  basis,  then,  from  a  scientific  standpoint,  not  only  a  mono-disciplinary 
research  approach  but  also  a  mono-disciplinary  assessment  of  the  research  experiment  are 
insufficient.

The Committees adopted the following recommendations:
-

Experiments  on  anthropoid  apes  should  be  explicitly  prohibited,  even  though  no  such 
experiments  are  currently  being  conducted  in  Switzerland.  Experiments  without  any 
strain (observing research) should be exempted from this ban. 

- Any  evaluation  of  the  permissibility  of  primate  experiments  must  be  subjected  to  an 
interdisciplinary  review.  The  law  should  therefore  provide  for  such  an  interdisciplinary 
review of the scientific relevance of such experiments and their research objectives. 
- A  study  should  be  conducted  to  determine  whether  the  cantonal  authorities  responsible 
for  examining  applications  and  granting  permits  have  at  their  disposal  the  relevant 
breadth of expertise, and whether institutional changes are required.

- Due to their close similarities to humans and their cognitive faculties, primates should be 
accorded  special  status.  For  ethical  reasons  the  competent  authorities  should  –  within 
their  current  legal  scope  –  only  permit  experiments  involving  primates  with  the  utmost 
restraint.
The development of alternatives in depression research should be encouraged. 
Research  into  depression  should  take  into  account  the  multi-factorial  aspects  of 
depression  and  not  be  conducted  on  a  mono-factorial  basis.  All  institutions  involved  in 
funding research should therefore be urged to insist on applicants ensuring that research 
projects are backed by a good interdisciplinary network. 

-
-

Nanobiotechnology

In  2006  the  ECNH  continued  its  discussion  on  ethical  aspects  of  nanobiotechnology.  To 
structure  the  discussion  within  the  ECNH,  an  external  mandate  was  issued  for  a  literature 
survey  of  the  ethical  questions  raised  by  nanobiotechnology.  The  survey  describes 
applications of nanotechnological developments within the life sciences (“nano2bio”) and the 

50

use  of  biological  material  and  building  plans  to  construct  technical  nanosystems  (“bio2 
nano”).  The  first  part  of  the  survey  discusses  the  huge  potential  of  nanobiotechnology  with 
regard  to  (possible)  applications  in  biomimetics,  medicine,  agriculture,  and  food  science 
(“nanofood”).  The  second  part  presents  the  internationally  discussed  ethical  aspects  of 
nanobiotechnology,  with  regard  to  risks  for  humans  and  the  environment,  justice  (“nano-
divide”), military applications, data protection, nanomedicine, and enhancement. The aim is 
to structure the discussion on an ethically adequate way of dealing with nanobiotechnology. 

The  survey  was  published  (in  German)  in  October  2006  as  the  first  volume  of  the  ECNH 
series “Beiträge zur Ethik und Biotechnologie” (contributions on ethics and biotechnology). 
Reports  written  under  external  mandates  that  are  of  interest  to  a  wider  public  will  be 
published  in  this  series.  They  are  working  papers  for  the  ECNH  and  serve  as  a  basis  for 
further discussion. 

All  statements  and  publications  of  the  ECNH  are  available  on  the  Committee’s  website 
www.ekah.ch or can be requested at the secretariat. 

OUTLOOK

The  ECNH  will  continue  its  discussion  on  the  ethical  aspects  of  nanobiotechnology.  In 
connection  with  this  topic  the  Committee  will  also  look  into  ethical  questions  raised  by 
synthetic  biology.  Applications  for  field  trials  with  genetically  modified  organisms  are  also 
expected  under  the  national  research  programme  “Benefits  and  Risks  of  the  Deliberate 
Release  of  Genetically  Modified  Plants”  (NRP  59).  The  ECNH  has  to  adopt  a  position  on 
these applications from an ethical point of view. 

Further information 

Ms Ariane Willemsen 
Executive Secretary ECNH 
Tel: +41 (0)31 323 83 83 
Email: Ariane.Willemsen@buwal.admin.ch 

Address
Swiss Ethics Committee on Non-Human Gene Technology (ECNH) 
c/o Swiss Federal Office for Environment 
CH-3003 Berne 
Tel: +41 (0)31 323 83 83 - Fax: +41 (0)31 – 324 79 78 
Email: ekah@buwal.admin.ch 

Website: www.ekah.ch

51

CURRENT WORK 

Critical care decisions in fetal and neonatal medicine: ethical issues 

Advances  in  medicine  mean  that  families  and  health  professionals  can  be  faced  with 
extremely  difficult  decisions  about  the  care  of  very  premature  or  seriously  ill  babies.  In 
November 2006, the Council published a Report, Critical care decisions in fetal and neonatal 
medicine: ethical issues. It was produced by a Working Party that included doctors, a nurse, 
philosophers,  lawyers,  a  health  economist  and  advisers  on  the  views  and  experiences  of 
parents and on childhood disability.

The  Report  examines  the  ethical,  social  and  legal  issues  raised  and  makes  practical 
recommendations  for  future  policy  and  practice.  The  topics  covered  include:  guidelines  to 
help parents and professionals make decisions about instituting intensive care for extremely 
premature and seriously ill babies; how the best interests of a baby may be assessed; decision 
making  during  pregnancy  when  fetal  abnormalities  are  present;  the  lifelong  implications  of 
decision  making  for  a  baby  and  their  family;  the  decision-making  process  and  resolving 
disputes; social and economic implications; and information requirements, including the need 
for research.

The forensic use of bioinformation: ethical issues 

The  police  in  England  and  Wales  have  powers,  unrivalled  internationally,  to  take  a  DNA 
sample from any arrested individual, without their consent. The DNA profile is stored on the 
UK’s National forensic DNA Database indefinitely, whether the person is charged or not. The 
Database  is  the  largest  of  its  type  in  the  world,  containing  profiles  from  over  three  million 
individuals. The Council has established a Working Group to consider the ethical issues that 
the forensic use of bioinformation raises. These relate to how police take, store and analyse 
the DNA of suspects, witnesses and victims. The views of the public on the storage of DNA 
in  the  National  DNA  Database  are  not  well  known.  The  Council  launched  a  wider 
consultation  to  inform  its  deliberations  in  November  2006  and  anticipates  that  a  Discussion 
Paper will be published in autumn 2007. 

Public health: ethical issues 

Public health has been described as “the science and art of preventing disease, prolonging life 
and  promoting  health  through  organised  efforts  of  society”.  Over  the  centuries,  it  has 
improved  significantly  through  measures  such  as  vaccination  programmes.  However,  public 
health  interventions  also  raise  a  number  of  complex  ethical  issues.  In  January  2006,  the 
Council formed a Working Party to examine these issues further. Drawing on case studies, the 
focus  of  the  Working  Party  is  upon  the  difficulties  in  balancing  individual  choice  and 
community benefit, and the role of third parties, such as the food and drink industry. The case 
studies  are:  infectious  diseases,  obesity,  smoking,  alcohol,  and  the  supplementation  of  food 
and  water.  The  members  of  the  Working  Party  have  expertise  in  health  economics,  law, 
philosophy,  public  health  policy,  health  promotion  and  social  science.  The  group  will  meet 

52

throughout 2006 and 2007, and their discussions will be informed by a number of fact-finding 
meetings. Members of the public, professionals and organisations were invited to contribute 
to a consultation exercise in the summer of 2006, and over 100 responses were received. A 
Report is expected to be published in autumn 2007.

Supplement to the 1993 Report on Genetic Screening

The Council’s 1993 Report on Genetic Screening remains one of its most cited and frequently 
accessed  publications.  In  August  2006,  the  Council  published  a  Supplement  to  the  original 
Report  to  provide  an  update  on  developments  in  science  and  policy  relevant  to  the  field  of 
genetic  screening.  This  paper  was  prepared  under  the  guidance  of  a  small  Working  Group. 
The  Group  noted  a  significant  number  of  developments  but  concluded  that  the  ethical 
principles  identified  in  the  1993  Report  remained  relevant  for  guiding  current  research  and 
practice. Therefore the commissioning of a new Working Party would be premature.

FUTURE WORK 

Neurodegenerative diseases: ethical issues 

Following  a  Workshop  on  the  ethical  issues  raised  by  neuroscience  held  in  May  2006,  the 
Council  has  decided  to  explore  the  possibility  of  carrying  out  work  on  the  topic  of 
neurodegenerative diseases. A subgroup of the Council has produced draft terms of reference 
for  a  new  Working  Party,  which  will  be  established  during  in  2007.  The  issues  to  be 
considered may include: change or loss of personality and identity; the implications of a “life 
plan”  or  “living  will”;  and  whether  practices  vary  across  different  cultures/ethnic  groups 
within a country. 

Further information about the Council’s work is available at: www.nuffieldbioethics.org.

PREVIOUS PUBLICATIONS:

(cid:120) Supplement to the 1993 Report on Genetic Screening (August 2006) 
(cid:120) The ethics of research involving animals (May 2005) 
(cid:120) The  ethics  of  research  related  to  healthcare  in  developing  countries:  a  follow-up 

discussion paper (March 2005) 

(cid:120) The  use  of  genetically  modified  crops  in  developing  countries:  a  follow-up  discussion 

paper (December 2003) 

(cid:120) Pharmacogenetics: ethical issues (September 2003) 
(cid:120) Genetics and human behaviour: the ethical context (October 2002) 
(cid:120) The ethics of patenting DNA: a discussion paper (July 2002) 
(cid:120) The ethics of research related to developing countries (April 2002) 
(cid:120) Stem cell therapy: the ethical issues – a discussion paper (April 2000) 
(cid:120) The ethics of clinical research in developing countries: a discussion paper (October 1999) 
(cid:120) Genetically modified crops: the ethical and social issues (May 1999) 
(cid:120) Mental disorders and genetics: the ethical context (September 1998) 
(cid:120) Animal-to-human transplants: the ethics of xenotransplantation (March 1996) 
(cid:120) Human tissue: ethical and legal issues (April 1995) 
(cid:120) Genetic Screening: ethical issues (December 1993) 

53

All  the  Council’s  publications  are  available  to  download  from  the  Council’s  website  at: 
www.nuffieldbioethics.org/publications.

MEMBERS OF COUNCIL 

Professor Sir Bob Hepple QC, FBA (Chairman) 
Professor Peter Smith CBE (Deputy Chairman) 
Professor Tom Baldwin 
Professor Margot Brazier OBE 
Professor Roger Brownsword 
Professor Sir Kenneth Calman KCB FRSE 
Professor Peter Harper 
Rt Reverend Richard Harries DD FKC FRSL 
Professor Søren Holm 
Mr Anatole Kaletsky 
Dr Rhona Knight 
Professor Sir John Krebs FRS 
Professor Peter Lipton 
Professor Hugh Perry 
Professor Lord Raymond Plant 
Professor Peter Smith CBE 
Dr Alan Williamson FRSE 

SECRETARIAT:
Director: Professor Sandy Thomas 
Deputy Director: Dr Catherine Moody 
Assistant Director: Harald Schmidt 
PA to Secretariat: Carol Perkins 
Communications & External Affairs Manager: Catherine Joynson   
Research Officer: Caroline Rogers 
Secretary: Audrey Kelly-Gardner 
Information Assistant: Julia Trusler 

Further information 

Ms Catherine Joynson 
Communications & External Affairs Manager 

Address
Nuffield Council on Bioethics 
28 Bedford Square 
London WC1B 3JS, UK 
Email: bioethics@nuffieldbioethics.org 
Tel: +44 207 681 9619 
Fax: +44 207 637 1712 

Website: www.nuffieldbioethics.org

54

 
 
55

Cloning in Public – The future of farm animal cloning 

Mickey Gjerris, PhD 
Danish Centre for Bioethics and Risk Assessment 
Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University 

Introduction
Should  the  EU  introduce  specific  legislation  on  the  cloning  of  farm  animal  species?  In  a 
recent  specific  support  action  —  Cloning  in  Public  —  an  overview  of  the  current  situation 
regarding farm animal cloning was presented. It depicts farm animal cloning research as an 
activity  fraught  with  both  scientific  and  technological  uncertainties  and  foreseeable  ethical 
conflict.  It  is  far  from  clear  how  the  technology  will  be  developed  and  used.  Furthermore, 
applications  in  Europe  and  the  US  may  differ  significantly.  Regardless  of  whether  the 
European  Commission  decides  to  introduce  new  legislation  or  to  rely  on  existing  laws,  the 
area should be kept under observation in the years to come. 

Sheep,  pigs,  rabbits,  cats,  dogs,  horses,  cows  and  other  mammals  have  been  cloned,  but 
success rates are low (1-10%). The way in which success rates and the related animal welfare 
problems evolve needs to be monitored. Are there signs that efficiency is improving? Is the 
range of applications in Europe expanding beyond the current focus on the use of cloning in 
research?

As yet there are no indications that European farmers are keen to introduce cloning. On the 
other  hand,  several  US-based  companies  claim  to  be  ready  to  market  food  products  from 
cloned animals or their progeny, and public authorities in the US appear to be on the brink of 
allowing  products  from  cloned  animals  to  enter  the  food  chain.  How  likely  is  it  that  a 
transatlantic conflict on the labelling of such products will arise? 

The  tasks  of  Cloning  in  Public,  sponsored  by  the  European  Commission  in  2004,  were  to 
provide  advice  on  possible  ways  of  regulating  the  area  and  to  facilitate  public  debate.  The 
project  concluded  in  October  2006  with  a  conference  in  Brussels  at  which  the  results  were 
discussed.  It  was  coordinated  throughout  by  the  Danish  Centre  for  Bioethics  and  Risk 
Assessment at the Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University. The Centre worked with five 
European partners. Outcomes of the project have been presented in a series of reports to the 
Commission and at several international workshops. The relevant materials can be found on 
the project website indicated below. 

Scientific and technological uncertainties 
One  of  the  more  important  objectives  of  the  project  was  to  describe  the  state  of  the  art  in 
cloning technology, highlighting uncertainties in the field. Two particular areas of uncertainty 
figured prominently in discussions at the different workshops and conferences held during the 
project. The first was whether the low success rates of the technology and the serious animal 
welfare problems it involves are merely temporary, developmental features of the technology. 
This view is certainly held by some observers, but others question it. Sceptics here point to 

56

several things: uncertainty about the egg’s ability to handle all the manipulations leading to its 
existence;  the  influence  of  the  mitochondrial  DNA  in  the  unfertilised  egg  on  the  DNA 
material  that  is  placed  in  the  egg;  and,  not  least,  the  influence  of  numerous  environmental 
factors on the development of the cloned individual. Perhaps it is not just a matter of time and 
experience before scientists learn to control these factors. The factors may continue to limit 
the technology as a result of the sheer biological complexity of cloning. 

Another  very  important  discussion  is  about  the  degree  to  which  a  clone  can  be  said  to  be  a 
genetic copy of the “parent” animal. Here some of the same factors as mentioned above come 
into play again. In total 99.9% of the genetic material in the cloned egg originates from the 
cell of the animal being cloned from. This DNA will, if the cloning is successful, be part of 
the genetic make-up of the clone. However, as mentioned above, some of the clone’s DNA 
will  be  derived  from  the  mitochondrial  DNA  of  the  unfertilised  egg  cell  (i.e.  the  cell  into 
which the nucleus is inserted). This is unavoidable, but it raises serious questions about the 
possibility of creating a genetic copy. It is not that 0.1% of the DNA is a lot, but rather that 
the  limited  knowledge  we  have  about  the  function  of  mitochondrial  DNA  suggests  that  it 
plays an important role both in the formation of the early embryo and in influencing which 
genes in the organism will be activated. At the same time it is as yet only poorly understood 
what role the various non-genetic influences upon the organism in the Petri dish, in the womb, 
and  after  birth  play  in  its  development.  The  importance  of  these  epigenetic  factors  and  the 
mitochondrial  DNA  derives  from  the  fact  that  they  might  explain  the  low  success  rates  and 
welfare problems associated with cloning. Equally, these factors raise questions about a range 
of  applications  that  are  often  presented  as  benefits  of  the  technology  –  especially  when  it 
comes to using cloning as a tool within the agricultural breeding industry. 

Possible applications and regulation 
There is also uncertainty regarding the applications of cloning technology. It is widely agreed 
that  cloning  will  play  an  important  role  in  basic  research  as  a  tool  for  understanding  the 
fertilisation process and the development of the foetus; and within medical research cloning 
will be able to play an important role as an enabling technology facilitating the production of 
disease  models  mimicking  human  diseases  —  for  instance,  genetically  modified  pigs  that 
mimic  Alzheimer’s.  Finally,  animal  cloning  has  potential  in  the  area  of  bioreactors. 
Bioreactors  are  animals  that  have  been  genetically  modified  to  express  a  human  protein 
sought  by  the  medical  sector,  most  often  in  their  milk.  Again,  cloning  comes  in  here  as  an 
enabling  technology  which  ensures  that  an  adequate  number  of  animals  with  the  desired 
genetic modification are produced. Common to all these applications of the technology is the 
huge  commercial  value  of  the  individual  animal.  It  is  this  value  that  makes  the  technology 
economically viable despite the low success rates. Likewise, the considerable (and at present 
exclusively  human)  benefits  of  these  applications  are  held  by  some  to  justify  the  animal 
welfare problems currently experienced. 

The agricultural applications of cloning are surrounded by much more uncertainty, especially 
if  cloning  is  looked  upon  as  a  free-standing  technology  —  so  it  seems  from  a  European 
perspective, at any rate. To animal breeders, the advantages of cloning are too small at present 
to offset the many welfare problems and uncertainty about the genetic make-up of the clone. 
Consumer  concerns  also  limit  interest  in  cloning  in  animal  production.  As  implied  above, 
however, the situation seems to be different in the US, although there the strong commercial 
interests involved make it hard to assess claims about marketability properly.

It  is  against  this  background  and  a  range  of  ethical  concerns  about  the  technology  that  the 
decision on whether to introduce new legislation or to regulate by means of existing rules in 
other  areas  (novel  foods,  experimental  animals,  etc.)  has  to  be  taken.  The  ethical  concerns 

57

begin  with  worries  about  safety  and  risks  associated  with  products  from  cloned  animals 
and/or  their  progeny;  move  on  to  concerns  about  the  welfare  of  cloned  animals;  move  on 
again  to  more  socio-economic  anxieties  about  the  influence  of  the  technology  on,  for 
example,  the  structure  of  agriculture;  and  end  with  widespread  apprehension  focusing  on 
animal integrity and the unnaturalness of the technology. 

Whether  the  Commission  chooses  to  regulate  this  area  or  to  rely  upon  existing  legislation 
remains an open question, of course. At the final Cloning in Public conference in Brussels the 
general  opinion  was  that,  as  long  as  farm  animal  cloning  is  applied  (albeit  in  undeniably 
significant  ways)  only  within  basic  research  and  the  medical  sector,  new  legislation  is 
unnecessary.  When  —  or  rather,  perhaps,  if  —  agricultural  applications  become  feasible,  it 
might be necessary to rethink this position. 

Further information 

Dr Mickey Gjerris 

Danish Centre for Bioethics and Risk Assessment 
Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University 
Rolighedsvej 25C, 2. 
1958 Frederiksberg C 
Denmark
Email: mgj@kvl.dk 
Tel: +4525370385
Website: www.bioethics.kvl.dk 

58

59

(cid:40)(cid:55)(cid:43)(cid:44)(cid:38)(cid:36)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:60)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:40)(cid:36)(cid:46)(cid:44)(cid:49)(cid:42)(cid:3)(cid:95)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:49)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:26)(cid:3)

Recent European Commission activities in the field of ethics:

The Ethics and Science Unit in the Research Directorate-General (DG RTD) 

At the European Commission many preparatory actions have been carried out with a view to 
the start of the 7th Framework Programme (FP), running from 2007 to 2013. In the new FP 
more emphasis will be placed on the fact that science is part of, and takes place in, society. 
The  FP  will  introduce  the  Science  in  Society  programme,  which  follows  on  from  the  FP6 
Science  and  Society  programme  but  with  some  new  features.  For  example,  there  will  be  a 
stronger focus on globalisation issues and on the participation of civil society organisations in 
research  activities.  Reflecting  the  aim  to  increase  synergies,  the  Ethics  and  Science  Unit  of 
DG  RTD  has  been  given  a  broader  remit  and  as  of  1  October  2006  has  been  renamed  the 
Governance and Ethics Unit. The new Unit is headed by P(cid:413)teris Zilgalvis, JD, and is placed in 
Directorate L: Science, Economy and Society. Besides the scope of activities already falling 
under ethics and governance, the new Unit will also work on issues surrounding conflicts and 
peace and on fundamental rights and citizenship. The first call for proposals for research on 
ethics is scheduled to be published in January 2007. 

The  Governance  and  Ethics  Unit  has  several  projects  in  its  portfolio  that  focus  on  the 
exchange of information and of best practices. Recently it supported a networking workshop 
for researchers on ethics and governance held in Riga, Latvia on 4 October 2006. It aimed to 
increase  contacts  and  collaboration  between  researchers  from  the  new  Member  States  and 
the  European  Commission.  More  structural 
experienced  project  coordinators  from 
cooperation activities include the Forum of National Ethics Councils (NEC Forum) and a new 
global forum on health research ethics to start in November 2006. The NEC Forum met for its 
8th  meeting  in  Helsinki  on  21-22  September.  The  NEC  Forum  is  an  independent  informal 
platform  consisting  of  the  chairpersons  and  secretaries  of  the  National  Ethics  Councils.  In 
Helsinki it had a joint session with the European Group on Ethics (EGE) on nanotechnology. 
Other  topics  discussed  were,  inter  alia,  the  past  and  future  of  the  Helsinki  Declaration  on 
medical  research  involving  human  subjects,  interaction  between  society  and  science,  and  a 
study on NEC opinions. 
See also:  http://ec.europa.eu/research/science-society/page_en.cfm?id=3161.

Other recent activities include a workshop on ethics and globalisation (Brussels, May 2006), 
which  was  the  final  workshop  on  the  EC  research  project  “Bioethical  implications  of  the 
globalisation process - BIG”, and a presentation on EC ethics activities by P(cid:413)teris Zilgalvis at 
the 8th World Congress of Bioethics in China (August 2006). The last ethics review of FP6 
research proposals took place 2-4 October. Ethical review will continue in the 7th Framework 
Programme, and parallel ethics and scientific reviews are being considered so as to enhance 
the beneficial interaction between scientists and ethicists. 

60

(cid:40)(cid:55)(cid:43)(cid:44)(cid:38)(cid:36)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:60)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:40)(cid:36)(cid:46)(cid:44)(cid:49)(cid:42)(cid:3)(cid:95)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:49)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:26)(cid:3)

Bureau de l’Enseignement de l’éthique in post-doctoral studies, Montreal 

We apologise for this error in Issue No 6: the resource person to contact is Professeure 
Danielle Laudy, and not Dr Hung Phong Nguyen. 

Further information: 

Professeure Danielle Laudy 
Bureau de l’Enseignement de l’éthique 
Tel: +1(514) 343-6879 
Fax: +1 (514) 343-7590 
Email: d.laudy@umontreal.ca 

Address
Université de Montréal 
C.P.6128, Succ.Centre-ville 
Montréal (Qc) H3C 3J7 
Canada

Website: www.med.umontreal.ca/etudes/ethisue.htm

61

European Commission 

Ethically speaking — Issue No 7 

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities 

2006 — 61 pp. — 21 x 29.7 cm 

ISSN  1725-5562 

How to obtain EU publications 

Our priced publications are available from EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu/), where you 
can place an order with the sales agent of your choice. 

The Publications Office has a worldwide network of sales agents. You can obtain their contact 
details by sending a fax to (352) 29 29-42758. 

K
A
-
A
I
-
0
6
-
0
0
7
-
E
N
-
C

The European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies
to the European Commission 

A Newsletter providing information 
on the activities of the National Ethics Committees 
compiled by the Secretariat of the European Group 
on Ethics in Science and New Technologies
to the European Commission 

ISSN1725-5562

EUROPEAN
COMMISSION

issue7

January 2007
 January 2007

