The Ethical Aspects 
of Animal Cloning  
for Food Supply
Proceedings of the Round-table Debate

brussels, 24-25 september 2007

K
A
-
7
0
-
0
7
-
0
4
4
-
E
N
-
C

ISBN 978-92-79-07398-4

How to obtain EU publications

Our priced publications are available from EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu), where you can 
place an order with the sales agent of your choice.

The Publications Office has a worldwide network of sales agents. You can obtain their contact details 
by sending a fax to (352) 29 29-42758.

The Ethical Aspects 
of Animal Cloning  
for Food Supply
Proceedings of the Round-table Debate

brussels, 24-25 september 2007

Secretariat of the EGE
September 2007 

Chief Editor 
Maurizio SALVI 

Table of contents

Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers 
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers 
or these calls may be billed.

More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu).

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication.

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, 2008

ISBN 978-92-79-07398-4

© European Communities, 2008
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Printed in Italy

Printed on white chlorine-free PaPer

Table of contents

INTRODUCTION
The European Group on Ethics 5

ROUND-TABLE REPORT 
Programme 24 September 
Programme 25 September 

PRESENTATIONS
Jean Paul Renard 
Confinement and consumption  
of clones and transgenic animals 

Joyce D’Silva
Animal welfare concerns regarding farm animal cloning 

Michael Rosenberger
Is Power-Dolly our future food?  
Ethical aspects of farm animal cloning 

Irina Polejaeva
Preserving and multiplying the best genetics 

Peter M. Kragh
Science and technology  
of farm animal cloning: state of the art 

David B. Morton
Recognition and assessment of pain, suffering, 
distress and lasting harm (ethical aspects) 

Kees de Winter 
The consumer’s perspective 

Gottfried brem
Bovine cloning in Europe 

ANNEx I 
Participants 
Secretariat of the european group on ethics 

ANNEx II
Powerpoint presentations of the speakers 

7
11
11

15

17

21

27

31

33

37

41

43
47

49

The Ethical Aspects 
of Animal Cloning  for Food Supply

Introduction

In  preparing  its  opinions,  the  EGE  engages  in  broad 
consultations,  involving  individual  experts,  representa-
tives  of  European  institutions  and  other  international 
institutions as well as representatives of civil society. The 
purpose of the round table organised by the group is to 
promote a transparent dialogue between parties repre-
senting different interests.

The European Group on Ethics (EGE) is an independent, 
pluralist  and  multidisciplinary  body,  which  advises  the 
European Commission on ethical aspects of science and 
new technologies in connection with the preparation and 
implementation of Community legislation or policies.

The group is composed of 15 independent experts ap-
pointed by the Commission for their expertise and per-
sonal qualities.

In  December  1997  the  European  Commission  set  up 
the European Group on Ethics to succeed the Group of 
Advisers on the Ethical Implications of Biotechnologies 
(GAEIB, 1991–97). During its first term (1998–2000), the 
EGE provided opinions on subjects as diverse as human 
tissue  banking,  human  embryo  research,  personal  he-
alth data in the information society, doping in sport, and 
human stem cell research.

In April 2001 the Commission appointed 12 members for 
the period 2001–04. During its second term, the group 
published opinions on the ethical aspects of patenting 
inventions involving human stem cells (No 16 — 7 May 
2002), clinical research in developing countries (No 17 — 
4 February 2003), genetic testing in the workplace (No 
18  —  28  July  2003),  and  umbilical  cord  blood  banking 
(No 19 — 16 March 2004).

On 11 May 2005, the Commission decided to renew the 
group’s mandate for a further four-year period. For this 
third term, the EGE was increased in size from 12 to 15 
members. The  same  year,  the  group  published  its  opi-
nion on the ethical aspects of ICT implants in the human 
body (No 20 — 16 March 2005). So far in 2007 the EGE 
has issued opinions on ethics and nanomedicine (1) (No 
21  —  17  January  2007)  and  on  an  ethics  review  of  se-
venth  framework  programme  (FP7)  human  embryonic 
stem cells projects (2) (No 22 — 13 July 2007).

Presently, the group is preparing its 23rd opinion on ‘The 
ethical aspects of animal cloning for food supply’.

(1) http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/activities/docs/opinion_21_nano_en.pdf
(2) http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/activities/docs/opinion_22_final_follow_up_en.pdf

5

The Ethical Aspects 
of Animal Cloning  for Food Supply

Round-Table

              Report

1.  Main goal of the Round-Table

The  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New 
Technologies (EGE) is preparing an opinion on ethics of 
animal cloning for food supply (Opinion 23). As part of 
its preparatory work the EGE held an open round table 
debate on the issues related to animal cloning for food 
supply. The round table was organised by the Bureau of 
European Policy Advisers (BEPA). 

The main goal of this event was to allow stakeholders to 
provide the EGE with relevant data, considerations and 
viewpoints for the finalisation of Opinion 23, which is to 
be published at the end of 2007.

To  maximise  the  interdisciplinary  participation  of  ex-
perts, an open invitation was sent to relevant stakehol-
ders (EU and beyond), members of the National Ethics 
Councils  (of  the  EU-27  Member  States),  patient  and 
consumer organisations, animal protection and welfare 
organisations,  academics,  religious  groups,  NGOs,  etc. 
An open invitation was also published on the Internet 
to allow full and free participation of all interested per-
sons. 

In order to allow active and democratic participation of 
EU citizens, a  public consultation  was  launched on the 
EGE website and the round table was broadcast there (in 
English,  French  and  German);  575  spontaneous  contri-
butions were sent during the round table. 

2.  The Round-Table: The speakers’ contributions

The round table was structured as a set of contributions 
from  different  speakers  representing  different  interest 
groups and as a debate between the attendees and the 
EGE members. 

Around 100 participants attended each day of the round 
table, including representatives of European institutions, 
international  organisations,  religions,  consumers,  food 
and  farm  industries,  animal  protection  organisations, 
experts (in law, ethics, science, theology, etc.), represen-
tatives of EU national ethics committees, etc. 

Invited  speakers  included  scientific  experts,  ethicists, 
and representatives of consumers’ organisations, animal 
welfare and industry. The speakers were:

•	

Professor	 Jean-Paul  Renard,  Professor  of  Animal 
Physiology, Director of Research at INRA, France; 
•	 Dr  Joyce  D’Silva,  representative  of  animal  welfare 
organisation Compassion in Animal Farming (CIWF), 
United Kingdom; 
Professor	Michael Rosenberger, Catholic University 
for Theology, University of Linz, Austria;

•	

•	 Dr	 Irina  Polejaeva,  ViaGen 

Inc.,  Texas,  United 

States;

•	 Dr	Peter M. Kragh, Danish Institute of Agricultural 

•	

Sciences, Tjele, Denmark; 
Professor	David B. Morton, Professor of Biomedical 
Science and Ethics, University of Birmingham, Unit-
ed Kingdom;

•	 Mr	Kees De Winter, Policy Advisor to the Food Depart-
ment, European Consumers’ Organisation, Belgium;
Professor	 Gottfried  Brem,  Agrobiogen  GmbH, 
Hilgertshausen, Germany .

•	

The  round  table  was  chaired  by  Professor  Göran  Her-
meren,  President  of  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in 
Science  and  New  Technologies,  and  opened  by  Graça 
Carvalho, Principal Adviser of the Society Group of the 
Bureau  of  European  Policy  Advisers  (BEPA),  and  Julien 
Mousnier, Chair of the Interservice Platform on Biotech-
nology  and  representative  of  the  European  Commis-
sion’s Secretariat-General.

Scientific  aspects  of  animal  cloning  were  addressed 
by  Professor  Jean-Paul  Renard  (‘Confinement  and  con-
sumption  of  cloned  and  transgenic  animals’)  and  Dr 
Peter M. Kragh (‘Science and technology of farm animal 
cloning: state of the art’). In their view, animal cloning is 
a technology which still needs improvement in terms of 
efficacy and needs further biological knowledge (gene 
expression  mechanisms,  nuclear  reprogramming,  epi-
genetic  factors,  silent  mutations,  etc.).  The  technology 
is, however, rapidly improving and lack of knowledge is 
being progressively solved.

7

Animal  welfare  issues  were  addressed  by  Dr  Joyce 
D’Silva  (‘Farm  animal  cloning  from  an  animal  welfare 
perspective’)  and  Professor  David  B.  Morton  (‘Recog-
nition  and  assessment  of  pain,  suffering,  distress  and 
lasting harm in animals’). These experts underlined the 
consequences for the health and welfare of cloned ani-
mals, for example surgical interference, embryo transfer, 
surrogate mother’s hormonal disruption, abortion rate, 
large  offspring,  high  frequencies  of  foetal  abnormali-
ties (mortal one) and postnatal mortality rates (67 % in 
cloned cattle). The experts agreed that health and wel-
fare are important issues when considering the breeding 
of clones.

Ethical  aspects  were  addressed  by  Professor  Michael 
Rosenberger  (‘Ethical  and  anthropological  aspects  of 
farm  animal  cloning’).  Professor  Rosenberger  summa-
rised  the  debate  on  the  ethics  of  animal  experimenta-
tion  (from  animal  sentience  capacity  to  intrinsic  value 
arguments,  from  metaphysical  to  utilitarianism  consid-
erations, etc.). In his view, the current debate on the eth-
ics of animal cloning is still open and several ethics the-
ories  coexist. The  relevance  of  the  animal  dignity  issue 
was also underlined and discussed. 

The  industrial  perspective  was  presented  by  Dr  Irina 
Polejaeva  (‘Preserving  and  multiplying  the  best  genet-
ics’)  and  Professor  Gottfried  Brem  (‘Bovine  cloning  in 
Europe’).  According  to  these  speakers,  high  interest  in 
animal cloning in farm animal programmes exists in the 
USA and other regions of the world (China, Japan, Brazil 
and Argentina) while the interest of European industries 
does not seem to be so high, due to costs and perform-
ance of the technology and possible EU public opposi-
tion to food products derived from clones and their off-
spring.

The consumer perspective was presented by Mr Kees 
De Winter (‘The consumers’ perspective’). He points to a 
lack of specific data on consumer perception of animal 
cloning  for  food  supply  in  the  EU.  Past  Eurobarometer 
surveys on public perception of biotechnology, howev-
er, show a general public reluctance to accept this tech-
nology when carried out for food production, while the 
use of animal cloning for research and medical purposes 
is generally more likely to be accepted. The importance 
of protecting consumers’ choice (labelling) was also ad-
vocated.

2.  The Round-Table: the general debate

The debate was open and lively. Issues discussed includ-
ed  the  latest  developments  in  animal  cloning,  ethical 
implications, animal welfare and health considerations, 
consumer perspectives, animal breeding and food mar-
ket,  labelling  and  international  trade.  The  main  items 
covered during the discussion are described below.

•	

IVF	 and	 ART	 were	 introduced	 in	 animal	 breeding	
programmes  during  the  1980s  with  no  debate  or 
public  reaction.  Cloning  of  plants  was  never  ques-

tioned and is a daily practice of modern agriculture. 
The public debate on cloning started when the use 
of  this  technology  on  human  beings  was  hypoth-
esised.

•	

The	 combination	 of	 animal	 cloning	 with	 bioengi-
neering  may  allow  the  production  of  added  value 
food products such as so-called ‘nutraceuticals’ (food 
products with added nutritional status, e.g. omega-
3 supplemented, low fat products) or ‘bio-pharming’ 
(e.g. production of proteins such as milk proteins to 
be used for therapeutic purposes at lower cost). 

•	 Animal	 cloning	 is	 a	 technology	 at	 an	 embryonic	
stage  and  still  quite  costly;  however,  its  technical 
efficacy  is  increasing  and  its  costs  are  decreasing. 
This technology may be of high interest for animal 
breeding programmes for the food industry. 

•	

Products	derived	from	clones	in	the	first	generation	
are  unlikely  to  reach  the  supermarket  shelves  (e.g. 
meat from clones). But products derived from their 
offspring  (milk,  for  example,  or  even  meat)  are  ex-
pected to be marketed soon if the technology is au-
thorised.

•	 Animal	cloning	for	food	purposes	seems	to	involve	
consequences for the environment and biodiversity 
and it may make epidemics more likely since genetic 
uniformity  may  increase  the  ecosystem’s  exposure 
to them.

Cloning	may	pose	serious	animal	welfare	and	health	
problems for the cloned animals, including high pre-
natal  and  postnatal  mortality  rates.  However,  simi-
lar phenomena also affect current animal breeding 
practices  but  are  not  being  debated  by  decision-
makers, academia, industry and the public at large.

Semen	 and	 embryos	 from	 clones	 are	 already	 on	
the  market.  Currently,  in  the  USA  6  000  specimens 
(breeding and seed) have been sold on the market 
and  embryos  from  cloned  animals  have  already 
been imported into the UK (cows) and used for ani-
mal breeding. The number of clones in the EU today 
is 120 units and all of them are registered.

The	efficacy	of	animal	cloning	may	radically	increase	
through  the  combined  use  of  different  bio-tech-
niques,  for  example  gene  expression  profile  may 
help the breeding of animals with a higher chance 
of success. However, as far as the industrial perspec-
tive is concerned, performance criteria should justify 
the use of this technology in the food industry, oth-
erwise it is hard to imagine any added value of food 
products derived from animal cloning.

Public	perception	may	be	opposed	to	animal	clon-
ing  for  food,  but  the  market  outcomes  of  this  bio-
technology  depend  on  the  public’s  willingness  to 
buy.  Labelling  is  therefore  needed  to  protect  con-
sumers’  freedom  and  autonomy  but  the  desire  to 

•	

•	

•	

•	

8

buy  food  products  from  clones  implies  a  cultural 
change  for  consumers.  Labelling  ‘alone’,  therefore, 
is not the ‘only’ solution where public acceptance is 
concerned.

•	

•	

Traceability	of	food	products	from	clones	and	their	
offspring is technically hard to achieve. Traceability 
should  be  applied  to  all  food  products  to  protect 
people’s autonomy.

It	 should	 be	 clear	 that	 public	 information	 will	 not	
necessarily involve public acceptance. 

•	 Animal	cloning	for	food	supply	affects	socio-cultural	
(and religious) factors and involves economic impli-
cations  at  EU  and  international  level  (competition 
between small and large food industries, import/ex-
port and trade rules). The positioning of the EU on 
food products derived from cloning will not stop the 
production of these products in other regions of the 
world, with resultant issues related to global trade.

•	

The	discussion	on	animal	cloning	for	food	in	the	USA	
has focused more on consequential considerations 
(safety more than animal welfare or public percep-
tion) rather than an ethics assessment. For example, 
the  forthcoming  European  Food  Safety  Authority 
(EFSA) opinion on safety of animal cloning for food 
will cover animal welfare while the Food and Drug 
Administration  (FDA)  opinion  on  this  topic  did  not 
address that issue. The EFSA and EGE opinions may 
then have an impact not only in the EU but also in 
the USA since they would exemplify an interdiscipli-
nary assessment method which is not the one used 
by the American experts. 

Maurizio SALVI, PhD
Head of the EGE Secretariat

The video of the round table (English, French and German) is available 
on the EGE website (http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/
index_en.htm). Presentations of invited experts are enclosed in the 
conference proceedings.

9

The Ethical Aspects 
of Animal Cloning  for Food Supply

Programme

Brussels, 24 – 25 September 2007

Organised by the European Group 
on Ethics in Science and New Technologies

The round able is broadcast (in English, French 
and German) on the EGE website: 
http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm

24 September

25 September

14H30  Welcome address and introduction to the EGE 

14H30  Welcome address and introduction to the EGE 

round table by Professor Göran HERMERÉN, Presi-
dent of the EGE, and Graça CARVALHO, Principal 
Adviser of the Bureau of European Policy Advisers 
(BEPA)

round table by Professor Göran HERMERÉN, Presi-
dent of the EGE, and Graça CARVALHO, Principal 
Adviser of the Bureau of European Policy Advisers 
(BEPA)

14H50  Presentation by Professor Jean-Paul RENARD, Pro-
fessor of Animal Physiology, Director of Research at 
INRA, France:
‘Confinement and consumption of cloned and trans-
genic animals’ (scientific aspects)

15H10  Presentation by Joyce D’SILVA, representative of 

animal welfare organisation Compassion in Animal 
Farming (CIWF), United Kingdom:
‘Farm animal cloning from an animal welfare per-
spective’ (animal welfare)

15H30  Presentation by Professor Michael ROSENBERGER, 
Catholic University for Theology, University of Linz, 
Austria: ‘Ethical and anthropological aspects of farm 
animal cloning’ (ethical aspects)

15H50 

 Presentation by Dr Irina POLEJAEVA, of ViaGen 
Inc., Texas, USA: ‘Preserving and multiplying the best 
genetics’ (industry)

16H10 

Coffee break

14H50  Presentation by Dr Peter M. KRAGH, Institute of 

Animal Breeding and Genetics of Veterinary Medi-
cine, University of Tjele, Denmark: ‘Biotechnology 
and cloning in animal production’ 

15H10  Presentation by Professor David B. MORTON, Pro-

fessor of Biomedical Science and Ethics, University 
of Birmingham, United Kingdom: ‘Recognition and 
assessment of pain, suffering, distress and lasting 
harm in animals’ (ethical aspects)

15H30  Presentation by Mr Kees DE WINTER, MSc Wage-

ningen University, Policy Advisor to the Food Dept, 
European Consumers’Organisation, Belgium:  ‘The 
consumers’ perspective’

15H50  Presentation by Professor Gottfried BREM, Agro-
biogen GmbH Hilgertshausen, Germany:  ‘Bovine 
cloning in Europe’ (industry)

16H10 

Coffee break

16H30  Discussion chaired by EGE — Contributions from 

16H30  Discussion chaired by EGE — Contributions from 

participants

participants

17H30 

EGE members — Reactions to stakeholders’ com-
ments
Closing comments from EGE members

18H00 

End of round table (first day)

17H30 

EGE members — Reactions to stakeholders’ com-
ments
Closing comments from EGE members

18H00 

End of round table (second day)

11

 
 
 
 
Presentations

The Ethical Aspects 
of Animal Cloning  for Food Supply

13

The Ethical Aspects 
of Animal Cloning  for Food Supply

Jean Paul RENARD

Professor Jean Paul Renard

Director of the INRA Research Centre, 
Paris, France

Background 

1969 
Agronomist, graduated from the Ecole nationale 
supérieure d’Agronomie de Grignon (now the Institut 
National Agronomique of Paris-Grignon) 

1970 
Agroeconomist, graduated from the National School of 
Agronomy applied to Development (ENSEAD) in Dijon

1982 
PhD (Thèse de Doctorat d’Etat) in Animal Physiology, 
University Paris VI (Jussieu)

Professor Jean-Paul Renard is a developmental 
biologist and an animal physiologist with research 
achievements in the molecular analysis of early 
embryonic development and reprogramming after 
nuclear replacement in several mammalian species. 
After the birth of Dolly the sheep, his laboratory was 
one of the first to confirm the possibility of producing 
live offspring from somatic nuclei in cattle. More 
recent achievements deal with successes in rabbit 
and rat cloning and with an exhaustive analysis of 
the quality and safety of clones and their products. 

Ten relevant  publications 

Jouneau, A., Zhou, Q., Camus, A., Brochard, V., Maulny, L., Col-
lignon, J. and Renard, J.-P. ‘Developmental abnormalities of 
NT mouse embryos appear early after implantation’. Devel-
opment 2006; 133: 1597–607.

Zhou,  Q.,  Renard,  J.-P.,  Le  Friec,  G.,  Brochard,  V.,  Beaujean, 
N., Cherifi, Y., Fraichard, A. and Cozzi, J. ‘Generation of fertile 
cloned  rats  by  regulating  oocyte  activation’.  Science  2003; 
302: 1179.

Renard, J.-P., Chastant, S., Chesné, P., Richard, C., Marchal, J., 
Cordonnier, N., Chavatte, P., Vignon, x. ‘Lymphoid hypoplasia 
and somatic cloning’. The Lancet 1999; 353: 1489–1491.

Bellier,  S.,  Chastant,  S.,  Adenot,  P.,  Vincent,  M.,  Renard,  J.-P. 
and Bensaude, O. ‘Nuclear translocation and carboxy-termi-
nal domain phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II delineate 
two  phases  of  zygotic  gene  activation  in  mammalian  em-
bryos’. EMBO J. 1997; 16: 6250–6262.

Chesné, P., Adenot, P. G., Viglietta, C., Baratte, M., Boulanger, L, 
Renard, J.-P. (2002) ‘Cloned rabbits produced by nuclear trans-
fer from adult somatic cells’. Nature Biotech 20: 366–369.

Thompson, E. M., Adenot, P., Tsuji, F.I. and Renard, J.-P. ‘Real 
time imaging of transcriptional activity in live mouse preim-
plantation  embryos  using  a  secreted  luciferase’.  Proc.  Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 1995; 92: 1317–1321.

Thompson,  E.  M,  Legouy,  E.,  Christians,  E.  Renard,  J.-P. ‘Pro-
gressive  maturation  of  chromatin  structure  regulates  HSP 
70.1 gene expression in the preimplantation mouse embryo’. 
Development 1995; 121: 3425–3437.

Thompson,  E. T.,  Christians,  E.  Stinnakre,  M.  G.  and  Renard, 
J.-P. ‘Scaffold attachment regions stimulate HSP 70.1 expres-
sion in mouse preimplantation embryos but not in differenti-
ated tissues’. Mol. Cell Biol. 1994; 14: 4694–4703.

Babinet, C., Richoux, V., Guenet, J.-L., Renard, J.-P. (1990) ‘The 
DDK  inbred  strain  as  a  model  for  the  study  of  interactions 
between  parental  genomes  and  egg  cytoplasm  in  mouse 
preimplantation development’. Development 1990; 81–87.

Renard,  J.-P.  and  Babinet,  C.  (1986)  ‘Identification  of  a  pa-
ternal  developmental  effect  on  the  cytoplasm  of  one-cell 
stage  mouse  embryos’.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA  1996;  83: 
6883–6886. 

15

  
Confinement 
and consumption 
of clones 
and transgenic animals

Jean Paul RENARD

The scientific expertise now available on the health sta-
tus  of  clones  confirms  that  the  few  animals  that  reach 
the adult age can be considered as physiologically nor-
mal and can have the same lifespan as animals obtained 
after sexual reproduction at least from the data presen-
tly available in the mouse model. 

The low efficiency of cloning is largely due to defecti-
ve placental functions. In cattle for instance about 30 
% of the clones die within the first few days after birth. 
The  physiological  disorders  frequently  observed  in 
the remaining ones, however, progressively disappear 
before adulthood. This demonstrates the remarkable 
robustness  of  a  developing  organism  when  exposed 
to  an  altered  environment.  Although  the  welfare  of 
both  the  offspring  and  the  foster  mother  may  be  af-
fected  by  these  pathologies,  careful  management 
of  pregnant  females  is  effective  in  minimising  those 
risks. Standard managerial procedures for clone reci-

pients and neonatal clones have been developed with 
this intent. 

Finally the quality and safety of products (milk and meat) 
from adult and clinically healthy cloned cattle is globally 
similar to normal animals. From a strictly biological point 
of view, the slightly delayed maturation process obser-
ved  in  the  muscle  of  clones  together  with  some  mar-
ginal differences identified in fatty acid composition of 
both muscle and milk point to the need for more refined 
analysis  to  understand  the  underlying  mechanisms  for 
these differences. 

In conclusion, imperfections occurring in the reprogram-
ming processes after nuclear transfer are not fatal to clo-
nes. They are compatible with the production of healthy 
animals which provide an invaluable research model to 
characterise  the  variability  of  the  phenotypes  that  can 
be generated from a given genotype. 

16

The Ethical Aspects 
of Animal Cloning  for Food Supply

Joyce D’SILVA

President of the Compassion in World Farming 
(CIWF) organisation, UK

Biography

BA in Modern History and Political Theory 
(Trinity College, Dublin)

Teacher and Head of Religious Education, 
Bramston School, Witham, Essex, 1977–85

Campaigns Officer, Compassion in World Farming, 
1985–91

Chief Executive, Compassion in World 
Farming/Compassion in World Farming Trust, 1991–2005

Ambassador for Compassion in World Farming, 2005–

Publications 

Editor:  CIWF  magazine  Farm  Animal  Voice  (formerly  Ag-
scene).

1995:  with  Peter  Stevenson:  Modern  breeding  technologies 
and the welfare of farm animals. Compassion in World Farm-
ing Trust.

1998:  BST  —  A  distressing  product.  An  analysis  of  the  health 
and welfare problems of dairy cows injected with BST. Compas-
sion in World Farming.

2000: Factory farming in the developing world. Compassion in 
World Farming Trust.

2002: Farm animal genetic engineering and cloning. Compas-
sion in World Farming Trust.

2007:  The  impact  of  livestock  farming:  solution  for  animals, 
people and the planet. Compassion in World Farming.

Chapters in the following books 

Animal genetic engineering — Of pigs, oncomice and men.  P. 
Wheale and R. McNally (eds). Pluto Press, 1995.

Animal biotechnology and ethics. A. Johnson (ed.). Chapman 
and Hall, 1998.

The meat business — Devouring a hungry planet. J. D’Silva and 
G. Tansey (eds). Earthscan, 1999.

Key  issues  in  bioethics.  M.  Reiss  and  R.  Levinson  (eds). 
Routledge Falmer, 2003.

You’re  history!  M.  Brown  and  R.  J.  Kelly  (eds).  Continuum, 
2005.

Animals, ethics and trade. J. D’Silva and J. Turner (eds). Earth-
scan, 2006.

The future of farming. M. Dawkins and R. Bonney (eds). Black-
wells, 2008.

Papers 

2005 paper to the Prague Workshop on Ethical and Legal As-
pects of Farm Animal Cloning: ‘Farm animal cloning from an 
animal welfare perspective’.

‘Adverse  impact  of  industrial  animal  agriculture  on  the 
health  and  welfare  of  farmed  animals’.  Integrative  Zoology 
2006; 1: 53–58.

17

Animal welfare 
concerns regarding
farm animal cloning

Joyce D’SILVA

There are two ways in which we view farm animals in so-
ciety: firstly, the 18th century view of animals as living cre-
atures with functional value. We see them in terms of their 
purpose, which is determined by us. Or we can view farm 
animals as sentient beings with inherent, intrinsic value. 

The  functional  view  of  farm  animal  cloning  includes 
commercial production of large numbers of high value, 
elite  animals  or  using  cloning  as  a  method  to  dissemi-
nate  genetically  engineered  animals.  Using  cloning  for 
greater productivity will inevitably perpetuate many of 
the serious welfare problems already widespread in hi-
gh-tech farming (e.g. lameness in broiler chickens, pigs 
and dairy cows).

Cloning and genetic engineering of farm animals is ta-
king us in the wrong direction — towards perpetuating 
factory farming when all other society trends point to-
wards  sustainable  farming  and  respect  for  animals  as 
sentient beings. The very aims of cloning are therefore 
an ethical issue. The practice of cloning raises ethical and 
welfare concerns. 

Welfare concerns over cloning of farm animals

Invasive  medical  interventions. These  are  performed 
on Welfare concerns over cloning of farm animals

Invasive  medical  interventions.  These  are  performed 
on donor animals — for oocyte extraction — and on sur-
rogate mothers. Oocyte extraction for pigs and sheep is 
usually  surgical,  with  all  the  accompanying  stresses  of 
recovery.

Suffering caused to surrogate mothers. Pregnancy is 
typically prolonged and cloned calves and lambs may be 
25 % heavier than normal. Higher birth weights lead to 
painful births and often the need for caesarean section.

Abnormal  foetal  development  and  late  pregnancy 
mortality,  leading  to  frequent  death  at  various  stages 
of  development.  Death  in  the  second  half  of  gestation 
is common.

Postnatal mortality. The viability of cloned offspring at 
delivery  and  up  to  weaning  is  reduced  compared  with 
normal  births.  Surviving  newborn  clones  have  altered 
neonatal  metabolism  and  physiology  —  an  elevated 
proportion of them dies before weaning (complications 
include  gastroenteritis,  umbilical  infections,  defects  in 
the  cardiovascular,  musculoskeletal  and  neurological 
systems, as well as susceptibility to lung infections and 
digestive  disorders).  These  animals  have  short  lives  of 
suffering.

Health problems during life. Clones may have a grea-
ter propensity in later life for respiratory problems and 
immune  system  deficiencies  compared  with  normal 
animals. Many clones have died or have had to be put 
down at a young age. Underlying weaknesses in cloned 
animals may not be fully revealed until the animals are 
stressed in some manner.

A study undertaken at the US Department of Agriculture 
and  published  in  October  2005  suggested  that  clones 
may be born with crippled immune systems. 

Inefficiency and wastage of life (this includes embryos, 
foetuses and mature animals — these are killed as part 
of the procedures). A recent paper from New Zealand re-
fers to the process as still inefficient and highly prone to 
epigenetic errors.

The legal situation in the EU. There are two important 
pieces of EU law which CIWF believes should be consi-
dered with reference to cloned farm animals. The Proto-
col on Improved Protection and Respect for the Welfare 
of Animals in the Amsterdam Treaty of 1997 recognises 
that animals are ‘sentient beings’ and calls on the EU to 
‘pay full respect to the welfare requirements of animals’.

The  EU  directive  on  the  protection  of  animals  kept  for 
farming  purposes  (Directive  98/58/EC)  says: ‘Natural  or 
artificial breeding or breeding procedures which cause, 
or are likely to cause, suffering or injury to any of the ani-
mals concerned must not be practised’. 

 The directive also says, ‘No animal shall be kept for far-
ming purposes unless it can reasonably be expected, on 

18

 
 
the  basis  of  its  genotype  or  phenotype,  that  it  can  be 
kept without detrimental effect on its health or welfare’. 
In other words, if the animal — in this case the cloned 
animal — is likely to suffer because of its inbuilt gene-
tic or physiological weaknesses, then we shouldn’t have 
such animals on our farms.

In view of the widespread suffering caused to the cloned 
animals themselves, to the females from whom eggs are 
extracted  and  to  the  surrogate  females  who  have  the 
cloned embryos inserted and who usually face caesare-
ans,  Compassion  in World  Farming  calls  on  the  EGE  to 
recommend a ban on the cloning of animals for food.

19

The Ethical Aspects 
of Animal Cloning  for Food Supply

Michael ROSENBERGER

Professor Michael Rosenberger
Catholic University for Theology, 
University of Linz, Austria
Dr. habil. o. Univ. Prof., Chairman of the Institute

Biography

Date of birth: 8.3.1962

1981–89: student of theology at the University of Würz-
burg and the Pontifical University Gregoriana Rome

1989–95: pastoral work as a priest in various parishes of 
the diocese of Würzburg

1995: graduation Dr. Theol.

1996–2002: Assistant Professor for Moral Theology at 
the University of Würzburg

1999: graduation Dr. Theol. habil.

Since 2002: Ordinary Professor for Moral Theology at 
the Catholic University of Linz

Since 2004: member of the national government’s Com-
mission for Genetic Engineering

Since 2006: member of the German Forum on Animal 
Experimentation for Scientific Research

Since 2007: Rector of the private Catholic University of 
Linz

21

Is Power-Dolly  
our future food?  
Ethical aspects of farm 
animal cloning

Michael ROSENBERGER

Possible aims of farm animal cloning

Is cloning unnatural?

There  are  at  least  three  acknowledged  aims  of  cloning 
farm animals:

•	

•	

•	

research:	 comparing	 genetically	 identical	 animals	
might be very helpful to get a deeper and more pre-
cise knowledge of certain biological processes in the 
organism of animals;

pharming:	there	have	already	been	several	attempts	
(some of them successful) to produce pharmaceuti-
cals or donor organs in animals;

farming:	 the	 multiplication	 of	 enhanced	 animals	
for  food  production  (or  more  likely  their  offspring) 
might ensure (a) quantitatively more products (e.g. 
more milk or more meat) or (b) qualitatively better 
products (better milk, better meat) or (c) greater san-
ity and well-being of the animals.

In our discussion here we are reflecting primarily on the 
cloning of animals for the last of these three aims. Howe-
ver, the following ethical considerations will reflect the 
basic lines of argumentation — and these are not limited 
to one or another type of cloning. They consider cloning 
of  animals  in  general.  Only  the  concrete  questions  of 
Chapter 3 will be aimed at farm animal cloning in direct 
use  for  breeding  and  farming  itself,  leaving  the  other 
possibilities aside.

Consideration in the light  
of basic ethical principles

What  are  the  criteria  for  reaching  a  sound  and  well-
founded  ethical  judgement  on  farm  animal  cloning? 
How  can  we  argue  ethically  considering  this  powerful 
technological  option? These  are  the  questions  the  EGE 
asked  me,  and  in  fact  these  are  the  questions  for  an 
ethicist. Looking at the debate of the last 10 years there 
are several paths of argumentation. I will try to examine 
each of them briefly to draw a final conclusion at the end 
and propose my favoured solution.

First  of  all  there  are  quite  a  few  scholars  who  argue 
in  a  very  traditional  manner  that  cloning  (or  at  least 
cloning of mammals) is unnatural. This argument fur-
thermore is one of the most popular in public debate 
and in mass media. However, it does not hold. Firstly 
there is an empirical objection: Cloning, even cloning 
of mammals, occurs in nature. Identical twins are clo-
nes,  and  they  are  very  natural.  Of  course  one  could 
say: OK, cloning of twins is natural, but cloning an of-
fspring  from  an  adult  animal  is  not.  Right,  this  does 
not  occur  in  nature.  But  obviously  the  method  used 
in  the  case  of  Dolly  and  many  other  cloned  animals 
works. The mechanisms used to produce the clone of 
an adult animal are natural mechanisms. There the ar-
gument of non-naturalism is falsified by our empirical 
cognition.

A second objection against the naturalistic argument is 
the logical one: A sentence asserting that something is 
the case does not allow a conclusion about what should 
be the case. If all cars in London are red this doesn’t tell 
us anything about the colour cars should be. From a de-
scription of what is, there is no logical possibility to pre-
scribe what ought to be. George Edward Moore, the first 
to observe this fact, called the conclusion of an ‘ought’ 
from an ‘is’ the ‘naturalistic fallacy’ (George Edward Moo-
re, 1903, Principia ethica, Chapter 2).

The third and last objection has a philosophical cha-
racter: What exactly is nature or natural? In truth na-
ture is very polyvalent. Is it natural to let a person die 
because he or she has a life-threatening infection? Or 
is it natural to kill the virus and save the human life? 
Nature doesn’t give us any hint about how to answer 
this.  Therefore  the  notion  of  ‘nature’  and  ‘natural’  is 
always  an  interpretation  drawn  from  the  observer’s 
perspective. We don’t have an objective idea of nature 
but describe what we conceive as nature! And at least 
in the context of ethical judgements the notion of na-
ture is more a conclusion than an argument: When we 
call  a  human  act  natural  we  already  consider  it  ethi-
cally correct.

22

Does cloning violate the realm of the Creator?

Also  this  second  argument  is  more  a  popular  than  a 
scientific  one.  However,  many  people  argue  in  this 
way,  one  of  the  most  famous  being  Prince  Charles. 
They  believe  that  cloning  and  genetic  modification 
intrude  into  areas  that  are  the  preserve  of  the  Crea-
tor.  Like  in  the  first  case  there  are  several  objections 
against this argument. First of all — a formal objection 
— this argument will reach and convince only belie-
vers. For non-believers it won’t be valid. We, however, 
have to find arguments acceptable both for believers 
and non-believers. 

A second objection is one of theological character: The 
classical Christian definition of ‘creation’ is: Bringing so-
mething from not-being to being. Producing something 
out of nothing. Cloning, however, is not producing living 
beings out of nothing, but uses living cells to bring into 
life a cloned creature. Hence it can’t be understood as a 
violation of the realm of the Creator.

Furthermore there is a third, biblical objection: The first 
chapters of the Bible (Gen 1-2), which set out the Judeo-
Christian vision of man’s position in the world, describe 
man and woman as co-creators of God the Creator. They 
are allowed and even expected to arrange the house of 
the living and to use their creativity in a wise and pru-
dent  manner,  thus  serving  and  taking  care  of  all  living 
beings.  There  is  no  (material)  realm  reserved  for  God 
himself, there are only (formal) limits installed by the aim 
of human creativity: Creativity should be at service of the 
creatures and enrich their life. 

Does cloning violate animals’ bodily integrity?

The first two arguments against cloning are not very hel-
pful, as we have seen. The third one comes closer to our 
problem of farm animal cloning. Yes, cloning obviously 
violates the bodily integrity of an animal. The exchange 
of almost all genetic material of the oocyte is a violation 
of this germ of life. But what does that mean? May we 
conclude from this fact that cloning is an intrinsic harm 
(in classical moral terminology intrinsece malum)?

Even  in  other  cases  of  medical  intervention  we  consider 
bodily integrity as a means, but not as an end in itself. The 
end in itself is the well-being of an individual or of the com-
munity, well-being understood not as mere physical happi-
ness (empiristic view), but as a felicity in all dimensions of 
life (holistic view). Therefore we accept a violation of bodily 
integrity if it increases and enhances the overall well-being 
of the individual himself or (under certain, very restricted 
conditions) even of other individuals (e.g. if a kidney is do-
nated by and explanted from a living person).

Concluding briefly, bodily integrity is always a necessary 
and important aspect of ethical considerations. Yet it is 
not a basic principle of ethics. Under certain conditions 
and with particular aims of great importance or high ur-
gency,  the  violation  of  bodily  integrity  by  farm  animal 
cloning may be ethically right. 

Does cloning violate animals’ sentience 
capacity?

In the English-speaking world the predominant ethics is 
utilitarianism. This ethical model, developed in the 18th 
century  especially  by  Jeremy  Bentham,  considers  the 
decisive  criterion  of  every  ethical  judgement  the  sum 
of  pleasure  and  pain  which  a  human  act  causes.  If  an 
act contributes to the increasing of pleasure and the re-
duction of pain among all sentient beings, it is ethically 
right. If not, it is wrong. In ethics we call this approach 
‘pathocentric’ or even ‘sentientistic’ — both words mea-
ning that the sensual feeling of all beings is the central 
guideline for ethical decisions. Some of the most popu-
lar  representatives  of  the  animal  rights  movement  like 
Peter Singer argue in this manner.

Applying the pathocentric criterion to farm animal clo-
ning,  we  have  to  consider  the  fact  that  cloning  or  its 
consequences  do  not  necessarily  cause  pain.  The  fact 
that cloning may cause pain to animals therefore is no 
general  argument  against  it.  It  might  even  be  the  op-
posite, that cloning reduces animals’ pain. Furthermore, 
conventional breeding of farm animals may also cause 
pain. Hence, the sentientistic view cannot be a specific 
argument against animal cloning.

23

And what shall we do, we have to ask, if farm animal clo-
ning provides more pleasure than pain for living beings, 
if in other words the sum of pleasure is increasing and 
the sum of pain is decreasing?

Concluding again in summary, the sentience capacity of 
animals  is  always  a  necessary  and  important  aspect  of 
ethical considerations. Their pleasure and pain matters. 
Yet sentientism is not a basic principle of ethics. Under 
certain conditions and with particular aims of great im-
portance or high urgency, the causation of pain in farm 
animals by cloning may be ethically right.

Does cloning violate animals’ dignity/intrinsic 
value?

In recent decades, among philosophers and theologians 
there has been a long and intensive debate about whe-
ther  we  should  or  must  attribute ‘intrinsic  value’, ‘inhe-
rent  worth’  or ‘dignity’  to  non-human  beings  (a  broad 
and detailed overview of the debate is given in: Micha-
el  Rosenberger  2001,  Was  dem  Leben  dient,  Stuttgart, 
131–166;  Michael  Rosenberger  2001a,  Im  Zeichen  des 
Lebensbaums.  Ein  theologisches  Lexikon  der  christlichen 
Schöpfungsspiritualität, Würzburg, 9–14; 193–204; Italian 
edition 2006, L’albero della vita. Dizionario teologico di spi-
ritualitá del creato, Bologna, 40–47; 79–92). The notions 
are different, and one may ask if it is prudent to attribute 
the last notion of dignity — considering its central im-
portance and long tradition within the context of exclu-
sively human rights — also to non-human beings. I shall 
not enter into this question of terminology. Those who 
promote one of the above notions all mean more or less 
the same in terms of content. And that is decisive.

Why  should  we  attribute  intrinsic  value  to  non-human 
living  beings?  There  are  several  answers,  all  of  them 
pointing in the same direction. Paul W. Taylor, the first to 
promote inherent value, argues that every living being 
has a ‘good of its own’ which consists in ‘the full develop-
ment of its biological powers’ (Paul W. Taylor 1981, ‘The 
ethics  of  respect  for  nature’,  in:  Environmental  Ethics  3, 
197–218, here: 199). This good of the animal or plant has 
to be considered by every human actor. 

A  second,  very  similar  approach  to  our  question  was 
established  by  process  philosophy.  Frederick  Ferré,  for 
example, insists on the fact that every living being has 
its own ‘subjective immediacy’. It is rejoicing in the now, 
choosing those things which it considers ‘beautiful’ (for 
Ferré a better word than ‘useful’!). Hence, a living being is 
a ‘center of appreciation and preference’. And he conclu-
des: Every individual which has the ability to value is in-
trinsically valuable in itself (Frederick Ferré 1995, ‘Value, 
time  and  nature’,  in:  Environmental Ethics  17,  417–431). 
The same opinion is expressed by the ‘founders’ of pro-
cess theology, John Cobb and David Griffin: The capacity 
to enjoy one’s own life and even certain things or proces-
ses in one’s environment is a good reason to attribute in-
trinsic value to all living beings (John B. Cobb and David 
R. Griffin 1979, Prozesstheologie, Göttingen, 53–56).

A third very famous approach is that represented by Tom 
Regan. An animal, Regan argues, is a subject of an own 
life  and  therefore  has  intrinsic  value  (Tom  Regan,  The 
case for animal rights).

In the German-speaking world it was Friedo Ricken who 
rediscovered the Aristotelian view. Aristotle attributes a 
‘soul’ to every living being because it has a certain auto-
nomy to realise its own aims and follow its own purposes 
(De anima II 4, 415a 14–416b 20). Aristotle’s ‘soul’ (which 
has  to  be  well  distinguished  from  Plato’s  eternal  soul!) 
therefore is only another word for Regan’s ‘subject of an 
own life’. Ricken points that out and draws the same con-
clusion as Paul Taylor: Every living being has intrinsic va-
lue (Friedo Ricken 1987, ‘Anthropozentrismus oder Bio-
zentrismus?  Begründungsprobleme  der  ökologischen 
Ethik’, in: Theologie und Philosophie 62, 1–21).

From a theological point of view the philosophical re-
flections may be confirmed and deepened. The Chri-
stian belief in a unique and universal Creator sees an 
immediate relation between the Creator and his cre-
atures.  All  creatures  are  created  by  God,  appreciated 
as  good  and  valuable  and  included  in  His  promise 
of  salvation.  Therefore  creatures  have  intrinsic  value 
(Hans J. Münk 1997, ‘Die Würde des Menschen und die 
Würde der Natur’: StZ 215, 17–29). Believing in God in-
cludes  the  conviction  that  God  sees  and  appreciates 

24

every  one  of  His  creatures  (Michael  Schramm  1994, 
‘Aisthetische  Mystik  der  Natur.  Schöpfungsethische 
Perspektiven’, in: Michael Schramm/Udo Zelinka (eds), 
Um des Menschen willen. Moral und Spiritualität, Würz-
burg, 208–229).

Looking at the debate it seems evident that the tenden-
cy  to  attribute  intrinsic  value  to  animals  is  irreversible. 
However, what does that mean? What are the practical 
consequences  if  we  accept  an  intrinsic  worth  of  living 
beings? They are very simple, and we can get the best 
orientation  if  we  look  at  Immanuel  Kant’s  analogous 
conclusions from the attribution of dignity to mankind 
(cf. Immanuel Kant, Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sit-
ten,  AA  IV,  428–431;  435–436).  If  a  subject  has  dignity 
we must not treat him or her as a mere object, but have 
to consider him or her also as a subject. In the so-called 
‘humanity  formula’  of  his  categorical  imperative,  Kant 
formulates it this way: Act in a manner that you consider 
human beings not only as means, but at the same time 
also as ends in themselves. In other words: An individual 
to which we attribute dignity or intrinsic value is a ‘moral 
patient’  towards  whom  we  have  direct  obligations. We 
owe respect to him or her, and that means: We have to 
do justice to him or her, weighing or balancing his/her 
good  and  harm  fairly  against  ours  and  those  of  other 
moral patients.

NB: Attributing dignity or intrinsic value to an individual 
does not mean that this individual has the same rights 
as human beings. It means only that his/her rights have 
to be considered with the same attention and respect as 
the rights of humans. And a second aspect demanding 
our attention: Attributing intrinsic value to animals does 
not mean that we must not use them for our own purpo-
ses. Of course we may — as we use other human beings 
for our own purposes! The decisive point is that we must 
not  consider  other  individuals  with  intrinsic  value  as 
mere means for our purposes — we always have to keep 
in mind that they are subjects with their own needs, own 
interests, own good and aims.

Balancing good and harm fairly
If the decisive point for human acts involving animals is 
the  balancing  of  their  good  and  harm  fairly,  if  in  other 

words  we  have  to  do  justice  to  animals  as  we  have  to 
do justice to other human beings involved in an action, 
then the central question for an ethical evaluation of clo-
ning farm animals is: Who are the subjects involved? And 
what  are  the  possible  realms  of  their  good  and  harm? 
In  answering  these  questions  I  would  list  primarily  the 
following groups and aspects.

•	 Animals	 (including	 at	 least	 those	 directly	 involved,	
i.e.  the  cloned  animals,  the  donors  of  oocytes,  the 
surrogate mothers and the offspring of clones!): We 
have  to  consider  the  positive  and  negative  conse-
quences  of  cloning  for  their  welfare  and  bodily  in-
tegrity,  for  their  physical  and  psychical  well-being 
including pain and pleasure.

•	

•	

Environment:	We	should	discuss	here	the	environmen-
tal impact of certain types of cloned animals living in 
stables or even outside on pasture land. What are the 
negative or even positive effects of these animals?

Producers	 (including	 the	 cloning	
industry,	 the	
breeders  of  cloned  animals  and  the  farmers  using 
offspring of cloned animals): In regard to producers 
we  have  to  consider  the  possible  economic  profit 
and  the  technological  progress  (or  regression?)  at-
tained  by  cloning  for  the  single  groups  of  produc-
ers. Also the question of a possible reduction of farm 
animal  biodiversity  (cf.  the  alarm  expressed  by  the 
FAO on 4 September 2007) is primarily an economic 
question concerning the farmers (and indirectly also 
a question of animal welfare).

•	 Alternative	competitors:	Modern	democracies	have	
a relatively free market. However, there is also a cer-
tain regulation of this market with the help of rules 
established  by  political  institutions  (single  states, 
European Union, World Trade Organization and oth-
ers). These rules try to ensure fair conditions for all 
competitors  on  the  market.  In  the  perspective  of 
farm  animal  cloning,  politics  have  to  ensure  such 
conditions  for  alternative  competitors  who  don’t 
want  to  use  cloning  methods  for  breeding.  In  par-
ticular, ecological farmers have an equal right of fair 
access to the market. 

25

	•	 Consumers:	 Already	 in	 the	 context	 of	 genetically	
modified food, politicians have had to pay much at-
tention to consumers’ rights. These include aspects 
of  food  hygiene  and  safety  (ensured  by  efficient 
mechanisms of control and risk assessment) on the 
one  hand  and  aspects  of  transparent  information 
and free choice (ensured, for example, by labelling 
the  products)  on  the  other.  Consumers  should  be 
able  to  decide  themselves  what  they  want  to  buy 
and to eat. 

Beyond these different aspects, however, there is a ba-
sic question we should examine and answer first of all: 
What is our model of future agriculture? Do and can we 
really  want  agriculture  to  become  increasingly  similar 
to industry? Is it reasonable and ethically responsible to 
develop agriculture more and more in the sense of agro-
technology?  Would  such  a  development  really  suffice 
and serve the many social, ecological and cultural needs 
of  our  planet?  And,  focusing  on  animals  and  cloning, 
isn’t farm animal cloning ‘yet another move away from 
regarding animals as animals’ (Michael Appleby)? 

Certainly these concerns are no sufficient reason to for-
bid farm animal cloning generally. However, they are a 
strong  motive  for  setting  positive  incentives  in  the  di-
rection of another model of agriculture — considering 
the farmer as a person sensitive to the needs of the en-
vironment and the creatures and primarily working for 
the culture of our fields, woods, animals and landscape 
and  —  biblically  speaking  —  cultivating  and  guarding 
the  wonderful  garden  of  Earth.  Such  incentives  in  the 
case of the EU may be set both by establishing quality 
labels and by funding the ecological efforts of farmers. 
But they have to be based on a common vision of future 
agriculture. My impression is that we are only beginning 
the  search  for  this  vision.  Confronted  with  the  possibi-
lities of agro-technology and breeding technology, this 
search is more important than ever.

26

The Ethical Aspects 
of Animal Cloning  for Food Supply

Irina POLEJAEVA

Dr Irina Polejaeva, ViaGen Inc., Texas, USA

Biography

Chief  Scientific  Officer  —  Dr  Polejaeva  joined ViaGen 
in October 2002 as its Director of Assisted Reproductive 
Technology  and  was  later  promoted  to  Chief  Scientific 
Officer.  Prior  to  joining Viagen,  Dr  Polejaeva  was  Head 
of  the  Cell  Biology  Group  and  project  manager  for  the 
porcine  nuclear  transfer  programme  at  PPL  Therapeu-
tics  Inc.  Dr  Polejaeva  is  one  of  the  pioneers  of  somatic 
cell nuclear transfer (SCNT). Her work led to the birth of 
the world’s first cloned pigs by SCNT and the birth of the 
world’s first 1,3-galactosyltransferase deficient pigs, sub-
sequently published in Nature, Nature Biotechnology and 
Science. Dr Polejaeva is an active member of the Interna-
tional Embryo Transfer Society (IETS) and serves on the 
Health and Safety Advisory Board. She holds a masters 
degree in animal science from Kubanski Agricultural Uni-
versity in Russia and a doctorate in developmental and 
stem cell biology from the National Institute of Animal 
Science  in  Moscow.  She  completed  her  post-doctoral 
training at Dr Kenneth White’s laboratory at Utah State 
University.

27

Preserving  
and multiplying  
the best genetics

Irina POLEJAEVA

Prior  to  the  initial  report  by  Wilmut  [1]  describing  the 
successful  production  of  a  cloned  sheep  (Dolly)  by  so-
matic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT), cloning animals from 
adult cell nuclei was thought to be biologically impossi-
ble. Considering the history, the progress that has been 
made  in  the  development  and  application  of  cloning 
technology  is  astonishing. The  number  of  somatic  cell 
cloned  animals  born  worldwide  has  increased  into  the 
hundreds.  The  technique  has  been  successfully  used 
in at least 17 different species (sheep, cattle, mice, pig, 
goat,  deer,  horse,  mule,  rat,  domestic  cat,  African  wild 
cat, dog, wolf, water buffalo, rabbit, European mouflon 
and ferret).

Assisted reproductive technologies

Cloning  is  an  emerging  assisted  reproductive  techno-
logy  that  has  the  potential  to  greatly  enhance  current 
agricultural  practices.  Assisted  reproductive  technolo-
gies (ARTs) have a very long history, for example artificial 
insemination  has  been  employed  for  several  hundred 
years, and some others (embryo transfer, IVF, embryo fre-
ezing) have been extensively used in livestock breeding 
for decades. SCNT does not require fertilisation and the-
refore it allows for the propagation of proven genotypes 
without ‘genetic reshuffling’.

Reproductive performance of clones

The  likelihood  of  human  consumption  of  meat  from 
clones is low. Cloning will likely be utilised to reproduce 
elite animals for greater dissemination of their genetics, 
and food products will be derived from their conventio-
nally  produced  offspring. Therefore,  it  is  critical  to  eva-
luate the reproductive performance of clones and grow-
th characteristics of their offspring. Several studies have 
indicated  that  cloned  animals  have  normal  reproducti-
ve  characteristics  [2–8]. The  reproductive  performance 
of  clones,  including  production  of  semen  or  embryos, 
conception  rates  and  gestation  length,  was  apparently 
normal. No difference was reported for litter size in pigs, 
birth weight, peri- and pre-weaning mortality between 
matings of clones and conventional pigs [7, 8]. Further-

more, the progeny of cloned animals exhibited normal 
phenotypic characteristics, and their growth, health and 
hematological  parameters  were  comparable  to  normal 
age-matched control animals [2–8].

Food safety

The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is conduc-
ting a risk assessment on the safety of products from clo-
ned animals and their offspring. The FDA draft risk asses-
sment [9] includes agency analysis of more than 400 US 
and international scientific studies on livestock cloning, 
including  two  reviews  by  the  US  National  Academy  of 
Sciences  [10].  The  document  demonstrates  unequivo-
cally  that  there  is  no  difference  between  the  safety  of 
food from cloned animals or their progeny and the sa-
fety of food from other animals (whether bred naturally 
or  through  common  ARTs  such  as  in  vitro  fertilisation, 
artificial insemination, embryo splitting or embryo tran-
sfer) or their progeny.

Both meat and milk from animals produced by nuclear 
transfer have been analysed in a number of studies and 
in  all  instances  have  been  shown  to  possess  a  similar 
composition and were within the normal range for the 
breed  [11–19].  Furthermore,  a  feeding  trial  in  rats  de-
monstrated that the consumption of meat from cloned 
animals had no effect on body growth, food intake, ge-
neral condition, locomotor activity, reflexes, sexual cycle, 
urinalysis, hematology, blood biochemistry, or histology 
[12,15,19].

Agricultural applications

Commercial  applications  involve  employing  SCNT  for 
the expansion of elite genetics, the propagation of lost 
genetics and the protection of genetics in the event of 
a catastrophe such as foot-and-mouth disease. The be-
nefit of cloning high-quality individuals will be to incre-
ase the number of descendents of elite genotypes in the 
breeding population via enhanced and prolonged pro-
duction  of  a  large  number  of  offspring.  Previously  po-
pulation outliers had insignificant impact on the mean. 

28

SCNT  can  amplify  the  impact  of  unique  genotypes  on 
the population. Regardless of the trait of interest (whe-
ther it’s increased feed efficiency, reduced waste, disea-
se resistance (e.g. mastitis) or any other economic, pro-
environment or animal welfare traits), cloning can offer 
significant  genetic  improvement  and  rapidly  increase 
quality and consistency of a herd. Thus, the greatest im-
mediate impact on animal breeding may be that it redu-
ces genetic lag.

Because of the promise of the technology,  many bree-
ders  have  expressed  strong  interest  in  using  this  tech-
nology  to  improve  the  quality  of  their  breeding  stock. 
As  with  most  technologies,  realising  this  potential  has 
taken longer and been more arduous than originally an-
ticipated. Livestock cloning today, however, has reached 
the  stage  where  commercial-scale  cloning  is  feasible 
and realistic.

References

[6]  Savage,  A.  F.,  Maull,  J., Tian,  x.  C.  et  al. ‘Behavioral 
observations of adolescent Holstein heifers cloned 
from adult somatic cells’. Theriogenology 2003; 60: 
1097–110.

[7]  Williams,  N.  E., Walker,  S.  C.,  Reeves,  D.  E.  et  al. ‘A 
comparison  of  reproductive  characteristics  of 
boars  generated  by  somatic  cell  nuclear  transfer 
to  highly  related  conventionally  produced  boars’. 
Cloning and Stem Cells 2006; 8: 130–139.

[8]  Martin, M., Adams, C., Wiseman, B. et al. ‘Pre-wean-
ing performance and health of pigs born to cloned 
(fetal cell derived) swine versus non-cloned swine’. 
Theriogenology 2004; 62: 113–122.

[9] 

Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Animal clon-
ing:  a  draft  risk  assessment.  Rockville  MD:  United 
States Food and Drug Administration, 2006. Web-
site: http://www.fda.gov/cvm/Documents/CLRAES.
doc/

[1]  Wilmut,  I.,  Schnieke,  A.  E.,  McWhir,  J.  et  al. ‘Viable 
offspring derived from fetal and adult mammalian 
cells’. Nature 1997; 385: 810–813.

[2]  Ortegon, H, Betts, D. H., Lin, L. et al. ‘Genomic stabil-
ity and physiological assessments of live offspring 
sired  by  a  bull  clone’,  Starbuck  II.  Theriogenology 
2007; 67: 116–126.

[3]  Panarace,  M.,  Aguero,  J.  I.,  Garrote,  M.  et  al. ‘How 
healthy  are  clones  and  their  progeny:  five  years 
of  field  experience’.  Theriogenology  2007;  67: 
142–151.

[4]  Enright, B. P., Taneja, M., Schreiber, D. et al. ‘Repro-
ductive  characteristics  of  cloned  heifers  derived 
from  adult  somatic  cells’.  Biol.  Reprod.  2002;  66: 
291–297.

[10]  National Academy of Science. Safety of genetically 
engineered  foods:  approaches  to  assessing  unin-
tended  health  effects.  Sub-report  on  methods  and 
mechanisms of genetic manipulation and cloning of 
animals. The National Academic Press, Washington, 
DC, 217–235.

[11]  Norman, H. D., Lawlor, T. J., Wright, J. R. and Powell, 
R. L. ‘Performance of Holstein clones in the United 
States’. J. Dairy Sci. 2004; 87: 729–738.

[12]  Takahashi,  S.  and  Ito, Y. ‘Evaluation  of  meat  prod-
ucts from cloned cattle: biological and biochemical 
properties’. Cloning Stem Cells 2004; 6: 165–171.

[13]  Tian, x. C., Kubota, C., Sakashita, K. et al. ‘Meat and 
milk  compositions  of  bovine  clones’.  Proc.  Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 2005; 102: 6261–6266.

[5]  Heyman, Y.,  Richard,  C.,  Rodriguez-Martinez,  H.  et 
al. ‘Zootechnical performance of cloned cattle and 
offspring:  preliminary  results’.  Cloning  Stem  Cells 
2004; 6: 111–120.

[14]  Walsh, M. K., Lucey, J. A., Govindasamy-Lucey, S. et 
al. ‘Comparison  of  milk  produced  by  cows  cloned 
by  nuclear  transfer  with  milk  from  non-cloned 
cows’. Cloning Stem Cells 2003; 5: 213–219.

29

[15]  Tome, D., Dubarry, M. and Fromentin, G. ‘Nutritional 
value of milk and meat products derived from clon-
ing’. Cloning Stem Cells 2004; 6: 172–177.

[16]  Heyman,  Y.,  Chavatte-Palmer,  P.,  Berthlot,  V.  et  al. 
‘Assessing the quality of products from cloned cat-
tle: an integrative approach’. Theriogenology 2007; 
67: 134–141.

[17]  Laible,  G.,  Brophy,  B.,  Knighton,  D.  et  al. ‘Compo-
sitional  analysis  of  dairy  products  derived  from 
clones  and  cloned  transgenic  cattle’.  Theriogenol-
ogy 2007; 67: 166–177.

[18]  Walker,  S.  C.,  Christenson,  R.  K.,  Reeves,  R.  P.  et  al. 
‘Comparison  of  meat  composition  from  offspring 
of cloned and conventionally produced boars’. The-
riogenology 2007; 67: 178–184.

[19]  Yamaguchi,  M.,  Ito, Y.  and Takahashi,  S. ‘Fourteen-
week  feeding  test  of  meat  and  milk  derived  from 
cloned  cattle  in  the  rat’.  Theriogenology  2007;  67: 
152–165.

30

The Ethical Aspects 
of Animal Cloning  for Food Supply

Peter M. KRAGh

Dr Peter Kragh, Danish Institute of Agricultural 
Studies, Tjele, Denmark

Biography

Born 23 November 1971 in Denmark.

Studied  biology  and  obtained  a  PhD  in  2006  from  the 
Faculty  of  Health  Sciences,  University  of  Aarhus,  Den-
mark,  about  porcine  somatic  cell  nuclear  transfer  and 
transgenesis. Employed as a post-doc at the University 
of Aarhus.

Area of research
Somatic cell nuclear transfer in bovine and porcine with a 
simplified, micromanipulator-free method, connected to 
cryopreservation and improvements in reprogramming 
and embryo culture. The purpose of porcine cloning is 
to establish animal models for various human diseases 
(e.g.  Alzheimer’s  disease)  by  both  random  integration 
of transgenes and targeted modification of the porcine 
genome.

Publications 

Kragh, P. M., Pedersen, C. B., Schmidt, S. P., Winter, V. S., Vajta, 
G.,  Gregersen,  N.,  Bolund,  L.  and  Corydon,  T.  J. ‘Expression 
of  human  short-chain  acyl-CoA  dehydrogenase  (SCAD)  in 
transgenic mice’. Mol. Genet. Metab., 91(2): 128–37, 2007.

Li, J., Du, Y., Zhang, Y., Kragh, P. M., Purup, S., Bolund, L., Yang, 
H.,  xue,  Q.  Z.  and  Vajta,  G. ‘Chemically  assisted  handmade 
enucleation of porcine oocytes’. Cloning and Stem Cells 8(4): 
241–50, 2006.

Kragh, P. M., Du, Y., Corydon, J., Purup, S., Bolund, L. and Va-
jta, G. ‘Efficient in vitro production of porcine blastocysts by 
handmade cloning with combined electric and chemical ac-
tivation’. Theriogenology 64: 1536–45, 2005.

Vajta, G., Kragh, P. M., Mtango, N. R. and Callesen, H. ‘Hand-
made cloning approach: potentials and limitations’. Reprod. 
Fertil. Dev. 17: 97–112, 2005.

Kragh, P. M., Vajta, G., Corydon, J., Bolund, L. and Callesen, H. 
‘Production of transgenic porcine blastocysts by handmade 
cloning’. Reprod. Fertil. Dev. 16: 1–4, 2004.

31

Science and technology 
of farm animal cloning: 
state of the art

Peter M. KRAGh

In cloning by somatic cell nuclear transfer, the genome 
from  an  unfertilised  egg  is  removed  and  instead  the 
nucleus  of  a  somatic  donor  cell  from  a  donor  animal 
is  inserted  into  the  enucleated  egg. The  reconstructed 
embryo may then develop into the cloned animal after 
transfer to a recipient foster mother.

Importantly,  genetic  modification  may  be  done  in  the 
donor cell before the cloning, resulting in a genetically 
modified animal.

The principles are the same for cloning of all farm animal 
species including pigs, cattle, horses and sheep.

Cloned animals are used mainly in biomedicine to pro-
duce models of genetic diseases, organs for transplanta-
tion and medicine in, for example, milk.

Moreover, in agriculture, cloning may be used to increa-
se copies of important animals for breeding or conserva-
tion. But the major achievements may lie in the produc-
tion  of  genetically  modified  animals  with,  for  example, 
altered nutritional status, resistance to diseases like BSE, 
or animals that produce fewer waste products harmful 
to the environment.

Traditionally cloning is performed by means of microma-
nipulation where the chromosomes of the egg are remo-
ved and the donor cell is inserted into the egg by fine ne-
edles. This method requires very expensive equipment.

With Gábor Vajta we have developed the handmade clo-
ning technique, where all steps are performed by hand. 
The technique is cheap in regard to equipment.

The blastocysts produced after in vitro culture of handma-
de cloned embryos are of high quality, and importantly 
have  high  in  vivo  developmental  capacities  as  seen  by 
the birth of both normal healthy calves and normal he-
althy piglets with normal litter sizes. The major goal of 
our research is to produce pig models of human genetic 
diseases, and we have now produced cloned pigs with a 
human gene for Alzheimer’s disease inserted.

32

In  cloning,  different  abnormalities  have  been  reported 
in the F0 generation, including overgrowth of newborns 
and  different  kinds  of  malformations.  The  reasons  for 
this  may  be  varied,  including  quality  of  the  biological 
material  (egg  and  donor  cells)  and  the  cloning  techni-
que  itself. The  major  explanation  is  believed  to  be  the 
epigenetic reprogramming of the donor cell genome.

What is reprogramming? Cells of one individual have the 
same  genetic  material,  the  chromosomes  with  a  DNA 
strand representing the genetic code. On top of that all 
cell  types  have  an  epigenetic  code  of  methylation  and 
acetylation of the DNA and proteins attached to the DNA. 
This makes a cell, for example a skin cell. During cloning 
the epigenetic programme of the donor cell, e.g. a skin 
cell,  needs  to  be  reprogrammed,  so  the  reconstructed 
cloned embryo will be able to develop into a new animal 
with all types of cells.

It  had  been  thought  that  when  epigenetic  reprogram-
ming  was  understood,  the  cloning  process  could  be 
more efficient. But the mechanisms are still not clarified.

However, technical improvements in cloning have resul-
ted  in  the  production  of  high-quality  cloned  embryos 
that develop into normal-health offspring with very few 
abnormalities reported.

The Ethical Aspects 
of Animal Cloning  for Food Supply

David B. MORTON

Biomedical Science and Ethics, University of 
Birmingham, United Kingdom

Biography

Education

1961–65  University of Bristol, BVSc, MRCVS

1965–69  University of Liverpool, PhD

Present organisation and position

Professor  of  Biomedical  Science  and  Ethics,  School  of 
Biosciences, University of Birmingham, UK (Emeritus as 
from 1 January 2007)

Experience in risk assessment, scientific research

My  research  interests  are:  the  recognition  and  assess-
ment of pain, suffering, distress and lasting harm in ani-
mals and its evaluation using risk assessment strategies; 
the  ethics  of  animal  use;  refining  animal  research  pro-
tocols to minimise suffering, including methods of hus-
bandry and killing. I have acted as a scientific and ethics 
referee for research sponsors and journal editors in the 
UK,  USA  and  EU  (e.g.  the  sixth  framework  programme 
—  FP6)  and  have  carried  out  site  visits  for  monitoring 
progress  of  research  projects.  My  research  contribu-
tions  are  mainly  in  the  field  of  animal  welfare  science, 
particularly  in  the  recognition,  assessment,  alleviation 
and avoidance of animal suffering in research. This has 
recently  extended  into  the  projection  of  farm  animals 
and  standards  of  husbandry  as  a  member  of  the  UK’s 
Farm Animal Welfare Council as well as for food and farm 
assurance schemes in the UK (AFS). This gives me some 
insight  into  environmental  protection  as  well  as  food 
safety and public health. I have been involved in drawing 
up  public  policies  in  several  countries  both  inside  and 
outside the EU.

33

Recognition and assess-
ment of pain, suffering, 
distress and lasting harm 
(ethical aspects)

David B. MORTON

Suffering  can  be  a  generic  term  encompassing  several 
adverse  states  and  can  be  defined  as  a  negative  emo-
tional  state  which  derives  from  adverse  physical,  phy-
siological  and  psychological  circumstances,  in  relation 
to the cognitive capacity of the species, the individual, 
and  its  life  experience.  Animal  suffering  relates  to  the 
health and welfare of animals, and polls show that it is of 
significant public concern and EU citizens rank it highly. 
As animal suffering is not something humans normally 
value as good, poor animal health and welfare leads to 
ethical  concern.  Some  citizens  assume  that ‘unnatural’ 
systems  of  husbandry  as  well  as  some  recent  scientific 
developments,  such  as  cloning,  will  inevitably  lead  to 
poor animal health and welfare. However, before we can 
discuss these issues in any depth, it is important that we 
recognise when animals are suffering and the situations 
that cause it.

Animal welfare is defined in a variety of ways but, in ge-
neral, it encompasses their physical and mental health. 
For humans, the World Health Organization (WHO) defi-
nes health as ‘... a state of complete physical, mental and 
social well-being, not merely the absence of disease or 
infirmity’.  For  animals,  the  American  Veterinary  Medi-
cal  Association  describes  animal  welfare  as ‘...  a  human 
responsibility  that  encompasses  all  aspects  of  animal 
well-being, including proper housing, management, nu-
trition,  disease  prevention  and  treatment,  responsible 
care,  humane  handling  and,  when  necessary,  humane 
euthanasia’.  Many  infectious  diseases  cause  animals  to 
suffer  and  some  are  particularly  severe  in  their  impact 
(e.g. foot-and-mouth disease), whereas others are minor 
(ringworm). The more severe the disease, the more likely 
it is to affect productivity and so eradication of some di-
seases becomes an international priority. Non-infectious 
diseases can also cause pain and suffering and so affect 
the welfare of animals, e.g. lameness. While productivi-
ty  is  relatively  easy  to  measure  (e.g.  milk  yield,  growth 
rates, eggs laid) and disease is usually easy to diagnose, 
mental ill-health (or welfare or psychological well-being) 
in animals is less easy to define and measure. Moreover, 
physical  health  status  and  productivity  indices  do  not 
necessarily  reflect  mental  states  as  animals  show  a  re-
markable resilience in coping with poor conditions that 
affect  their  mental  health.  Animals  with  poor  mental 

health  may  experience  feelings  akin  to  frustration,  bo-
redom,  pain,  distress,  fear,  social  deprivation,  etc.,  and 
can  show  a  variety  of  abnormal/unusual  behavioural 
traits often induced by inadequate or inappropriate en-
vironmental  conditions.  Environments  that  predispose 
animals to poor mental health include lack of space to 
carry  out  normal  activities,  social  isolation,  barrenness 
(a lack of stimulation in their immediate surroundings), 
and poor husbandry and care. Animals that fail to adapt 
or cope with their circumstances may experience further 
poor welfare through self-harming.

As husbandry is such an important factor in animal men-
tal health, an ethical framework for evaluating husband-
ry systems and helping to ensure good welfare was devi-
sed nearly 40 years ago and is called the ‘five freedoms’:

(1)  freedom  from  thirst,  hunger  and  malnutrition  (by 
ready  access  to  fresh  water  and  a  diet  to  maintain 
full health and vigour);

(2)  freedom from discomfort (by providing an appropri-
ate  environment  including  shelter  and  a  comfort-
able resting area);

(3)   freedom  from  pain,  injury  and  disease  (by  preven-

tion or rapid diagnosis and treatment);

(4)  freedom to express normal behaviour (by providing 
sufficient space, proper facilities and company of the 
animal’s own kind);

(5)  freedom from fear and distress (by ensuring condi-
tions and treatment which avoid mental suffering).

The key issue in assessing the welfare of animals is how 
to recognise animal suffering in the first place as without 
that step nothing follows. Once it has been determined 
that animals are suffering (normally based on some de-
viation from what is considered normal for comparable 
control animals) it may then be possible to assess, alle-
viate or avoid poor welfare in animals. Defining key wel-
fare indicators that reflect the quality of life of animals 
from birth until slaughter is also helpful as it sets in place 
strategies  for  monitoring  farming  systems,  monitoring 

34

farmers and stock-keepers, and potentially for labelling 
foodstuffs  as  to  their  welfare  provenance  to  enhance 
consumer choice. All these matters are the subject of se-
veral ongoing research projects within the EU.

The  main  ways  in  which  animals’  welfare  is  assessed 
stem from measurement of their productivity, their phy-
siological states, and their behaviour, and observance of 
clinical  signs  (such  as  lameness,  diarrhoea,  respiratory 
distress).  Exposure  to  stressors  can  result  in  responses 
that will indirectly affect zootechnical performance such 
as  immune  response.  It  is  important  to  try  to  estimate 
the  nature  of  any  suffering,  its  intensity,  duration,  and 
the number of animals affected in order to assess wel-
fare, and also to carry out a risk assessment that could 
identify  critical  control  points  for  monitoring  and  im-
provements.  At  the  European  Food  Standards  Authori-
ty  risk  assessment  approaches  for  animals’  welfare  are 
being  developed.  Animal  welfare  science  is  a  growing 
and multidisciplinary subject and these days it is being 
better funded than ever before. Recent initiatives inclu-
de the EU FP6 ‘Welfare quality’ project along with several 
others. There are also several proposals for welfare label-
ling of food in addition to food assurance schemes from 
various conglomerates (national schemes, retailers, farm 
assurance schemes) that assure a minimum (normally le-
gal) standard of welfare, and a few schemes that claim to 
exceed this minimum standard.

Understanding  what  animals  need  or  want  is  not  easy 
to  determine.  Physiological  essentials  like  water,  food, 
air  containing  oxygen  and  free  from  noxious  substan-
ces,  are  obvious,  but  other  aspects  of  husbandry  such 
as space, social interaction, bedding, and access to sub-
strates to meet behavioural needs are less obvious. For 
example, what strength of motivation is there for hens 
to  have  dust  to  bathe  in,  ducks  to  have  water  to  swim 
in,  mud  for  pigs,  straw  for  piglets,  space  for  rabbits  to 
hop or lambs to gambol, or young animals to play in. We 
can start to determine from their natural behaviour, and 
by  using  critical  (taking  the  biology  of  the  animal  into 
account) anthropomorphic deductions. We can also ask 
the animal what it likes and dislikes by giving it choices 
and by seeing how hard it will work to access a particular 
environment or resource. Looking at it from the animal’s 

viewpoint  throughout  its  lifetime  and  in  all  situations 
(e.g. age, pregnancy, species, breed) is not easy. Moreo-
ver, we have relatively little knowledge of how to measu-
re happiness — i.e. good welfare? An important ethical 
question is: where there is a lack of knowledge, to whom 
should the benefit of any doubt be given — human or 
animal?

In the context of cloned animals, consideration has to be 
given to the welfare of the cloned offspring, the source 
animal, the gestation animal, and to the future offspring 
of the clone. Only an animal that is sentient can ‘suffer’, 
and so there will be cause for concern only when a clo-
ned animal has developed to a stage when it will be able 
to  experience  poor  welfare.  So  manipulating  eggs  and 
sperm,  and  other  early  stages  of  development  before 
the  embryo  becomes  a  fetus,  will  not  give  rise  to  con-
cern regarding welfare at that time, although such ma-
nipulations may have a welfare impact later on in life. In 
order to measure welfare of cloned animals in a pragma-
tic way, relevant scientific welfare measurements have to 
be made and those data then have to be compared with 
some  comparator.  One  approach  has  been  to  use  ani-
mals  produced  from  other  artificial  reproductive  tech-
nologies. But if such animals themselves are poorer then 
‘normal’ animals that have had nothing ‘unnatural’ done 
to them, then one could be comparing one poor techno-
logy with another poor technology and not finding any 
significant  differences.  Comparison  with  other  animals 
of ‘normal health’ also raises questions. Normal could be 
in the sense of ‘usual’. As such it could be considered ‘nor-
mal’ for a large number of broiler chickens to be lame at 
slaughter, for cows to be lame at some time in their an-
nual lactation or to have mastitis. These are hardly good 
comparators. Any differences in the scientific measure-
ments between the cloned and the non-cloned animals 
have to be interpreted in terms of their welfare impact. 
For example, a difference in muscle composition or fibre 
characteristics would not necessarily mean a difference 
in welfare, but a difference in the incidence of lameness 
or other painful disease would be relevant.

There is a tendency to always assume that cloning will 
result in poor health and welfare of animals but that ne-
eds to be questioned. As with the development of any 

35

novel technique, improvements are likely to occur that 
will  reduce  a  risk  of  poor  welfare  (this  happened  with 
transgenic animals). Secondly, it will be possible to cho-
ose those elite animals that have good health and good 
welfare  and  also  have ‘high’  productivity.  For  example, 
high-yielding  dairy  cows  with  no  lameness  or  mastitis 
and  that  have  good  longevity,  or  animals  with  good 
growth performance and efficient feed conversion with 
no  untoward  effects,  could  be  cloned,  rather  than  just 
selecting for productivity alone. Another example could 
be  the  Belgium  Blue  as  elite  animals  could  be  cloned 
that required fewer therapeutic Caesarean sections, and 
so one could claim a welfare benefit for that clone. Just 
as with conventional breeding practices, it is the balan-
ced  selection  for  productivity,  along  with  good  health 
and welfare, that is important.

The welfare problems encountered with cloned animals 
appear  to  be  with  the  surrogate  dams  and  the  clones 
themselves (F0), and not the offspring from cloned ani-
mals. Future technical improvements seem likely as the 
causes of poor health and welfare become better under-
stood. Finally, as mental health can also embrace positi-
ve welfare states such as contentment and pleasure that 
can apply equally to animals and humans, research into 
this area may help promote ‘happiness’ in animals in the 
ways in which they are kept and the next generation is 
selected.  However,  it  remains  to  be  seen  which  direc-
tions are taken in practice.

36

The Ethical Aspects 
of Animal Cloning  for Food Supply

Kees DE WINTER

Food Department of the European Consumers’ 
Organisation, Brussels, Belgium

Biography

Since  May  2007  Kees  De  Winter  has  been  Food  Policy 
Advisor at BEUC, the European Consumers’ Organisation. 
His  job  is  to  assist  BEUC  and  its  member  organisations 
in campaigning to influence EU policies relating to food 
and  food  production  in  the  consumer  interest.  From 
1998  until  2007  he  worked  as  a  consultant  in  the  area 
of food and life sciences. In this period he was, amongst 
other things, active as Project Technical Assistant for the 
Research Directorate-General of the European Commis-
sion  and  prepared  several  courses  on  EU  food  law  for 
professionals in the food sector. From 1992 until 1998 he 
worked as Food Officer at BEUC. Before that, he worked 
as a civil servant for the Dutch Ministry of Agriculture, as 
a food researcher for a Dutch consumer organisation, as 
a teacher at a teacher training college, and as a research-
er at Wageningen University. Mr De Winter graduated as 
a nutritionist and food technologist.

37

The consumer’s  
perspective

Kees DE WINTER

BEUC  is  the  umbrella  body  for  40  consumer  organisa-
tions in the EU Member States and a few other countries. 
We are trying to put forward the consumer perspective 
to  the  Commission  and  other  EU  institutions  on  food-
related issues.

The issue of cloning is relatively new for us and the con-
sumer  organisations  in  Europe  have  not  given  it  much 
attention. What is becoming clear is that the issue is ra-
dically developing and we have to devise an appropriate 
approach towards it. Firstly, some surveys such as Euro-
barometer  have  attempted  to  find  out  the  consumer’s 
opinion about different topics, including cloning. In the 
2000 INRA Eurobarometer on biotechnology, for exam-
ple,  there  was  a  question  about  perception  on  use  of 
cloned animals in production of medicines and vaccines. 
You can see that the biomedical use was more positively 
perceived than the use for food supply, which was not 
assessed  very  positively.  Also  there  were  a  number  of 
questions on cloning asked in 15 Member States (about 
1  000  persons  per  Member  State  —  a  representative 
sample). Some people were not very positive about clo-
ning, 61 % had little idea about benefits, especially in re-
lation to food, as people do see alternatives and tend not 
to want to change the ‘natural’ order of things, a concept 
which is obviously subjective, and subject to change. In 
general,  not  many  citizens  thought  that  the  risks  asso-
ciated  with  cloning  technology  would  be  acceptable.  I 
think  that  it  is  an  issue  which  is  starting  to  develop.  In 
the  USA  a  similar  survey  has  been  carried  out  and  the 
results were very similar to the results in Europe, under-
lining that consumers were not very likely to accept pro-
ducts from cloned animals. Interestingly, in percentage 
terms, people were more positive about products from 
transgenic animals than from cloned animals. There was 
a second question regarding products derived from of-
fspring  of  cloned  animals  and  the  answer  was  similar 
to  the  one  concerning  first-generation  cloned  animals, 
showing  that  people  were  not  willing  to  accept  either 
of  such  products. The  Eurobarometer  also  tried  to  find 
out  more  about  the  acceptance  or  non-acceptance  of 
‘controversial  technologies’  such  as  biotechnologies, 
and cloning was perceived as controversial. In order for 
a new technology to be perceived as acceptable it has 
to be regarded as useful by consumers, and if it is use-

ful there should be a proper balance between risks and 
benefits.

As  to  food,  especially  in  Europe,  people  are  convinced 
that  there  are  alternatives  to  provide  sufficient  food. 
Safety as such is not an issue where acceptance of this 
technology is concerned, but there are other aspects to 
consider,  especially  ethical  considerations.  Consumers 
in  the  USA  recently  signed  and  delivered  a  petition  to 
the  US  Centre  for  Food  Safety,  altogether  representing 
50 million people, and not just US animal welfare groups 
but also consumers’ groups such as the Consumer Fede-
ration. They pointed out quite a number of problems in 
relation to animal welfare, the main one being the low 
success  rate  in  cloning. This  is  one  of  the  reasons  why 
cloning will not easily become a common technology to 
produce animals for food purposes. Additionally, it is still 
very expensive. The suffering of surrogates has already 
been mentioned by several speakers, and offspring ab-
normalities do represent an issue today, even if the tech-
nology will improve in the future. The petition also men-
tioned food safety risks: cloned animals might be more 
sensitive to zoonoses that can be transferred to humans. 
At the moment, it is still not clear whether that poses a 
serious  problem  or  not,  so  it  is  important  to  carry  out 
an  appropriate  assessment  first.  Regarding  the  ethical 
issues, we have already heard the opinion of several spe-
akers who are better qualified than me on the subject, so 
I will not continue on that.

Regarding the implementation of the cloning technolo-
gy, we learned that it will be mainly used for the bree-
ding of animals, cloned animals will be used for mating 
and  the  production  of  offspring,  the  advantage  being 
that the spread of high-quality genetic traits is quicker. 
In my opinion, one disadvantage of cloning is that the 
cloned animal is not better than the source animal, while 
in in-breeding schemes you can from time to time ob-
serve sudden substantial improvements. I was intrigued 
by the fact that, as was shown by the speaker yesterday, 
in the USA there are 500–600 cloned cattle already and 
they have produced at least 60 000 semen units; I won-
der  what  will  happen  with  those.  Are  they  being  used 
somehow? Maybe for breeding outside the USA, and if 
so, is there offspring? Is there any chance that they could 

38

possibly enter the food chain? I haven’t heard anything 
about it so far, so I would like to know more about tho-
se animals. Semen from the USA and Canada is regularly 
imported into Europe, so I would like to know more on 
this issue and also about the consumption of offspring 
from clones. Finally, I’d like to say something about con-
sumer rights and ethical aspects.

It  is  my  understanding  that  food  products  from  clones 
could  fall  under  the  novel  foods  regulation,  in  which 
case a pre-market risk assessment has to be carried out. 
It’s  still  not  clear  whether  cloned  animals  are  seen  as 
traditional animals or not. They are certainly not GM, as 
clones do not have deliberate changes in the DNA. Re-
garding food safety, EFSA has been asked to provide an 
opinion on the use of somatic cell nuclear transfer and 
products from that. It is important that the whole legal 
process  is  transparent,  so  that  no  misunderstanding 
arises  and  consumers  know  about  what  is  going  on  in 
their own country and at EU level. In my opinion it will 
most probably be inevitable that the specific regulations 
will have to cover the cloning process and resultant pro-
ducts, like for GMOs, as it is something of great interest 
and importance to consumers. Public debate is needed 
before products are made available on the market and 
the  public  needs  to  be  properly  informed.  As  regards 
consumers’  right  to  know,  the  EU  Directive  2000/13/
EC on labelling is the relevant one which should apply. 
For  highly  controversial  processes  such  as  radiation  or 
GMO, labelling is compulsory. One might argue that this 
should also be the case for cloned animals, as consumers 
feel very strongly about it.

39

The Ethical Aspects 
of Animal Cloning  for Food Supply

Gottfried BREM

Professor Gottfried Brem 
Agrobiogen GmbH, Hilgertshausen, Germany
O. Univ. Prof. Dipl.-Ing. agr. Dr. Dr. habil.  
Drs. h.c.

Biography

Since  1990  Visiting  Professor  at  the  University  of Veterinary 
Sciences  in  Budapest;    Since  1991  Member  of  the  Russian 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences; Since 1993  Full Professor 
(C4-chairholder, Ordinarius) of Animal Breeding and Genetics 
at  the  Institute  of  Animal  Breeding  and  Genetics,  Veterinary 
University of Vienna; Since 1995  Doctor honoris causa of the 
University of Veterinary Science, Budapest; Since 1996  Elect-
ed member of the FAO World Panel of Experts on the Devel-
opment of the Global Strategy for Animal Genetic Resources, 
Rome; Since 2003  Doctor honoris causa of the Ludwig-Max-
imilians-University,  Munich;  Since  1997  CEO  of  Agrobiogen 
GmbH; Since 1999  Elected member of the Novel Food Com-
mission  in  Berlin;  Since  2007    Member  of  the  ERC  Starting 
Grants Evaluation Panel at the European Research Council.

Previous university career

1979–85  Post-doc and group leader at the Institute of Animal 
Breeding,  Ludwig-Maximilians-University,  Munich;  1985  Ha-
bilitation  (admission  as  lecturer)  in  Animal  Breeding  and  Ge-
netics;  1985–87  Lecturer  and  Associate  Professor  at  the 
Institute  of  Animal  Breeding,  Ludwig-Maximilians-University, 
Munich; 1986  Offered the Professorship (chair) of Biotechnol-
ogy in Animal Production at the Agroscientific Faculty of the 
Christian-Albrechts University, Kiel; 1986  Offered the Fiebiger 
Professorship  of  Experimental  Genetics  and  Pathogenetics  in 
Animal  Breeding  at  the  Veterinary  Faculty,  Ludwig-Maximil-
ians-University, Munich; 1987–93  Full Professor (chairholder, 
Ordinarius)  of  Molecular  Animal  Breeding  at  the  Veterinary 
Faculty,  Ludwig-Maximilians-University,  Munich;  1991  Of-
fered the Professorship (chair) of Female Reproduction Biology 
at the Veterinary University, Hannover; 1992  Offered the Pro-
fessorship  (C4-chair)  of  Animal  Breeding  and  Genetics  at  the 
Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Veterinary Univer-
sity of Vienna – Education; 1972  Abitur (university admission 
certificate);  1972–77  Studies  of  veterinary  medicine  at  the 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University,  Munich;  1977  Examinations 
in veterinary medicine; 1978  Approbation to practise veteri-
nary medicine; July 1979  Completion of PhD thesis and PhD 
oral  examination;  1976–79  Studies  in  agricultural  sciences 
(animal  production  at  the  Faculty  of  Agriculture,  Technical 
University  Munich  at Weihenstephan);  1980  Examination  in 
agricultural sciences (Dipl.-Ing. agr.); 1978–79  Studies of eco-
nomic sciences at the Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich.

Publications 

Journal papers (peer reviewed) 

301

Books (author and co-author) 

Book chapters 

22

49

41

 
Annex I

The  main  application  of  cloning  in  the  biotechnology 
industry is the generation of so-called transgenic (gene-
tically engineered) animals. The genome of somatic cells 
is changed by molecular genetic techniques to add new 
genes or gene combinations, or to modify/silent existing 
genes. The selected somatic cells are then used for the 
generation  of  genetically  modified  animals  using  so-
matic nucleus transfer. There are many advantages and 
applications for this technique especially in biotechno-
logy companies (production of recombinant proteins or 
xenogenetic organs, animal models for human diseases, 
etc.). The industry might also, in the future, be interested 
in  using  genetic  engineering  —  generated  by  cloning 
of  modified  somatic  nuclei  —  for  improving  and  opti-
mising product quality and quantity, decreasing health 
risks, and creating novel food and/or nutraceuticals.

Bovine cloning  
in Europe

Gottfried BREM

Cloning  of  bovines  mostly  uses  somatic  cell  nucleus 
transfer to generate biological copies of an animal. Clone 
sibs are identical in a similar way to monozygotic twins. 
Clones can be genetically different from each other and 
from their original regarding their mtDNA composition, 
differences in epigenetic reprogramming and the length 
of the telomeres.

The  heteroplasmy  of  mitochondrial  DNA  is  a  direct  re-
sult of the cloning process that normally combines mtD-
NA  of  the  donor  cell  and  the  enucleated  recipient  cell 
(Steinborn et al. 2000, ‘Mitochondrial DNA heteroplasmy 
in cloned cattle produced by fetal and adult cell cloning’. 
Nat.  Genet.  25,  255–257).  Non-cloned  offspring  inherit 
the  heteroplasmatic  mtDNA  situation  from  female  clo-
ned animals. During transmission of the heteroplasma-
tic  mtDNA,  sometimes  natural  selection  is  observed 
resulting in different mtDNA genomes in the offspring. 
Heteroplasmy  of  mtDNA  appears  regularly  in  cloned 
animals and their offspring but it can also be detected, 
with a much lower probability, in non-cloned animals as 
a result of spontaneous mutations of the mtDNA and a 
shift during transmission. Therefore heteroplasmy is not 
a new effect but a regular effect of cloning.

To the best of my knowledge, up to now no cloned bovi-
nes have reached the food chain in Europe and there are 
no  cloning  programmes  established  in  Europe  aiming 
at the generation of bovine clones for the human food 
supply chain in the industry. The reasons are simply the 
still extremely high costs of the cloning procedure, the 
uncertainty  over  whether  the  use  of  bovine  clones  in 
animal production will be allowed and the public/politi-
cal concerns about food from cloned animals.

The main genetic impact of cloning on animal breeding 
is the propagation/multiplication of already proven ge-
notypes. Thus, in the future, the first ‘products’ of cloned 
animals to be used in Europe could be imported semen 
or embryos.

Extensive evaluations by the FDA in the USA have pro-
duced no evidence of any additional food consumption 
risks for bovine clones and their offspring.

42

Annex I

Participants

Secretariat 
of the European Group 
On Ethics

The Ethical Aspects 
of Animal Cloning  for Food Supply

43

Members of the European Group 
on Ethics (EGE)

Göran HERMERÉN, President
Philosopher, Professor of Medical 
Ethics
Faculty of Medicine, Lund University
Lund, Sweden

Paula MARTINHO DA SILVA
Vice-President
Lawyer, President of the National 
Council of Ethics for the Science of Life
Lisbon, Portugal

Emmanuel AGIUS
Professor of Moral Philosophy and 
Moral Theology, Faculty of Theology
University of Malta
Malta

Diana BÁNÁTI
Professor of Food Safety, Director-
General of the Central Food Research 
Institute
Budapest, Hungary

Inez de BEAUFORT
Professor of Health Care Ethics
Erasmus Medical Centre
Dept of Medical Ethics
Rotterdam, the Netherlands

Anne CAMBON-THOMSEN
Research Director, CNRS, Head of a 
research team on genetics and public 
health, Inserm U558
Faculté de Médecine
Institut Fédératif de Recherche 126:
«Santé, Société»
Toulouse, France

Rafael CAPURRO
Professor of Information Management 
and Information Ethics at Fachhochs-
chule
Stuttgart, Hochschule der Medien
University of Media
Stuttgart, Germany

Jozef GLASA
Professor of Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics, Hepatology and Medical 
Ethics/Bioethics at the
Slovak Medical University in Bratislava
Institute of Medical Ethics and Bioeth-
ics
Institute of Clinical 
Pharmacology
Central Ethics Committee
Ministry of Health
Bratislava, Slovakia

Hille HAKER
Professor of Moral Theology and
Social Ethics, Goethe University
Johann Wolfgang Goethe Universität
FB Kath Theologie
Frankfurt, Germany

Julian KINDERLERER
Professor, Sheffield Institute of Bio-
technological Law and Ethics
Law Dept, University of Sheffield
Sheffield, United Kingdom

Dr Peter M. KRAGH
Danish Institute of Agricultural Sci-
ences, Tjele, Denmark

Professor David B. MORTON
Professor of Biomedical Science and 
Ethics at the University of Birmingham, 
United Kingdom

Dr Irina POLEJAEVA
ViaGen Inc. 
Texas, USA

Krzysztof MARCZEWSKI
Professor, Head of Dept of Medical Eth-
ics, Zamość Hospital
Medial University of Lublin
Lublin, Poland

Professor Jean-Paul RENARD
UMR Biologie du Développement et 
Reproduction
INRA-CNRS-ENVA
Jouy en Josas, France

Linda NIELSEN 
Professor, University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark

Pere PUIGDOMÈNECH ROSELL
Research Professor of CSIC
Director of Plant Molecular Genetics
Laboratory
CSIC-IRIA
Barcelona, Spain

Professor Michael ROSENBERGER
Institute for Moral 
Theology University of Linz, 
Austria

European Commission

Bureau of European Policy Advisers
(BEPA)

Günter VIRT
Professor of Moral Theology
University of Vienna
Vienna, Austria

Secretariat of the EGE

Maurizio SALVI
BEPA
Head of the EGE Secretariat

Joëlle BEZZAN
BEPA, EGE Secretariat

Alessandra FERRARI
BEPA, EGE Secretariat

Speakers

Prof. Gottfried BREM
Agrobiogen GmbH
Hilgersthausen, Germany

Graça CARVALHO
Principal Adviser
BEPA

Secretariat-General

Julien MOUSNIER
DG SG D03

Research DG

Klaus-Guenther BARTHEL
DG RTD E02

Jean Charles CAVITTE
Project officer
DG RTD E04 

John CLAxTON
DG RTD T01

Jean Francois DECHAMP
DG RTD L03 — Ethics and Science

Kees De WINTER
Food Policy Advisor 
European Consumers’ Organisation
Brussels, Belgium

Laurence MOREAU
Project officer
DG RTD E03

Joyce D’SILVA
Ambassador
Compassion in World Farming
Godalming, Surrey, United Kingdom 

Health and Consumer Protection 
DG

Rui CAVALEIRO-AZEVEDO
DG SANCO E04

44

 
Maria FERRARA
DG SANCO D02

Andrea GAVINELLI
DG SANCO D02

Paivi MANNERKORPI
DG SANCO E04

Kai-Uwe SPRENGER
DG SANCO D01

Caroline TROUET
DG SANCO C06

Michael WALSH
DG SANCO 03

Agriculture and Rural 
Development DG

Horacio CAPPELLARO
DG AGRI D01

Joint Research Centre

Ilias PAPATRYFON
Scientific officer
DG JRC J05
Seville, Spain

NECs (National Ethics Councils.)

Ana Sofia CARVALHO
Professor
Conselho Nacional de Etica para as 
Ciencias de Vida
Lisbon, Portugal

International organisations, NGOs, 
agencies and associations

Michael APPLEBY
World Society for Protection of Ani-
mals, London, United Kingdom

Gundula AZEEZ
Policy manager
Soil Association
South Plaza, Marlborough Street
Bristol, United Kingdom

Oliver HENNIGES
Projects Department
European Investment Bank (EIB)
Luxembourg

Laura STREET
Food policy officer
EURO COOP
Brussels, Belgium

David CARLANDER
European Food Safety Authority, Unit 
of the Scientific Committee and Advi-
sory Forum, EFSA
Parma, Italy

Chris JONES
Food Standards Agency
London, United Kingdom

National and regional authorities

Susanna AHLSTROEM
Veterinary Officer
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Dept of Food and Health, Finland

Ana de Vasconcelos BATALHA
Counsellor
Permanent Representation of Portugal
Brussels, Belgium

Nicolas CANIVET
Nutrition and novel food expert
French Ministry of Agriculture
Paris, France

Marco CASTELLINA
Health policy, pharmaceuticals, veteri-
nary and food
Permanent Representation of Italy
Brussels, Belgium

Didem CELIKKANAT
Scientific officer
Scientific and Technological Research 
Council of Turkey
Ankara, Turkey

Andrea DIONISI
Counsellor for sanitary matters
Permanent Representation of Italy
Brussels, Belgium

Gaetana FERRI
General Director
Health Ministry
Rome, Italy

John FERRIS
Director
Dept of Agriculture and Food
Central Veterinary Research Laboratory
Kildare, Ireland

Mark MAGUIRE
Agricultural Inspector
Dept of Agriculture and Food
Kildare, Ireland

Maria Eugenia MARTIN PEREZ
Political adviser

45

Officina de Castilla y Leon
Brussels, Belgium

Christopher MCHONE
Regulatory, trade and consumer affairs 
officer
US Mission to the European Union
Brussels, Belgium

Birgit WINKLER
Federal Agency of Nature Conserva-
tion
Konstantinstr. 110
Bonn, Germany

Representatives of industry

Anne DEMOISY
Consultant
Rhizome SA
Brussels, Belgium

Roxane FELLER
COPA-COGECA
Brussels, Belgium

Ricardo GENT
Executive Director
German Association of Biotechnology 
Industries
Frankfurt, Germany

Johan VANHEMELRIJCK
Secretary-General
EuropaBio
Brussels, Belgium

Dr Marlene WARTENBERG
Director of European Policy Office
VIERPFOTEN
Avenue de la Renaissance 19/11
B–1000 Brussels

Representatives of religion

Richard FISCHER
Executive Secretary
Church and Society Commission of the 
Conference of European Churches
Strasbourg, France

Christine LOEWENSTEIN
Rat der Evangelischen Kirche in Deut-
schland (EKD)
Brussels, Belgium

Christel NGNAMBI
Manager
European Evangelical Alliance
Brussels, Belgium

Kaharina SCHAUER
COMECE — Commission of the Bishops’
Conferences of the European Community
Brussels, Belgium

Wim VERBEKE
Ghent University
Dept of Agricultural Economics
Gent, Belgium

Sabine VON ZANTHIER
Rat der Evangelischen Kirche in Deutschland (EKD)
Brussels, Belgium

Academics

Media/press

Donald BRUCE
Edinethics Ltd
United Kingdom

Stef AERTS
Centre for Science, Technology and Ethics (CWTE)
Kasteelpark Arenber 1
Leuven, Belgium

Richard HUDSON
CEO and Editor
Science Business Publishing
London, United Kingdom

Carlos ALONSO
Professor
Instituto de Salud Carlos III
Madrid, Spain

Ann BRUCE
Roslin Institute
United Kingdom

Linda COURT
Kingswood School
Bath, United Kingdom

George GASKELL
Professor
London School of Economics
London, United Kingdom

Riccardo GIRARDI
Università degli Studi Roma tre
Rome, Italy

Victor GONZALEZ-RUMAYOR
Instituto de Salud Carlos III
Madrid, Spain

Jennifer GUNNING
Cardiff Centre for Ethics, Law and Science 
United Kingdom

Sulev KOKS
Institute of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Sciences
Estonian University of Life Sciences
Tartu, Estonia

Jan MERKS
IPG (Institute for Pig Genetics BV) 
European Forum of Farm Animal Breeders (EFFAB)
FABRE TP (Farm Animal Breeding and Reproduction Technol-
ogy Platform)
Beuningen, the Netherlands

Kate MILLER
Centre for Applied Bioethics
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, United Kingdom

Peter SENNEKAMP
Press officer
Germany

(updated 25/09/2007)

In accordance with Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2000 on the protec-
tion of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data 
by the Community institutions and bodies and on the free move-
ment of such data, this data will be used only for the purpose of 
mailing EGE publications and will be strictly managed by the EGE 
Secretariat. The storing of the data expires at each EGE mandate, 
or is renewed within the updating of the database. You have the 
right of access to, and the right to rectify, your data by contacting 
the EGE Secretariat via email (bepa_ethics_group@ec.europa.eu).

46

  
Secretariat of the European 
Group On Ethics

Dr Maurizio Salvi
Head of the EGE Secretariat

Tel. (32-2) 299 11 79
Fax (32-2) 299 45 65
E-mail: maurizio.salvi@ec.europa.eu

Dr Alessandra Ferrari

Tel. (32-2) 295 43 29
Fax (32-2) 299 45 65
E-mail: alessandra.ferrari@ec.europa.eu

Ms Joelle Bezzan

Tel. (32-2) 296 19 48
Fax (32-2) 299 45 65
E-mail: joelle.bezzan@ec.europa.eu

Mail address

European Commission

Secretariat of the European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies

BERL 8/143
B-1049 Brussels

Office

European Commission
Berlaymont Building, Rue de la Loi 200
B-1049 Brussels

Website

http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm

47

 
 
Annex II

Annex II

Powerpoint 
Presentation 
of the Speakers

The Ethical Aspects 
of Animal Cloning  for Food Supply

49

Jean Paul RENARD

Professor Jean Paul Renard

Director of the INRA Research Centre, 
Paris, France

Confinement  
and Consumption  
of clones  
and transgenic animals

Powerpoint Presentation

51

Confinement and Consumption
Confinement and 

Consumption of clones and 

of clones and transgenic

animals
transgenic animals

Jean-Paul Renard

INRA Jouy en Josas
jean-paul.renard@jouy.inra.fr

EGE « Ethical aspects of animal cloning for foof supply » , Brussels, 24-25th september 2007

clones are not transgenic
clones are not 

animals
transgenic animals

Clones share in common the same genome

Clones are obtained after the 
Reprogramming of a somatic nucleus 

Transgenic animals do not

How? When? Why?

No intentional genetic modification with cloning

EGE « Ethical aspects of animal cloning for foof supply » , Brussels, 24-25th september 2007

53

1

consumption of of cloned
consumption

animals
cloned animals

Scientifically,  a matter of risk assesment

Requires hazard identification, hazard characterisation, exposure assessment and risk characterisation

Hazard: a biological, chemical or physical agent with the potential to cause an adverse effect;

from : REGULATION (EC) No 178/2002 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 28 January2002, Art. 2, 
L31/7

Because of the central societal role of food, risks assesment with the consumption of cloned animals
should comprise « social risks »

EGE « Ethical aspects of animal cloning for foof supply » , Brussels, 24-25th september 2007

the quality and safety of products (milk and meat)
from adult and clinically healthy cloned (F0) cattle 
is globally similar to normal animals

Based on several reports

See for instance proceedings from the last scientific conference
IETS, 2007, Reprod Fertil Development, 19, issue 1

The same for the descendants of clones (F1)

EGE « Ethical aspects of animal cloning for foof supply » , Brussels, 24-25th september 2007

54

2

however

1- differences are observed between clones and matched control animals

but these differences are within the normal biological range

The contractile differentiation in muscle is delayed in clones up to 12 months of age 

Controls
Clones

Proportions of MyHCs isoforms

MyHC I
Slow oxidative 
isoform

%

40
30

20
10
0

***

8m

12m

18m 24m

%

40
30

20
10
0

MyHC IIa
Rapid isoform oxido-glycolytic
***

**

MyHC IIx
Rapid glycolytic
*
isoform

***

%

100
80
60
40
20
0

8m

12m

18
m

24m

8m

12m

18m

24m

Repeated biopsies of 
Semitendinosus (ST) muscle 
at 8, 12, 18 and 24 months

MHC IIX

MHC IIA

MHC I

rapid

Slow 

EGE « Ethical aspects of animal cloning for foof supply » , Brussels, 24-25th september 2007

Myosin heavy chain separation

Heyman et al, Animal 2007

(cid:507)(cid:507)9 9 desaturase

desaturase activity

activity indexes are 

indexes are higher

higher in the 

and muscle of clones
in the milkmilk and muscle of clones

ex: milk

80 days

0,8

0,7

0,6

0,5

0,4

0,3

0,2

0,1

0

Control

Clone

0.010.01

In dex 14

In dex 16

In dex 18

In dex C L A

0,8

0,7

0,6

0,5

0,4

0,3

0,2

0,1

0

180 days of lactation

0.001
0.001

Control

Clone

0.001
0.001

0.001

In dex 14

In dex 16

In dex 18

In dex C L A

Index 14 : C14:1 c9/(C14:0 + C14:1 c9)

Index 18 : C18:1 c9/(C18:0 + C18:1 c9)

Index 16 : C16:1 c9/(C16:0 + C16:1 c9)

Index CLA : C18:2 c9, t 11 /(C18:1 t11 + C18:1 c9, t11)

Heyman et al, Animal 2007

55

3

Joyce D’SILVA

President of the Compassion  
in World Farming (CIWF) Organisation
United Kingdom

Animal welfare  
concerns regarding  
farm animal cloning

Powerpoint Presentation

57

Abnormal fetal development

• High frequency 

of 

• abnormalities
• Fetal death
• Late stage 
deaths

Copyright Marek Spinka

www.ciwf.org

Health problems of cloned 
animals

• Respiratory 
problems
Immune 
deficiency

•

• Sudden 
death

Copyright Associated MPR Photo/ Cara 
Hetland

www.ciwf.org

59

4

Copyright INRA

www.ciwf.org

Post-natal mortality of 
clones

• Altered physiology/ metabolism
• Defective systems:
– cardiovascular
– musculoskeletal
– neurological

• Weakened immune systems
•

Infections

www.ciwf.org

60

5

Summary of pathology of cloned lambs
(P Loi et al 2006)

Morbidity/mortality

No. cases that suffered
(out of 12 reaching term)

Renal

Hepatic

Pulmonary

Stillborn

Total mortality I month after 

birth

5

5

4

3

12

www.ciwf.org

Suffering of clones

Copyright  Xinhua News Agency

www.ciwf.org

61

6

Cloned gaur calf died after 48 hours

Copyright Associated Press/ 
Advanced Cell Technology

www.ciwf.org

“The incidence of enteritis, 
umbilical and respiratory 
infections are certainly 
increased in cloned 
livestock”

DN Wells OIE 2005

www.ciwf.org

62

7

“Post-natal survival of cloned 
calves can be as low as 33% 
in some studies, and we have 
experienced similar losses in 
cloned piglets.”

Jeff Carroll. USDA ARS Oct. 2005

www.ciwf.org

“I’ve looked at the immune 
response of hundreds of 
young pigs and I’d never seen 
anything that low until I looked 
at a clone” Jeff Carroll, USDA

(New Scientist 06/11/04)

www.ciwf.org

63

8

Council Directive 98/58/EC
concerning the protection of 
animals kept for farming 
purposes:

Annex 21:
“No animal shall be kept for farming 
purposes unless it can reasonably be 
expected, on the basis of its 
genotype or phenotype, that it can be 
kept without detrimental effect on its 
health or welfare”

www.ciwf.org

Compassion in World Farming’s View

There should be a ban on the cloning of 
farm animals for the food supply for the 
following reasons:
– Suffering caused to source animals, 

surrogates and clones

– Poor quality of life of many ‘abnormal’ clones
– High morbidity and mortality rates of clones
– Failure to view animals as sentient beings 

with intrinsic value

www.ciwf.org

64

9

www.ciwf.org

65

10

Michael ROSENBERGER

Catholic University for Theology
University of Linz, Austria

Is Power-Dolly  
Our Future Food? 
Ethical aspects  
of farm animal cloning

Powerpoint Presentation

67

Katholisch--Theologische 
Katholisch

PrivatUniversit

Universitäät t 

Theologische Privat
LinzLinz
Institute for Moral Theology
Institute for Moral Theology
Prof. Dr. Michael Rosenberger
Prof. Dr. Michael Rosenberger

Is Power-Dolly Our Future Food?
Ethical aspects of farm animal cloning

1. Possible aims of cloning farm 
animals

- research: 

comparing genetically identical animals

- pharming: 

production of pharmaceuticals/ donor organs

- farming: multiplication of enhanced animals 

for food production
a) quantitative: more meat/ milk
b) qualitative: better meat/ milk

(cid:198) here: only last aim considered

69

1

2. Consideration in the light of 
basic ethical principles

Is cloning unnatural?
- empirical objection: cloning occurs in nature

and functions

- logical objection: naturalistic fallacy (G.E. Moore):

is (cid:159) ought
- philosophical objection: nature = polyvalent

(cid:198) needs human interpretation

2. Consideration in the light of 
basic ethical principles

- unnatural? No
Is cloning violating the realm of the Creator?
- formal objection: argument of faith, not of reason
- theological objection: creation = 

bringing from not-being to being

- biblical objection: man as co-creator (Gen 1)

no realm of creativity is reserved for God

70

2

2. Consideration in the light of 
basic ethical principles

- unnatural? violating realm of the Creator? No
Is cloning violating animals‘ bodily integrity?
- integrity: may be violated in case of good reasons
- mean for well-being, not end in itself
(cid:198) important + necessary aspect

of ethical consideration, 
but no basic principle of ethics

2. Consideration in the light of 
basic ethical principles

- unnatural? violating realm of the Creator? No
- violating animals‘ integrity? Aspect, not principle
Is cloning violating animals‘ sentience capacity?
- Not every case of animal cloning will cause pain

(cid:198) no general argument against animal cloning

- Also conventional breeding may cause pain 

(cid:198) no specific argument against animal cloning

- What, if human pleasure > animals‘ pain?
(cid:198) important + necessary aspect

of ethical consideration, 
but no basic principle of ethics

71

3

2. Consideration in the light of 
basic ethical principles

- unnatural? violating realm of the Creator? No
- violating animals‘ integrity or sentience capacity?

Aspects, not principles

Is cloning violating animals‘ dignity/ 

intrinsic value?

- reason for attributing dignity to every living being: 

subject of an own life (T. Regan)
value-ability (process ethics)
having a good of its own (P.W. Taylor)
autonomy to realize own purposes

(Aristotle, F. Ricken, M. Rosenberger)

2. Consideration in the light of 
basic ethical principles

- unnatural? violating realm of the Creator? No
- violating animals‘ integrity or sentience capacity?

Aspects, not principles

Is cloning violating animals‘ dignity/ 

intrinsic value?

- dignity: do not use the dignitarian as a mere object

treat him/ her also as a subject (Kant)
=: treat him/ her also as a moral patient
=: have respect for him/ her
=: do justice to him/ her
=: weigh his/ her goods fairly

72

4

3. Justice: 
Weighing goods and harms fairly
Subjects and aspects to be examined

- Animals: 

- Producers: 

- Consumers: 

Welfare + bodily integrity
Well-being: pain + pleasure
Economic profit + technical progress
Biodiversity ((cid:198) FAO)
Sanity/ safety 
Free + informed choice; acceptance

- Environment:  Negative/ positive impacts + risks
- Alternative competitors on the free market: 
Fairness

3. Justice: 
Weighing goods and harms fairly
Basic question to be examined

- What is our model of future agriculture?
- Should agriculture be always more assimilated to 
industry?
- Isn’t farm animal cloning “yet another move away 
from regarding animals as animals” (Michael Appleby)?

(cid:198) Not a question of prohibition/ setting limits

but of funding/ setting incentives

73

5

3. Justice: 
Weighing goods and harms fairly
Basic question to be examined

- Isn’t farm animal cloning “yet another move away 
from regarding animals as animals” (Michael Appleby)?
Not a question of prohibition/ setting limits

but of funding/ setting incentives

(cid:198) EU supplies only for ecological agriculture
(cid:198) Obligatory information for consumers 
(like Novel-Food)

(cid:198) Motivation of consumers by quality labels 

(like “no GMO”)

Is Power-Dolly our future food?

Thanks for your attention!

George and Charlie

74

6

Irina POLEJAEVA

Dr Irina Polejaeva, ViaGen Inc., Texas, USA

Preserving and  
multiplying  
the best genetics

Powerpoint Presentation

75

Preserving and multiplying 
the best genetics

The European Group on 
Ethics in Science and New 
Technologies
24 September, 2007

Global Leader

•Austin, Texas

•Waunakee, Wisconsin

•Lethbridge, Alberta

•Querétaro, Querétaro

•Founded in 2001

•Fifty employees 

•Commercially clone 3 species

77

1

Bucking Bulls

Panhandle Slim
-1997 Bucking Bull of the Year
-1998  2nd Bull of the Year
-1999 2nd Bull of the Year

Clones of Panhandle Slim

Scamper and Clone

Ten Time  World Championship in Barrel Racing

78

2

What is Cloning?

(cid:122) Assisted reproduction technology

(cid:132) Artificial Insemination (1322)
(cid:132) Embryo Transfer (1891)
(cid:132) In vitro Fertilization (1959)
(cid:132) Embryo Freezing (1972)

(cid:122) Exact genetic copy of the donor animal

(cid:132) “Identical twins separated in time”

Animal Cloning in Agriculture

(cid:36)(cid:71)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:29)

(cid:122) (cid:38)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)

(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:86)

(cid:122) (cid:53)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)
(cid:122) (cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:3)

(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:71)

(cid:122) (cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)
(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)
(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:86)
(cid:122) (cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)

(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:37)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:15)(cid:3)
(cid:42)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:58)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:37)(cid:88)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:12)

79

3

Genetic Improvement of Feed Efficiency

(cid:122) Select for lean growth - History

1980

2005

live wt

backfat

feed

Genetic Improvement of Feed Efficiency

(cid:122) Select for lean growth - History 

1980

2005

80

4

Genetic Improvement of Feed Efficiency

1972

2007

FCR: 3.8

836 pounds

220 pounds

32%

FCR: 2.6

715 pounds

275 pounds

330 lbs of feed x 1,000 market hogs = 
165 Tons of Feed Saved!!!!!

35% from measuring feed intake

65% from 
lean growth 
selection

81

5

Power of “1”

(cid:122) (cid:56)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:32)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)

(cid:132) (cid:51)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)
(cid:132) (cid:44)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)
(cid:132) (cid:40)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:22)(cid:14)(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:91)(cid:3)(cid:24)(cid:15)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:32)
(cid:3640)(cid:7)(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:15)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:3)

Product Opportunities
(cid:122) Product Attributes

(cid:132) Low fat, naturally high Omega 3 milk

(cid:122) Pro-environment

(cid:132) Increased feed efficiency
(cid:132) Reduce water consumption
(cid:132) Reduce waste

(cid:122) Animal health and welfare

(cid:132) Disease resistance (e.g. Mastitis)
(cid:132) Improved production life

82

6

Cloning: Poised to Impact

(cid:122) Livestock breeders adopting cloning

(cid:132) 500-600 cloned cattle (USA)
(cid:132) (cid:167) 250 cloned pigs
(cid:132) (cid:167) 20 cloned horses
(cid:132) (cid:149) 60,000 doses of semen from cloned bulls
(cid:122) FDA data shows no differences between 

cloned animals and controls in:
(cid:132) Reproductive parameters
(cid:132) Milk composition
(cid:132) Meat composition

Keep in mind…

(cid:122) Cloned animals are NOT “Genetically Modified”
(cid:122) Progeny of cloned animals are NOT “clones”
(cid:122) Cloned animals will be rare in food supply

(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)
(cid:37)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:85)

83

7

Summary

(cid:122) Cloning is a powerful assisted 

reproduction technology that can:
(cid:132) (cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:3247)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3248) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)

(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)

(cid:132) Enhance genetic improvement
(cid:132) Decrease genetic lag
(cid:132) (cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)

K.C. was cloned from a carcass.  She’s shown here 
with her traditionally bred calf.

Thank you

84

8

Questions???

Clones of a Texas Longhorn cow

85

9

Peter M. KRAGh

Dr Peter Kragh, Danish Institute 
of Agricultural Studies, Tjele, Denmark

Science and technology  
of farm animal cloning:  
state of the art

Powerpoint Presentation

87

Science and technology of farm 
animal cloning: 
state of the art

Peter Michael Kragh

University of Aarhus

Denmark

Gábor Vajta
Peter M. Kragh

Du Yutao
Li Juan

Lin Lin
Ying Li

Danish Institute
of Agricultural
Sciences

89

1

Cloning by somatic cell nuclear transfer

Unfertilized
egg

Somatic cell

Cloned embryo

Genetic
modification

Transfer to 
foster 
mother

Cloned pig
with genetic
modification

Applications of farm animal cloning

• Biomedicine

• Disease models, xenotransplantation, bioreactors

• Agriculture

• Increase copies of valuable animals: breeding and 

conservation

• Genetic modification: 

- alter nutritional status of animal products
- introduce disease resistance
- reduce environmental side effects

90

2

Handmade cloning: manual enucleation

91

3

92

4

93

5

Developmental abnormalities in 
1st generation cloned animals

• Placental malformations
• Fetal overgrowth, prolonged gestation
• Stillbirth, respiratory failure, circulatory
problems, lack of post-natal vigour
• Increased body temperature at birth
• Malformations
• Immune dysfunction
• Infections

Factors causing developmental
abnormalies in cloned animals

• Failure in reprogramming of the donor cell

genome

• Quality of donor cell and recipient oocyte
• Cloning technique itself

94

6

Qiu, Nature 441, 2006

How to improve cloning

1.  Understanding biology of epigenetic

reprogramming
2. Technical improvement

-High quality cloned embryos
-Very few abnormal animals

95

7

96

8

David B. MORTON

Biomedical Science and Ethics
University of Birmingham, United Kingdom

Recognition  
and assessment of pain,  
suffering, 
distress and lasting harm  
(ethical aspects)

Powerpoint Presentation

97

Recognition and assessment of 
pain, suffering, distress and 
lasting harm (ethical aspects)

David B. Morton
University of Birmingham
UK

1

American Veterinary Medical Association

Animal Welfare is:
“. . . a human responsibility that 

encompasses all aspects of animal well-
being, including proper housing, 
management, nutrition, disease 
prevention and treatment, responsible 
care, humane handling and when 
necessary, humane euthanasia.”

2

99

1

WHO
“HEALTH is:
a state of complete
physical, mental and social well-being, 
not merely the  
absence of disease or infirmity”

Could equally apply to animals
NB Also infers positive wellbeing

3

SUFFERING - generic term?

a negative emotional state which 
derives from adverse physical, 
physiological and psychological 
circumstances, 

in relation to the cognitive capacity of 
the species, the individual, and its 
life’s experience.
(Morton, 2000)

4

100

2

The FIVE FREEDOMS - goals

1. Freedom from thirst, hunger and malnutrition

By ready access to fresh water and a diet to maintain full health and 

vigour

2. Freedom from discomfort

By providing an appropriate environment including shelter and a 

comfortable resting area

3. Freedom from pain, injury and disease
By prevention or rapid diagnosis and treatment
4. Freedom to express normal behaviour

By providing sufficient space, proper facilities and company of the 

animal’s own kind

5. Freedom from fear and distress

By ensuring conditions and treatment which avoid mental suffering

Farm Animal Welfare Council (1993) Second Report on 'Priorities for research and development in Farm Animal Welfare'.  Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries 
& Food, Tolworth, London, UK

5

ASSESSMENT OF ANIMAL SUFFERING
costs: harm benefit analysis

Cannot ask the animal - or can we? 

NATURE, INTENSITY, DURATION, NUMBER AFFECTED
Applicable to ALL species strains/breeds

-critical anthropomorphism

Looking at it from the animal’s viewpoint 

Throughout its lifetime
All situations

How do we measure happiness - good welfare?

BENEFIT OF ANY DOUBT over harm- to human or to animal?

6

101

3

Assessment of animal wellbeing
needs a holistic approach

• Behaviour

– Abnormal behaviours and behavioural diversity 

(e.g. time spent)

– Choice tests (simple)
– Economic demand tests

• Clinical signs 
• Blood hormones and target organ responses
• Neurochemical binding patterns
• Response to known pharmacological agents

• Subjective vs Objective - the interpretation

ONGOING PROJECTS

ANIMAL WELFARE SCIENCE - a growing and 

multidisciplinary subject

FUNDING INCREASED more information with time

RELEVANT INITIATIVES

EU WELFARE QUALITY PROJECT
WELFARE LABELLING (EU?, others)
NATIONAL AND RETAILER (multi-national) 
ASSURANCE SCHEMES becoming international

RISK ASSESSMENT APPROACHES being developed

7

8

102

4

OTHER THOUGHTS

Welfare problems appear to be with surrogate dams and F0, 

not F1.  Future technical improvements likely.

Control animals should be: 

normal (?) animals for ALL ‘assisted’ technologies, 
source animal for specifics and ‘performance’ testing as 
well as progeny testing

Elective and therapeutic/rescue Caesareans, Resorptions, 
natural and induced Abortions have different welfare 
impacts - care.

Bio- and genetic diversity - long term loss of breeds?
Can clone animals without (assumption is with?) the specific 
welfare problems - benefits large - “fit and happy” concept.

9

103

5

Kees DE WINTER

Food Department of the European  
Consumers’ Organisation
Brussels, Belgium

The consumers’  
perspective

Powerpoint Presentation

105

The consumers’
perspective 

Kees de Winter,BEUC 

Ethical Aspects of Animal 
cloning for food supply

Brussels

24-25 September 2007

Public concerns on animal cloning for 
food supply 

(cid:57) Public perceptions of farm animal cloning has 
rarely been the main focus of studies of public 
opinion

(cid:57) (2000) INRA Eurobarometer 52.1question on 

cloning animals such as sheep to get milk which 
can be used to make medicines and vaccines:
(cid:131) Mean score in 15 EU countries (-0.17)
(-2= negative +2= positive) 

107

1

Judgements about animal cloning in the 
15 EU membership countries in 1999

(cid:57) Dread of the idea of cloning animals: 61% agree
(cid:57) Cloning will bring benefits to many:  24% agree
(cid:57) Cloning is simply not necessary:        60% agree
(cid:57) Cloning threatens the natural order:    74% agree
(cid:57) It is fundamental unnatural
77% agree
(cid:57) The risks of cloning are acceptable     17% agree
(cid:57) If anything went wrong with cloning animals, it would 

be a worldwide catastrophe      

58% agree             

Consumer opinion: U.S. (I)

(cid:57) International Food Information Council:
(cid:57) “If the FDA determined that meat, milk and 
eggs from cloned animals were safe, how 
likely would you be to buy them?

(cid:131) 9% Very likely
(cid:131) 33% Somewhat likely 
(cid:131) 28% Not too likely
(cid:131) 30% Not at all likely”

(cid:57) The figures mirror the situation in Europe

108

2

Consumer opinion: U.S. (II)

(cid:57) International Food Information Council:
(cid:57) “If the FDA determined that meat, milk and eggs from 
the offspring of cloned animals were safe, how likely 
would you be to buy them?

(cid:131) 9% Very likely 
(cid:131) 32% Somewhat likely
(cid:131) 29% Not too likely
(cid:131) 30% Not at all likely”

(cid:57) Hardly any difference between cloned animals and 

offspring of cloned animals !

Why/When support for applications of 
biotechnology

(cid:57) First usefulness is a preconditions of support;
(cid:57) Second, people seem prepared to accept some risk as 

long as there is a perception of usefulness and no moral 
concern;

(cid:57) Third and crucially moral doubts act as a veto 
irrespective of people’s view on use and risk 

(cid:57) Medical application seen useful as there may be no 

alternative

(cid:57) For the food supply, people believe there are alternatives
(cid:57) Rejection is not based primarily on safety risks

109

3

Public concerns on animal cloning for 
food supply (II)

(cid:57) Petition of the US Center for Food Safety c.s:

(cid:131) Animal welfare concerns

(cid:131) Low success rate of cloning
(cid:131) Suffering of surrogates
(cid:131) Abnormalities in the offspring 
(cid:131) Food safety risks (zoonoses)
(cid:131) Ethical issues implicated

(cid:131) Request for an advisory committee must address public 

concerns

Consequences of cloning for food 
supply with regard to consumer rights

(cid:57) Clones will be used for breeding to make ‘better’ use 

of ‘top’ animals.

(cid:57) Use of embryonic cells to speed up the process?
(cid:57) Clones are not ‘better’ than the source animal, thus 

cloning cannot replace ‘normal’ breeding

(cid:57) Trade in semen? In U.S. several hundreds bulls have 

been cloned

(cid:57) Clones are already used to produce semen.  
(cid:57) Where is this semen used? Also exported? 
(cid:57) Where are the products of the progeny consumed?

110

4

Consumers rights (I)

(cid:57) Ethical aspects 
(cid:57) Product Safety 

(cid:131) Pre-market Risk Assessment. 
(cid:131) Are clones covered by the EU Novel Food 

Regulation?

(cid:131) Is offspring of clones covered by the EU Novel 

Food Regulation?

(cid:131) Are they covered by the GM Food/Feed 

Regulation? 

(cid:131) EC request to EFSA for advice on the implications 
of live cloned animals obtained through SCNT

(cid:131) Position of embryonic cells (ECNT)?

Consumer Rights (II)

(cid:57) Transparency on Animal Health & Welfare issues
(cid:57) Regulation to include process  
(cid:57) Need for RA of clones and progeny including clones 

obtained by embryonic cell nuclear transfer 

(cid:57) Need for public debate
(cid:57) Labelling 

(cid:131) Products from cloned animals
(cid:131) Products from offspring of cloned animals including products 

from offspring  (Directive 2000/13) 

111

5

The European Consumers Organisation  

Bureau Européen des Unions de Consommateurs

Avenue de Tervueren, 36 -1040 Bruxelles  
Tel: 0032 2 743 15 90 - Fax: 0032 2 740 28 02  
Email: consumers@beuc.org  
www.beuc.org

112

6

Gottfried BREM

Agrobiogen GmbH
Germany

Bovine cloning  
in Europe

Powerpoint Presentation

113

EGE Roundtable on 
„the Ethical aspects of cloning for food supply“

Brussels, 24-25 September 2007

Bovine cloning in Europe

Gottfried Brem

What is a clone?

A group of 

two or more individuals
with identical genetic
makeup derived, 

by asexual reproduction, 
from a single common
parent or ancestor.
(f.e. Natural clones in amardillo)

115

1

What is cloning?

Cloning by nucleus transfer
per se is a 

reproductive technique
–
not a 
gene technique

“Clones” versus “Genomic Copies”

A) Embryo-splitting

B) nuclear transfer

Identical nuclear (genomic) DNA

Identical mtDNA

Variable mtDNA

116

2

Nuclear transfer cloning

A) Enucleation of the recipient oocyte

B) Separation of a donor cell

C) Transfer of the donor cell under the Zona

pellucida

D) Electro fusion

E) Reconstructed embryo

Cloning of bovines mostly uses somatic cell
nucleus transfer to generate biological
copies of an animal. 

Clone sibs are
similar identical
but not as identical as 
monozygotic twins. 

117

3

Copying by cloning:

Only the cell is copied.
The adult organism 
must advance and grow biologically!

1 cell

> 1 year

>1,000,000,000,000 cells

>1,000,000,000,000 cells

>1,000,000,000,000 cells

>1,000,000,000,000 cells

>1,000,000,000,000 cells

Clones can be (minimal) genetically different from
each other and from their original by:

• Already pre-existing genetic differencies in the
somatic) cells used as donor cells (caused by
mutations etc.)

• heteroplasmatic mtDNA
• spontaneous changes in the DNA of cells

during development of the fetus and afterwards

• differences in epigenomic reprogramming
• the length of the telomeres

118

4

mtDNA heteroplasmy in NT cattle 

Number 
of clones

Donor cells

% Heteroplasmy

Reference

Embryonic: 24-cell 
morulae (2 clones)

Embryonic: 92-cell 
morulae (2 clones)

Embryonic

Somatic

Somatic

Somatic

Somatic

Somatic

13 -18%

0.4-0.6%

Steinborn et al., 
1998

21-57% (n=2); 
2-4% (n=27)

Hiendleder et al., 
1999

0.6-4% 
in tissues

2.7% (d55 fetus)
0%

<12.7% (n=10) 

Steinborn et al., 
2000

Meirelles et al., 
2001

Steinborn et al., 
2002

<5% in blood (not in other 
tissues analysed)

Hiendleder et al., 
2003

<59% (n=3)

Takeda et al., 
2003

4

29

10

2

22

12

11

Bovine Clones in Europe

France

about 80

Germany 

about 30

Italy

about 10

119

5

No cloned bovines have reached
the food chain in Europe
(to generate clones is much to difficult und costly
for that purpose)

No projects are
established in Europe 
where bovine clones
or their products
have been used
for human food supply in the industry

Reasons are
the still extremely high costs
of the cloning process
and the uncertain situation about
the possibility of the allowance
of using bovine clones
in animal production
and the public concerns about
food of cloned animals.

120

6

Extensive evaluations by the FDA 
have identified no data for any
additional food consumption risks
for bovine clones and their
offspring. 

The main genetic impact of cloning on
animal breeding is the propagation of 
already proven (known) genotypes. 

Thus in the future the first „products“ of
cloned animals to be used in Europe
could be imported semen or embryos of 
cloned animals. 

121

7

Transgenic Clones
(genetically engineered animals)

The main application of cloning in biotechnology industry

is generating so called transgenic animals. 

The genom of somatic cells prior to the cloning process
is changed by moleculargenetic techniques
to add new gene or gene combinations, or modify/silent

existing genes. 

The selected somatic cells are then used for the
generation of genetically modified animals using
somatic nucleus transfer.

There are many advantages and applications for
these technique especially in biotechnology
companies:

production of recombinant proteins

or xenogenetic organs, 

or animal models for human diseases

etc. 

122

8

The industry might be interested
in the future
to use genetic engineering for improving

and optimising product quality and 
quantity, 

decreasing health risks, and the
creation of novel food 
and/or nutraceuticals,
if there will be a market
and certainity about the allowance of using
clones for that purpose.

123

9

European Commission

The Ethical Aspects of Animal Cloning for Food Supply – Proceedings of the Round-table Debate 
Brussels, 24-25 september 2007

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities

2006 — 123 pp. — 21 x 29.7 cm

ISBN 978-92-79-07398-4

How to obtain EU publications

Our priced publications are available from EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu), where you can 
place an order with the sales agent of your choice.

The Publications Office has a worldwide network of sales agents. You can obtain their contact details 
by sending a fax to (352) 29 29-42758.

The Ethical Aspects 
of Animal Cloning  
for Food Supply
Proceedings of the Round-table Debate

brussels, 24-25 september 2007

K
A
-
7
0
-
0
7
-
0
4
4
-
E
N
-
C

ISBN 978-92-79-07398-4

