The European Group on Ethics in Science and New  
Technologies to the European Commission 

Opinion on the ethical aspects of  
nanomedicine 

- Opinion N° 21 - 

-  17 January 2007  - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 

ABSTRACT  

I. HAVING REGARD TO 

II. WHEREAS  

1. Introduction 

2. Scientific and technical background 

2.1 Introduction 

2.2 Nanomedicine: the state of the art  
2.2.1 Diagnostic techniques 
2.2.2 Imaging 
2.2.3 Biomaterials 
2.2.4 Drug development and delivery  
2.2.5 Other potential health related 

applications of nanotechnologies 

2.2.6 Cosmetic applications 
2.2.7 Toxicological aspects  

3. Legal background   

3.1 The legal situation: an overview 

3.2 EU legislation 

3.3 World Trade Organisation (WTO) agreements 
and Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual 
Property Rights (TRIPS) 

3.4 Framework on ethics and human rights 

3.5 Regulatory concerns 

4. Ethics, governance and policies: Problems and concerns  

4.1 Introduction  

4.2 Toxicology and human health 

4.2.1 Safety 
4.2.2 Risk governance 
4.2.3 The precautionary principle 

 1 

5 

7 

11 

11 

13 

13 

13 
16 
17 
18 
19 

20 
21 
21 

23 

23 

24 

30 

31 

33 

36 

36 

37 
37 
38 
39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.3 Bioethical questions 

4.3.1 Protection of individuals 
4.3.2 Informed consent 
4.3.3 Diagnostic complexity and increased  

personal responsibility 

4.3.4 Third-party uses? 
4.3.5 Medical and non-medical uses: 

therapy and enhancement? 

4.3.6 Access from an individual perspective  

4.4 Social ethics 

4.4.1 Economic issues 
4.4.2 Societal debates 
4.4.2.1 Pluralism 
4.4.2.2 Societal dialogue 
4.4.3 Institutional/political issues 
4.4.3.1 The individual and the state 
4.4.3.2 Institutional and regulatory questions 
4.4.3.3 Intellectual property rights 
4.4.4 Research policies 
4.4.4.1 Clinical research involving nanomedical  

applications 

4.4.4.2 Nanotechnology in the 6th Research 
and Development Framework 
Programme (FP6)   

4.4.4.3 Nanotechnology in the 7th Research 
and Development Framework 
Programme (FP7)   
4.4.4.4 Military research and use  
4.4.5 Questions of Justice   
4.4.6 Anthropological questions: Changing 

the human condition   

III. OPINION 

5.1 Introduction 

5.2 Scope of the Opinion 

5.3 Fundamental values and rights 

5.4 Safety  

5.4.1 Risk assessment 
5.4.2 The need for prospective technology 

assessment, including consideration of 
social effects 

 2 

39 
39 
40 

40 
41 

41 
42 

42 
42 
44 
44 
45 
45 
46 
46 
47 
48 

48 

48 

49 
49 
50 

50 

53 

53 

53 

53 

54 
55 

56 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
     
 
     
 
 
 
     
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56 
57 
57 

58 

59 

59 

60 

60 

61 

61 

62 

62 

63 

 65 

67 

69 

5.5 Legal issues 

5.5.1 General issues 
5.5.2 Intellectual property rights 

5.6 Offering nanomedicine tests on the market 

5.7 Information and consent 

5.8 Economics and research funding 

5.9 Communication and public trust 

5.10 The need for interdisciplinary research on the 
Ethical, Legal and Social Implications 
(ELSI) of nanomedicine  

5.11 Ethical deliberation on the concept of 
humanity, human rights, social and 
political conflicts in relation to 
  Nanotechnology 

5.12  Clinical research involving nanomedical 

applications 

5.13  Medical and non-medical uses 

5.14 Sharing of information and establishing 

databases 

5.15 The need for revision of this Opinion   

APPENDIX I 
Examples of projects funded under FP6 

APPENDIX II 
Examples of ELSA projects in the programmes funded under 
FP6 in the area of nanomedicine 

APPENDIX III 
Extract from the Opinion on the appropriateness 
of existing methodologies to assess the potential risks 
associated with engineered and adventitious products 
 of nanotechnologies, produced by the Scientific Committee  
on Emerging and Newly Identified Health Risks (SCENIHR) 

 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX IV 
Nanomedicine, Nanotechnology for Health, from the 
European Technology Platform, Strategic Research 
Agenda for Nanomedicine, November 2006 

APPENDIX V 

Addendum requested from Professor Krzysztof Marczewski, 
EGE Member 

73 

163 

 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 

Nanomedicine and nanotechnology in the EU Research Programme 

Nanomedicine  is  an  area  of  nanotechnology  which  raises  high  expectations  with 
regard to its potentials in diagnostics, drug development and delivery, imaging and 
other  health-  related  applications.  It  is  a  major  research  sector  covered  by  the  EU 
Research and Development Programme. 

Under  the  6th  EU  Framework  Programme  for  research  (FP6)  the  Commission  has 
invested  more  than  €1.36  Billion  in  nanotechnology  (550  projects  financed)  and 
under the 7th Framework Programme for research (FP7) some €3.5 billion should be 
allocated to this research sector.  

The  first  FP7  call  for  proposals  on  nanotechnology  has  been  launched  and  it  has 
been estimated that €300-400 million could be allocated to nanotechnology in 2007.  
Around  €100  million  per  year  is  expected  to  be  allocated  to  nanomedicine  project 
proposals.  

Like  other  research  sectors,  however,  this  new  area  of  nanotechnology  needs  a 
proper analysis of its ethical implications. 

The EGE Opinion on the ethical aspects of nanomedicine. 

In its Opinion the EGE acknowledges that nanomedicine offers the possibility of new 
diagnostic, treatment and preventive methods that may open up promising areas of 
medicine. The Opinion focuses  on ethics issues arising from nanomedicine but also 
discusses  a  number  of  problems  raised  by  nanotechnology  insofar  as  they  concern 
primarily health-related issues.  

The  EGE  underlines  the  vital  importance  of  addressing  concern  for  safety  with 
respect to nanomedical developments (and, in fact, nanotechnology in general) and 
therefore  advocates  the  need  to  establish  measures  to  verify  the  safety  of 
nanomedical  products  and  to  ensure  that  nanomedical  devices  are  properly 
assessed with regard to public health. The Group proposes that institutions already 
operating  at  European  and  national  level  to  protect  the  safety  of  patients  and 
citizens  should  be  charged  with  the  additional  task  of  overviewing  the  safety  and 
security  aspects  of  new  tools  and  devices  in  nanomedicine.  The  Group  then 
underlines  the  need  to  properly  address  risk  assessment  at  national  and  EU  level 
and  invites  relevant  stakeholders  to  devote  adequate  efforts  to  understanding  and 
preventing risks that may be linked to nanomedicine.  

As  far  as  public  participation  is  concerned,  the  Group  argues  that  transparency 
(including openness about uncertainties and knowledge gaps) is essential for public 
trust  in  nanotechnology.  The  Group  therefore  proposes  that  initiatives  should  be 
taken at national and European level to prepare surveys of public perception of the 
benefits and risks of the applications of nanotechnologies, with special reference to 

 5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
medical sectors. The Group also calls for initiatives to be taken to organise academic 
and  public  debates  on  problems  and  possibilities  of  present  and  near-future 
nanomedicine.   

Additionally  the  Group  underlines  the  need  for:  prospective  technology 
assessment, including consideration of social effects (also in developing countries); 
interdisciplinary  research  on  the  Ethical,  Legal  and  Social  Implications 
(ELSI)  of  nanomedicine; 
the  establishment  of  a  European  Network  on 
Nanotechnology  Ethics;  and  enhanced  information  exchange  between  research 
ethics  committees  in  different  Member  States  or  among  competent  bodies  in 
particular  on  toxicity  studies,  ELSI-related  aspects  of  nanomedicine  and  informed 
consent procedures with regard to safety. 

As far as the legal implications of nanomedicine are concerned, the EGE does not 
propose any new regulatory structures specifically dealing with nanomedicine at this 
point, and argues that any changes should be made within existing structures (with 
focus  on  implementation  of  existing  regulations).  The  Group  proposes,  however, 
that  possible  cases  of  nanomedicine  applications  where  there  might  be  overlap 
between regulations, which could create uncertainty as to which regulations should 
be  applied,  should  be  explored  by  the  relevant  authorities  so  that  the  existing 
regulations  can  be  implemented  in  an  unambiguous  way.  In  addition  the  EGE  calls 
for  comparative  research  on  intellectual  property  rights  and  nanomedicine  and 
advocate  the  needs  to  look  further  into  the  balance  between  knowledge  protection 
and information dissemination. 

 6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS 

IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES 

TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

N° 21 

Original in English 

*********************************************************************************** 

ETHICAL ASPECTS OF NANOMEDICINE 

Reference:  

Rapporteurs:  

Opinion  produced  at  the  request  of  José  Manuel 
Barroso,  President  of  the  European  Commission,  dated 
10.11.2005 

Professor Göran Hermerén,  
Professor  Krzysztof  Marczewski  and  Professor  Linda 
Nielsen 

********************************************************************************** 

The  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New  Technologies 

(EGE), 

Having  regard  to  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community  and  in 
particular  Article  6  of  the  common  provisions  concerning  respect  for 
fundamental rights; 

Having  regard  to  the  EC  Treaty,  and  in  particular  Article  152  on  public 
health; 

Having regard to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union of 
28 September  2000,  approved  by  the  European  Council  in  Biarritz  on 
14 October 2000  and  proclaimed  solemnly  in  Nice  by  the  European 
Parliament,  the  Council  and  the  Commission  on  7  December  2000,  and  in 
particular  Article  1  (Human  dignity),  Article  3  (Right  to  the  integrity  of  the 
person) and Article 8 (Protection of personal data);1

1 Official Journal C 364 of 18 November 2000, pp. 1 - 22. 

 7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                    
 
Having  regard  to  the  Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the  Council, 
the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee of 7 June 
2005 “Nanosciences and nanotechnologies: an action plan for Europe 2005 – 
2009”2  and 
in  particular  section  5.1.(b)  thereof,  stating  that  “the 
Commission  will  ask  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New 
Technologies to carry out an ethical analysis of nanomedicine”; 

Having  regard  to  Regulation  (EC)  No  726/2004  of  the  European  Parliament 
and of the Council of 31 March 2004 laying down Community procedures for 
the  authorisation  and  supervision  of  medicinal  products  for  human  and 
veterinary use and establishing a European Medicines Agency;3

Having regard to the Convention on the grant of European patents (European 
Patent Convention) of 5 October 1973 (text as amended by the act revising 
Article  63  EPC  of  17  December  1991  and  by decisions  of  the  Administrative 
Council  of  the  European  Patent  Organisation  of  21  December  1978,  13 
December  1994,  20  October  1995,  5  December  1996,  10  December  1998 
and  27  October  2005  and  comprising  the  provisionally  applicable  provisions 
of the act revising the EPC of 29 November 2000);4  

Having  regard  to  Commission  Directive  2003/63/EC  of  25  June  2003 
amending  Directive  2001/83/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the 
Council  on  the  Community  code  relating  to  medicinal  products  for  human 
use;5

Having  regard  to  Directive  2002/58/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of 
the  Council  of  12 July 2002  concerning  the  processing  of  personal  data  and 
the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector;6

Having  regard  to  Directive  2001/20/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of 
the Council of 4 April 2001 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and 
administrative  provisions  of 
the 
implementation  of  good  clinical  practice  in  the  conduct  of  clinical  trials  on 
medicinal products for human use,7 as amended in 2003 and 2005;  

the  Member  States 

relating 

to 

Having  regard  to  Directive  2001/83/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of 
the  Council  of  6 November  2001  on  the  Community  code  relating  to 
medicinal products for human use;8

Having  regard  to  Directive  98/44/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the 
Council of 6 July 1998 on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions;9

2 COM(2005) 243 final. 
3 Official Journal L 136 of 30 April 2004, pp. 1 - 33. 
4 http://www.european-patent-office.org/legal/epc/e/ma1.html. 
5 Official Journal L 159 of 27 June 2003, pp. 46 - 94. 
6 Official Journal L 201 of 31 July 2002, pp. 37 - 47. 
7 Official Journal L 121 of 1 May 2001, pp. 34 - 44. 
8 Official Journal L 311 of 28 November 2001, pp. 67 – 128. 

 8 

 
                                    
 
Having  regard  to  Directive  95/46/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the 
Council  of  24  October  1995  on  the  protection  of  individuals  with  regard  to 
the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data;10

Having  regard  to  Council  Directive  93/42/EEC  of  14  June  1993  concerning 
medical devices;11

Having  regard  to  Council  Directive  90/385/EEC  of  20  June  1990  on  the 
approximation  of  the  laws  of  the  Member  States  relating  to  active 
implantable medical devices;12

Having regard to Directive 76/768/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council  of  27  July  1976  on  the  approximation  of  the  laws  of  the  Members 
States relating to cosmetic products13

Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament 
and  of  the  Council  of  18 December  2006  concerning  the  Registration, 
Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing 
a  European  Chemicals  Agency,  amending  Directive  1999/45/EC  and 
repealing  Council  Regulation  (EEC)  No  793/93  and  Commission  Regulation 
(EC)  No  1488/94  as  well  as  Council  Directive  76/769/EEC  and  Commission 
Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC 
Having  regard  to  the  Council  of  Europe  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and 
Biomedicine, signed on 4 April 1997 in Oviedo14

Having  regard  to  the  Additional  Protocols  to  the  Council  of  Europe 
Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine,  in  particular  the  Additional 
Protocol  on  Prohibition  of  Human  Cloning  and  the  Protocol  on  Biomedical 
Research; 

Having  regard  to  the  Universal  Declaration  on  the  Human  Genome  and  the 
Rights  of  Man  adopted  by  Unesco  on  11  November  1997,15  the  Declaration 
on  Human  Genetic  Data  adopted  by  Unesco  on  16  October  2003  and  the 
Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights adopted by Unesco on 
19 October 2005; 

Having regard to the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard 
to  Automatic  Processing  of  Personal  Data  adopted  by  the  Council  of  Europe 
on 1 January 1981;16

9 Official Journal L 213 of 30 July 1998, pp. 13 - 21. 
10 Official Journal L 281 of 23 November 1995, pp. 31 – 50. 
11 Official Journal L 169 of 12 July 1993, pp. 1 - 43. 
12 Official Journal L 189 of 20 July 1990, pp. 17 - 36. 
13 Official Journal L 262, 27.9.1976, p. 169 
14 http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/en/treaties/html/164.htm. 
15http://portal.unesco.org/shs/en/ev.php-
URL_ID=2228&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html. 
16 http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Treaties/Html/108.htm).  

 9 

 
                                                                                                                   
 
Having regard to the United Nations Declaration on Human Cloning adopted 
by the UN General Assembly on 8 March 2005;  

Having  regard  to  the  hearings  of  experts  and  Commission  departments  by 
the  EGE  during  their  November  2005,  December  2005,  January  2006  and 
March 2006 meetings;17

Having  regard  to  the  “Vision  Paper  and  Basis  for  a  Strategic  Research 
Agenda  for  NanoMedicine”  published  in  September  2005  by  the  European 
Technology Platform on NanoMedicine; 

Having  regard  to  the  Opinion  on  “The  appropriateness  of  existing 
methodologies  to  assess  the  potential  risks  associated  with  engineered  and 
adventitious products of nanotechnologies” (SCENIHR, 29.9.2005);18

Having  regard  to  the  “Reflection  paper  on  nanotechnology-based  medicinal 
products  for  human  use”  published  in  June  2006  by  the  Committee  for 
Medicinal  Products  for  Human  Use  (CHMP)  of  the  European  Medicines 
Agency; 

Having  regard  to  the  report  “Ethics  and  nanotechnologies:  a  basis  for 
actions” issued by the Quebec Science and Technology Ethics Committee;19  

Having  regard  to  EGE  Opinion  No  17  on  “Ethical  Aspects  of  Clinical  Trials  in 
Developing Countries”;20

Having  regard  to  EGE  Opinion  No  20  on  “Ethical  Aspects  of  ICT  Implants  in 
the Human Body”;21

Having regard to the Roundtable organised by the EGE on 22 March 2006 in 
Brussels; 

Having  heard  the  EGE  rapporteurs,  Professor  Göran  Hermerén,  Professor 
Krzysztof Marczewski and Professor Linda Nielsen; 

17 See agendas on the EGE website: 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm. 
18SCENIHR/002/05, available at: 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/health/ph_risk/committees/04_scenihr/docs/scenihr_o_003.pdf. 
19 http://www.ethique.gouv.qc.ca/. 
20 http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/docs/avis17_en.pdf. 
21 http://europa.eu.int/comm/european_group_ethics/docs/avis20en.pdf. 

 10 

 
                                    
 
II. WHEREAS: 

1. INTRODUCTION 

“The principles of physics, as far as I can see, do not speak against 
the  possibility  of  manoeuvring  things  atom  by  atom.  It  is  not  an 
attempt to violate any laws; it is something, in principle, that can be 
done;  but  in  practice,  it  has  not  been  done  because  we  are  too 
big”.22

It is thanks to this statement that Richard Feynman has been considered the 
grandfather of the concept of nanotechnology, an expression coined by Norio 
Taniguchi,  popularised  by  Eric  Drexler,  and  ever  more  part  of  our  daily 
life.23,24  Characteristically,  each  of  them  had  a  different  aspect  of  this 
fascinating new field of science and technology in mind. 

Although, like nanotechnology, nanoscience is beginning to be familiar to the 
general public, some clarification of the meaning of the two terms is needed. 
The  prefix  “nano”  indicates  one  thousand  millionth  or  10-9.  A  nanometre  is 
10-9  metre.  For  comparison,  a  human  hair  has  a  diameter  of  about  80 
thousand nanometres and a strand of DNA is about 2 nm wide.  

Nanoscience  is  the  study  of  the  properties  of  materials  and  their 
manipulation  at  the  atomic,  molecular  and  macromolecular  scales,  where 
larger  scale,25  and 
properties  differ  significantly 
nanotechnology  is  the  development  and  practical  applications  of  structures 
and devices on a nanometre scale in several fields including medicine. 

from  those  at  a 

Nanotechnology  exploits  the  often  distinctly  different  physical,  chemical  and 
biological  properties  of  materials  at  sizes  similar  to  those  of  molecules 
compared with those of the bulk material. “In nanometre scale structures, it 
is possible to control or change the fundamental characteristics of a material, 
including  its  melting  point,  magnetic  properties,  strengths,  electrical  and 
thermal  conductivity,  porosity,  corrosiveness,  even  colour,  and  –  most 
important in some cases - bio-compatibility, without changing the material’s 

22  Richard  Feynman  (1918-1988),  Nobel  Prize  winner  in  Physics  1965,  lecture  given  on  29 
December 1959 at the annual meeting of the American Physical Society. 
23 Drexler, K.E. (1981) “Molecular engineering: An approach to the development of general 
capabilities  for  molecular  manipulation”,  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences 
USA 78:5275-5278. 
24 Drexler, K.E. (1986) Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology. New York, 
Anchor Press/Doubleday. 
25  The  Royal  Society  &  The  Royal  Academy  of  Engineering  (July  2004)    Nanoscience  and 
nanotechnologies: Opportunities and uncertainties. London, ISBN 0 85403 604 0. 

 11 

 
 
                                    
 
chemical composition”.26 In many cases nanotechnology includes technology 
which has been in use for a long time, and most of the concepts used are not 
strictly speaking new. For instance, the mode of action of all pharmaceutical 
products  occurs  at  nano  scale.  Nanomedicine  essentially  provides  tools  that 
may be useful for well identified medical problems.  

The  European  Science  Foundation  (ESF)  defines  nanomedicine  as  “the 
science  and  technology  of  diagnosing,  treating  and  preventing  disease  and 
traumatic  injury,  of  relieving  pain,  and  of  preserving  and  improving  human 
health, using molecular tools and molecular knowledge of the human body. It 
was perceived as embracing five main sub-disciplines that in many ways are 
overlapping and underpinned by the following common technical issues: 

•  Analytical Tools, 

•  Nanoimaging, 

•  Nanomaterials and Nanodevices, 

•  Novel Therapeutics and Drug Delivery Systems, 
•  Clinical, Regulatory and Toxicological Issues” .27 

techniques,  especially 

In the view of its advocates, nanomedicine may prove to be a very promising 
set  of 
treatment  of 
cardiovascular  conditions,  certain  types  of  cancer,  and  age-related  and 
neurological degenerative illnesses. Although this discipline is in its infancy, it 
is  advancing  very  rapidly.  It  has  the  potential  to  change  medical  science 
dramatically but it also raises urgent ethical issues. 

the  detection  and 

for 

Nanoscience  is  one  of  the  most  rapidly  growing  branches  of  science  applied 
to medical questions.28  

In addition, on 7 June 2005 the Commission adopted a Communication from 
the  Commission  to  the  Council,  the  European  Parliament  and  the  Economic 
and  Social  Committee  entitled  “Nanosciences  and  nanotechnologies:  an 
action plan for Europe 2005 – 2009” (COM(2005) 243 final). Section 5.1.(b) 
of  the  Communication  states  that  “the  Commission  will  ask  the  European 
Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New  Technologies  to  carry  out  an  ethical 

26  Philips  Medical  Systems  Position  in  Nanomedicine,  for  communication  to  the  European 
Commission, Michael H. Kuhn PhD, Jacques Souquet PhD. 
27  “ESF  Forward  Look  on  Nanomedicine”,  European  Science  Foundation,  November  2005, 
available  at:  http://www.esf.org/publication/214/Nanomedicine.pdf  (accessed  9  January 
2006). 
28 According to data for 2005 “more than 130 nano-based drugs and drug delivery systems 
and  125  devices  or  diagnostic  tests  have  entered  preclinical,  clinical,  or  commercial 
development”  (Nanobiotech  News,  4  January  2006,  “2006  Nanomedicine,  Device  & 
Diagnostic  Report”).  This  is  an  increase  of  68%  compared  with  the  previous  year.  Over 
4 000  scientific  papers  (25%  published  in  2006)  in  the  Medline  database  are  related  to 
nanomedicine.  

 12 

 
                                    
 
analysis of nanomedicine. This will identify the primary ethical concerns and 
enable  future  ethical  review  of  proposed  nanoscience  and  nanotechnology 
Research and Devlopment  (R&D) projects to be carried out appropriately”. 

2. SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL BACKGROUND

2.1 Introduction 
The potential of nano-technologies29 raises great hopes. Far-reaching claims 
are made by both opponents and proponents. The first difficulty in describing 
the state of the art accurately is to distinguish between science and science 
fiction,  i.e.  between  the  state  of  the  art  today,  what  may  be  around  the 
corner  tomorrow  and  what  remains  highly  speculative.  The  ethical  issues 
raised at these stages are not necessarily the same.  

Today’s  nanotechnologies  exploit  the  interaction  of  three  technological 
developments: 

•  New  and  improved  control  of  the  size  and  manipulation  of  nano-scale 

building blocks and standardisation of nanodevices; 

•  New and improved characterisation of materials on a nano scale; 

•  New  and  improved  understanding  of  the  relationships  between 

nanostructure and properties and how these can be engineered. 

2.2 Nanomedicine: the state of the art  

Potential  applications  of  nanomedicine  have  been  discussed  in  many  of  the 
reports on nanotechnology and nanoscience, for example those published in 
the UK (the Royal Society and the Royal Academy of Engineering30), Norway 
(Norwegian Research Council), the Netherlands (Dutch Health Council31) and 
Canada32,  as  well  as  by  Unesco33.  An  overview  is  also  available  in  the 

29 For additional background see the Vision Paper and Basis for a Strategic Research Agenda 
for  NanoMedicine  published  in  September  2005  by  the  European  Technology  Platform  on 
NanoMedicine,  and  annexed  with  permission  to  this  Opinion,  and  the  Strategic  Research 
Agenda  on  Nanotechnology  under  the  EU  research  programme  (FP7),  5  June  2006.  Micro-
Nano-Bio  Systems:  Future  RESEARCH  AND  DEVELOPMENTand  New  Challenges.  FP7 
See 
Consultation 
http://cordis.europa.eu/nanotechnology/src/past-highlights.htm. 
30  The  Royal  Society  &  The  Royal  Academy  of  Engineering  (July  2004)    Nanoscience  and 
nanotechnologies: Opportunities and uncertainties. London, ISBN 0 85403 604 0. 
31 http://www.gr.nl/pdf.php?ID=1417&p=1. 
32 http://www.ethique.gouv.qc.ca/. 
33http://portal.unesco.org/shs/en/ev.php-
URL_ID=9648&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html. 

Workshop. 

Brussels, 

2006. 

May 

3 

 13 

 
 
 
                                    
 
proceedings  of  the  Roundtable  on  Nanomedicine  organised  by  the 
Commission and the EGE.34

It has been claimed that clinical use in the short term includes therapies for 
cancer, antiviral and antifungal agents, arteriosclerosis, diabetes, and chronic 
lung  diseases.  In  the  longer  term,  clinical  applications  are  likely  to  involve 
gene therapy and cell repair. 

“Progress  in  the  development  of  nano-sized  hybrid  therapeutics 
and  nano-sized  drug  delivery  systems  over  the  last  decade  has 
been  remarkable.  A  growing  number  of  products  have  already 
secured regulatory authority approval and, in turn, are supported 
by a healthy clinical development pipeline”.35  

According  to  an  expert  group  of  the  European  Medicines  Evaluation  Agency 
(EMEA),  “the  majority  of  current  commercial  applications  of  nanotechnology 
to medicine is geared towards drug delivery to enable new modes of action, 
as  well  as  better  targeting  and  bioavailability  of  existing  medicinal 
substances.  Novel  applications  of  nanotechnology  include  nanostructure 
scaffolds  for  tissue  replacement,  nanostructures  that  allow  transport  across 
biological  barriers,  remote  control  of  nanoprobes,  integrated  implantable 
sensory  nanoelectronic  systems  and  multifunctional  chemical  structures  for 
drug delivery and targeting of disease.”36

The  diagrams  below  indicate  what  has  already  been  achieved  and  what  are 
the future prospects for nanomedicine37

34 http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/publications/index_en.htm. 
35  Ruth  Duncan,  “Microscopic  miracles:  nanomedicines  already  bringing  clinical  benefits  to 
thousands”. Conference on 24 September 2004, Cardiff University.
36  EMEA  Committee  for  Medicinal  Products  for  Human  Use  (CHMP)  “Reflection  paper  on 
nanotechnology-based medicinal products for human use”, June 2006. 
37  Philips  Medical  Systems  Position  in  Nanomedicine,  for  communication  to  the  European 
Commission,  Michael  H.  Kuhn  PhD,  Jacques  Souquet  PhD  and  'Nanotechnology  risk 
governance, white paper'  International risk governance council, Geneve, June, 2006.. 

 14 

 
   
 
 
 
                                    
 
 15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The following paragraphs present some of the key scientific and technological 
aspects  of  nanomedicine,  as  background  to  address  ethical  issues  of 
nanomedicine. 

2.2.1 Diagnostic techniques 

New in vitro diagnostic tests based on nanodevices may shift diagnosis to a 
pre-symptomatic  stage  and  allow  pre-emptive  therapeutic  measures  with 
less invasive methods of extraction. The technology may therefore allow the 
use of cost-effective diagnostic systems with higher performance in terms of 
resolution, sensitivity, specificity, reliability, reproducibility and integration. 
Diagnostic techniques can be either in vitro or in vivo. In vitro techniques are 
used  in  a  wide  variety  of  analyses  including  blood,  urine  and  biopsies. 
Nanotechnologies may be used to improve the performance of DNA chips and 
protein chips, and offer the potential to enhance resolution down to a single-
molecule analysis of standard samples.38 A nanowire array might test a mere 
pinprick  of  blood  (which  is  minimally  invasive)  in  just  minutes,  providing  a 
nearly  instantaneous  scan  for  many  different  cancer  markers.  Such  devices 
could  open  up  substantial  new  possibilities  in  the  diagnosis  of  cancer  and 
other  complex  diseases.39,40  The  first  so-called  “Lab-on-a-chip”  devices  are 
already  being  manufactured:  such  a  device  might  offer  many  of  the 
diagnostic  functions  of  a  medical  laboratory.  In  addition,  hand-held 
diagnostic  kits  may  be  used  to  detect  the  presence  of  several  pathogens  at 
once and could perhaps be used for wide-range screening in small peripheral 
clinics.  These  techniques  have  been  greatly  improved  in  recent  years  and 
they  are  becoming  more  reliable,  inexpensive,  and  miniaturised.  If  the 
efforts  are  successful  they  may  offer  simple,  rapid  and  inexpensive  testing 
both  for  large  numbers  of  patients  (as  in  screening  for  epidemic  diseases) 
and  in  the  testing  of  multiple  parameters  with  one  sample  (as  in  the 
diagnosis of complex conditions). 

including  pulse, 

include  biosensors, 

implants  and  surgical  tools. 
In  vivo  techniques 
Subcutaneous chips are already being developed to continuously monitor key 
body  parameters 
temperature  and  blood  glucose. 
Implantable  sensors  can  also  work  with  devices  that  administer  treatments 
automatically if required, e.g. fluid injection systems to dispense drugs. It is 
expected that systems that will provide real-time assessments of therapeutic 
and  surgical  efficacy  for  accelerating  clinical  treatments  will  soon  be 
invasive 
commercialised.  In  addition,  “the 

integration  of  minimally 

38  Sano  Y,  Shirai  K,  Takahata  N,  Hirata  T,  Sturchio  NC.  Nano-SIMS  analysis  of  Mg,  Sr,  Ba 
and U in natural calcium carbonate. Anal Sci. 2005 September 21 (9), 1091-7. 
39 http://www.nanotechweb.org/articles/news/4/9/17/11 (accessed 31 December 2005).  
40  Herr  JK,  Smith  JE,  Medley  CD,  Shangguan  D,  Tan  W.  Aptamer-conjugated  nanoparticles 
for selective collection and detection of cancer cells. Anal Chem. 2006 May 1;78(9):2918-24. 

 16 

 
 
                                    
 
diagnostics  with  information  technology  for  remote  monitoring  of  the 
patient’s condition may produce a radical shift of the point of care from the 
hospital or clinic into the home”.41  
Diagnostic  techniques  based  on  nanotechnologies  are  already  available.42 
However, in the more distant future, miniaturised devices with biocompatible 
surfaces  could  remain  in  the  body  to  constantly  monitor  and  report  certain 
markers  to  medical  practitioners  (for  cancer  or  cardiovascular  conditions  in 
high-risk patients, for instance). 

2.2.2 Imaging 

Techniques  such  as  tomography,  nuclear  magnetic  resonance  or  ultrasound 
scanning have enormously expanded the classical use of X-rays in producing 
images of increasing quality of the human body that are already widely used 
in  multiple  types  of  diagnosis,  including  analysis  of  functions  of  the  human 
brain. Imaging includes also analysis of microscopic images of tissues used in 
pathology.  Nanotechnologies  may  allow  a  more  precise  diagnosis.  As  an 
example, ultra small, super-paramagnetic iron oxides, with a diameter of less 
than  50  nm,  allow  the  imaging  of  organs  and  have  been  successfully 
evaluated  for  improved  lymph  node  metastases  detection  in  various  clinical 
trials.  

There  are  many  other  techniques  in  use  or  at  the  design  stage  that  use 
nanoparticles to assist in the imaging process or that use nano-techniques to 
provide images of living systems.43,44 These techniques can be both in vivo, 

41  Rickerby  D.G.  “Societal  and  Policy  Aspects  of  the  Introduction  of  Nanotechnology  in 
Healthcare”, International Journal of Health Technology and Management. 
42  A  method  for  the  rapid  collection  and  detection  of  leukemia  cells  using  a  novel  two-
nanoparticle  assay  (Herr  JK,  Smith  JE,  Medley  CD,  Shangguan  D,  Tan  W.  Aptamer-
conjugated  nanoparticles  for  selective  collection  and  detection  of  cancer  cells.  Anal  Chem. 
2006  May  1;78(9):2918-24);  possible  use  of  nanocapsules  of  liquid  perfluorocarbons  as 
ultrasound  contrast  agents  to  visualise  very  small  vessels  in  the  human  body  (Pisani  E, 
Tsapis  N,  Paris  J,  Nicolas  V,  Cattel  L,  Fattal  E.  Polymeric  nano/microcapsules  of  liquid 
perfluorocarbons  for  ultrasonic  imaging:  physical  characterization.  Langmuir.  2006  Apr 
25;22(9):4397-402); a bi-enzyme-based Clark electrode developed for the determination of 
3-hydroxybutyrate  (Kwan  RC,  Hon  PY,  Mak  WC,  Law  LY,  Hu  J,  Renneberg  R.  Biosensor  for 
rapid  determination  of  3-hydroxybutyrate  using  bi-enzyme  system.  Biosens  Bioelectron. 
2006  Jan  15;21(7):1101-6);  nano-liquid  chromatography-mass  spectrometry  to  analyse 
atenolol  enantiomers  present  in  human  urine  samples  of  a  patient  under  atenolol 
(antihypertensive  medicament)  therapy  (D'Orazio  G,  Fanali  S.  Use  of  teicoplanin  stationary 
phase  for  the  enantiomeric  resolution  of  atenolol  in  human  urine  by  nano-liquid 
chromatography-mass spectrometry. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2006 Feb 24;40(3):539-44). 
43 Hauge Bunger M, Foss M, Erlacher K, Bruun Hougaard M, Chevallier J, Langdahl B, Bunger 
C,  Birkedal  H,  Besenbacher  F,  Skov  Pedersen  J.  Nanostructure  of  the  neurocentral  growth 
plate:  Insight  from  scanning  small  angle  X-ray  scattering,  atomic  force  microscopy  and 
scanning electron microscopy. Bone. 2006 Jun 10; [Epub ahead of print]. 

 17 

 
 
                                    
 
for  example  contrast  agents  introduced  in  the  body,  and  ex  vivo,  such  as 
specific markers used in histology. In the more distant future a combination 
of  improved  in  vivo  agents,  scanners  and  software  could  offer  diagnostic 
support  to  the  practitioner  (e.g.  displaying  real-time  statistics  about  similar 
symptoms). 

2.2.3 Biomaterials 

The  biomaterials  in  current  use  are  generally  based  on  metallic  alloys, 
ceramics,  polymers  and  composites.  Significant  efforts  to  mimic  biological 
materials with man-made materials are being made in order to improve their 
function  within  biological  systems.  Nanotechnologies  may  provide  new 
approaches  in  this  direction.  For  example,  the  nanotechnologies  currently 
developed may be used to increase the mechanical properties and biological 
compatibility  of  prosthetic  and  dental  implants,  catheters,  wound  dressings 
and  medical 
instruments.  Furthermore,  nanotechnology  can  help  to 
understand and mimic the structures and biochemical pathways that lead to 
natural  healing,  with  the  future  potential  to  induce  and  support  healing 
beyond  the  normal  capabilities  (e.g.  after  massive  loss  of  tissue,  in  the 
restoration  of  neural  structures  or  even  in  the  restoration  of  complete 
organs).  

By applying bioactive nanoparticle coatings on the surface of implants, it will 
be  possible  to  bond  the  implant  more  naturally  to  the  adjoining  tissue  and 
significantly prolong the implant lifetime.  

In  addition  to  the  above  described  applications,  implants  for  knee  joints 
coated with nano-crystalline diamond films have properties such as extreme 
hardness,  wear  resistance,  low  friction  and  high  biocompatibility.  Silver 
nanoparticles  are  also  being  used  in  antibacterial  coatings  for  implants, 
catheters,  wound  dressings  and  medical  instruments.  Further  examples 
include the following: 

•  A  self-sterilising  lancet  coated  with  a  titanium  dioxide  photocatalytic 
nano-layer has been developed for self-monitoring of blood glucose.45 

•  Novel  dental  materials  might  have  longer  life-spans,  biocompatibility 
and other properties. Nano-indentation could also be used to measure 
the quality of resins for dental restoration.46  

44 Plotkin M, Gneveckow U, Meier-Hauff K, Amthauer H, Feussner A, Denecke T, Gutberlet M, 
Jordan  A,  Felix  R,  Wust  P.  18F-FET  PET  for  planning  of  thermotherapy  using  magnetic 
nanoparticles in recurrent glioblastoma. Int J Hyperthermia. 2006 Jun;22(4):319-325. 
45  Nakamura  H,  Tanaka  M,  Shinohara  S,  Gotoh  M,  Karube  I.    Development  of  a  self-
sterilizing lancet coated with a titanium dioxide photocatalytic nano-layer for self-monitoring 
of blood glucose. Biosens Bioelectron. 2006 Sep 18. 

 18 

 
 
                                                                                                                   
 
•  Cell  encapsulation  with  nano-membranes  might  allow  completely  new 

ways of treating diseases such as diabetes. 

2.2.4 Drug development and delivery 

Drug  delivery  may  be  one  of  the  main  applications  of  nanotechnologies  in 
medicine.  Pharmaceuticals  embedded  or  enclosed  in  targeted  nanocarriers 
may allow a new degree of specificity and efficacy in the delivery of drugs.  

A  key  characteristic  of  nano-pharmaceuticals  is  their  complexity:  they  can 
combine  several  characteristics.  They  could  deliver  therapeutic  molecules 
directly  across  biological  barriers  (such  as  the  blood-brain  barrier  or  the 
blood-retina barrier) by bearing specific molecules or charges on their outer 
shell.  At  the  same  time  this  shell  could  include  specific  reagents  such  as 
antibodies  that  bind  to  specific  targets  (e.g.  molecules  which  are  typical  for 
cancer  or  for  inflammation).  The  carrier  could  be  made  of  physiologically 
stable  material  which  only  disintegrates  on  binding  to  its  target  (or  on 
receiving  an  external  signal,  administered  by  the  practitioner).  This  would 
allow  the  delivery  of  high-potency  pharmaceuticals  which  either  could  have 
adverse effects when administered systemically or may not be administered 
successfully by conventional methods at all. 

Early clinical trials have already commenced for nano-pharmaceuticals, and a 
number  of  pharmaceuticals  already  available  are  not  marketed  as 
nanomedicines  but  would  actually  fulfil  the  definition.  The  benefit  of  new 
drug  delivery  systems  for  the  patient  will  be  fewer  side-effects,  improved 
efficacy  and  the  treatment  of  diseases  and  disease  stages  that  currently 
cannot be effectively treated.47 Some examples of drug delivery systems are 
nano-emulsions, conjugates, multi-component systems, liposomal anticancer 
agents, antibody drug conjugates, and nanoprecipitation.48 Methods could be 
combined (e.g. first isolating diseased tissue from the vascular system, then 
locally  releasing  a  substance  which  induces  cell  death).  Novel  forms  of 
therapy  are  possible  too  (for  instance  a  new  form  of  thermotherapy:  iron 
nanoparticles can be enriched in cells of malign brain cancer and will create 
local heating when the practitioner places the patient in an external magnetic 
field  –  thereby  enhancing  the  effects  of  chemo-  and  radiation-therapy). 

46  Hosoya  Y.  Hardness  and  elasticity  of  bonded  carious  and  sound  primary  tooth  dentin.  J 
Dent. 2006 Feb;34(2):164-71. 
47 Sethuraman VT, Bae YH. Stimuli-sensitive polymeric micelles as anticancer drug carriers.  
Anticancer  Agents  Med  Chem.  2006  Nov;6(6):525-35;  Thorne  SH.  Strategies  to  achieve 
systemic  delivery  of  therapeutic cells  and  microbes  to  tumors. Expert  Opin  Biol  Ther.  2007 
Jan;7(1):41-51. 
48 Bilati U, Allemann E, Doelker E. Development of a nanoprecipitation method intended for 
the entrapment of hydrophilic drugs into nanoparticles. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2005 Jan;24(1):67-
75. 

 19 

 
 
                                                                                                                   
 
Novel drug release coatings for stents will reduce restenosis without potential 
adverse effects.  

In conjunction with pharmacogenetics and pharmacogenomics, nanomedicine 
may help to offer “personalised” pharmaceutical therapy, when the individual 
mechanisms of drug response are better understood.  

Another possibility would be the combination of miniaturised biosensors with 
drug  reservoir  units  for  implantation;  a  wireless  integrated  system  could 
regulate drug release, receive sensor feedback, and transmit updates.49   

2.2.5 Other potential health related applications of nanotechnologies 

(a) Regenerative medicine 
The  potential  applications  of  nanotechnology  in  regenerative  medicine  also 
include improvement in the activation of genes that stimulate regeneration of 
living  tissues;  production  of  nano-  and  micro-engineered  biocompatible 
membranes;  improvement  in  the  performance  and  duration  of  neural 
prostheses; faster regeneration of novel bone substitutes; and creation of a 
new  lymphocyte  factory  that  re-establishes  normal  immune  response  in  a 
patient.  

According to the Vision Paper and Basis for a Strategic Research Agenda for 
NanoMedicine,  nanotechnology  may  “allow  for  improvement  of  non-
resorbable  biomaterials  and  effective  manipulation  of  biological  interactions 
at the nanometer level, which will dramatically increase the functionality and 
longevity of implanted tissues.  

Similarly, it may be possible in the future to surround implanted tissues with 
a  nanofabricated  barrier  that  would  prevent  activation  of  the  rejection 
mechanisms of the host, allowing a wider utilisation of donated organs”.  

(b) Stem cell therapy 

Stem  cell  therapy  combined  with  nanotechnology,  based  on  magnetic  cell 
sorting,  also  offers  promising  possibilities  for  the  regeneration  of  diseased 
tissue.  Stem  cells  may  be  identified,  activated  and  guided  to  the  place  of 
damage within the body with the use of cell–signalling molecules as a source 
of molecular regeneration messengers. 

49 Staples M, Daniel K, Cima MJ, Langer R. Application of micro- and nano-electromechanical 
devices to drug delivery. Pharm Res. 2006 May 5. 

 20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                    
 
(c) Implants 

With regard to the use of electronic nanodevices, it has also been advocated 
that  nano-  and  related  micro-technologies  might  be  used  to  develop  a  new 
generation of smaller and potentially more powerful devices to restore loss of 
vision. Another future approach may be the use of a miniature video camera 
attached to a blind person’s glasses to capture visual signals processed by a 
microcomputer  worn  on  the  belt  and  transmitted  to  an  array  of  electrodes 
placed  in  the  eye.  Another  uses  a  sub-retinal  implant  designed  to  replace 
photoreceptors in the retina. 

For hearing, an implanted transducer may be pressure-fitted onto a bone in 
the  inner  ear,  causing  the  bones  to  vibrate  and  move  the  fluid  in  the  inner 
ear, which stimulates the auditory nerve.50

2.2.6 Cosmetic applications 

One major area of health related non-medical nanotechnological applications 
is  in  the  field  of  cosmetics.  A  number  of  cosmetics  products  using 
nanotechnology are already on the market51. The market is growing at about 
10% a year and companies believe that nanotechnology will help to create a 
new  generation  of  products.  Toxic  effects  connected  with  the  use  of 
nanocosmetics  have  not  been  reported  so  far,  but  both  US  Food  and  Drug 
Administration  and  the  Royal  Society  in  Britain  have  stressed  a  lack  of 
knowledge in this area52.  

2.2.7 Toxicological aspects 

Nanotechnologies  are  employed  in  a  wide  variety  of  applications  ranging 
from  automobile  construction  to  building  techniques,  from  textiles  to 
cosmetics.  Although  these  technologies  are  not  nanomedical  applications  in 
themselves, the use of nanomaterials may have health effects when they are 
dispersed in the environment. Toxic effects of some nanoparticles have been 
already demonstrated in cells, tissues and small animal experiments.  

Some  materials  used  at  nano  scale  may  increase  the  probability  of 
nanoparticles  entering  the  body  and  circulating  or  being  absorbed  into 
specific  organs.  Nanoparticles  may  act  in  a  different  way  in  tissues  such  as 
the  respiratory  organs  and  may  be  catabolised  in  a  different  way  by  the 
organism  and  recycled  differently  by the  environment,  when  compared  with 

50 See also EGE Opinion No 20 “Ethical Aspects of ICT Implants in the Human Body”. 
51  Ruetsch  SB,  Kamath  YK,  Kintrup  L,  Schwark  HJ.  Effects  of  conditioners  on  surface 
hardness of hair fibers: an investigation using atomic force microscopy. J Cosmet Sci. 2003 
Nov-Dec;54(6):579-88. 
52 http://www.timesonline.co.uk/article/acessed 2007-01-16 

 21 

 
 
 
                                    
 
larger  particles.  Nanoparticles  can  deposit  in  the  respiratory  tract  after 
inhalation. There is currently little evidence from skin penetration studies but 
only a few specific nanoparticles have been investigated in a limited number 
of  test  systems,  and  extrapolation  of  this  data  to  other  materials  is  not 
possible.53  
It is important to monitor the possible adverse effects on health arising from 
the  use  of  free  new  nanoparticles  for  diagnostic,  therapeutic  or  cosmetic 
purposes.  Such  adverse  effects  may  be  due  to  accumulation  in  tissue  or 
organs;  to  the  consequences  on  cellular  metabolism  of  the  organism 
involved, including potential protein conformational change – e.g. prions; as 
well  as  to  the  possible  promotion  of  tumour  formation.  There  are  examples 
indicating  that  known  and  widely  accepted  toxicological  methods  are  not 
sufficient to detect possible damaging effects of nanoparticles.54   

53Borm  PJ, Robbins  D,  Haubold  S, Kuhlbusch  T,  Fissan  H, Donaldson K,  Schins  R, Stone  V, 
Kreyling  W,  Lademann  J,  Krutmann  J,  Warheit  D,  Oberdorster  E.  The  potential  risks  of 
nanomaterials: a review carried out for ECETOC. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2006 Aug 14;3:11. 
54  Wang  B,  Feng  WY,  Wang  TC, Jia  G,  Wang M,  Shi  JW, Zhang  F,  Zhao  YL,  Chai  ZF.  Acute 
toxicity of nano- and micro-scale zinc powder in healthy adult mice. Toxicol Lett. 2006 Feb 
20;161(2):115-23. 

 22 

 
                                    
 
3. LEGAL BACKGROUND

The current legal systems in Europe were not designed for nanomedicine as 
such;  but  this  does  not  mean  that  nanomedicine  is  unregulated.  The  legal 
background is primarily derived from European Union legislation, from other 
international  instruments  and  from  general  principles  underlying  national 
legislation. These legal principles are mostly to be found in texts concerning 
different subject matters, including medicinal products, medical devices, data 
questions  and  general  bioethical  principles  on  information,  consent,  safety 
and justice.  

3.1 The legal situation: an overview  

Many  reports  mentioned  in  section  2.2  address  legal  questions,  but  specific 
legislation  on  nanomedicine  has  not  been  introduced  in  European  Union 
Member States.  

Most  of  the  existing  regulations  result from  transposition  of  the  relevant  EU 
legislation  into  the  national  legal  systems.  This  is  supplemented  by  some 
global  provisions,  issued  by  the  World  Trade  Organisation  (WTO),  and  an 
international  framework  on  ethics  and  human  rights.  The  latter  is  only  to  a 
limited  extent  legally  binding.  These  rules55  are  described  briefly  in  the 
following  (according  to  their  legal  force),  focusing  on  their  importance  for 
nanomedicine,  with  special  reference  to  definitions,  procedures  and  the 
content of the provisions.    

(A)  European  Union  (EU)  legislation  on  products,  clinical  trials,  data  and 
patents 

- Medicinal products 
- Medical devices 
- Cosmetics  
- Chemicals 
- Clinical trials 
- Data protection (personal data) 
- Patents 
- Other relevant EU legislation 

(B) Global provisions issued by the World Trade Organisation (WTO) 

- General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)  

55  As  the  topic  of  this  Opinion  is  nanomedicine,  the  description  focuses  on  human  health. 
Legislation on the environment, foodstuffs etc. is thus not described. 

 23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                    
 
- Sanitary and PhytoSanitary (SPS) agreement on trade 
- Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS)  

(C) International framework on ethics and human rights  

- Council of Europe Convention for the protection of human rights and 
fundamental freedoms 
-  Council  of  Europe:  Convention  on  human  rights  and  biomedicine  –
known as the Bioethics Convention (Oviedo) 
- EU Charter of Fundamental Rights. 
- Unesco Declaration on the human genome and human rights 
- Unesco Declaration on bioethics and human rights  

Legislation adopted by the European Union is binding for the Member States, 
but  there  are  differences  in  the  nature  of  obligations.  Legislation  related  to 
the  placing  of  products  on  the  EU  market,  e.g.  medical  devices,  medicinal 
products  and  cosmetics,  constitutes  a  harmonised  system  at  Member  State 
level, whereas legislation on Good Clinical Practice may be supplemented by 
national rules, as Community law establishes minimum provisions. The data 
protection and patent provisions are binding for the EU Member States.  

WTO agreements ratified by a great number of nations form the legal ground 
rules  for  international  commerce.  They are  binding  for  the  States  that  have 
signed and ratified them.  

The  international  framework  on  ethics  and  human  rights  is  legally  binding 
only  to  a  limited  extent.  The  Council  of  Europe  Convention  on  Bioethics, 
based  on  the  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and 
Fundamental  Freedom  (4.11.1950),  is  binding  for  the  States  that  have 
signed  and  ratified  it,  but  not  all  EU  countries  have  done  so.56  However, 
European  projects  funded  under  the  EU  research  framework  programmes 
also  have  to  comply  with  the  principles  enshrined  in  that  Council  of  Europe 
Convention.  The  Unesco  Declarations  and  the  EU  Charter  of  Fundamental 
Rights are not legally binding, but they have moral authority. All three types 
of rules may be supplemented by national regulation.  

3.2 EU legislation 

There is a wide range of Community legislation related to issues relevant for 
in  existence  or  being 
nanotechnology  and  nanomaterials,  currently 

56  As  of  November  2006,  the  Convention  has  been  signed  by  21  EU  Member  States  and 
ratified 
http://www.coe.int/t/e/legal_affairs/legal_co-
operation/bioethics/texts_and_documents/1Treaties_COE.asp#TopOfPage. 

them. 

See 

13 

by 

of 

 24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                    
 
elaborated.  These  issues  primarily  have  to  do  with  risk  assessment. 
Examples of legislation relevant for nanomedicine are the following: 

(a)  Medicinal  products  marketed  in  the  European  Union  are  covered  by 
comprehensive EU legislation.57  
Medicinal products are defined in the EU legislation as follow: 

"Medicinal product: 
Any  substance  or  combination  of  substances  presented  for  treating  or 
preventing  disease  in  human  beings.  Any  substance  or  combination  of 
substances which may be administered to human beings with a view to making 
a  medical  diagnosis  or  to  restoring,  correcting  or  modifying  physiological 
functions  in  human  beings  is  likewise  considered  a  medicinal  product."  (Art. 
1.2; 2001/83/EC58) 

All  medicinal  products  marketed  in  the  European  Union  must  obtain  an  EU 
product authorisation. Directive 726/2004 lays down Community procedures 
for  the  authorisation  and  supervision  of  medicinal  products  for  human  and 
veterinary  use  and  establishes  a  European  Medicines  Evaluation  Agency 
(EMEA). EMEA’s task, according to its mission statement, is  

“to  contribute  to  the  protection  and  promotion  of  public  and  animal  health  by 
mobilising  scientific  resources  from  throughout  the  EU  to  provide  high  quality 
evaluation  of  medicinal  products,  to  advise  on  research  and  development 
programmes  and  to  provide  useful  and  clear  information  to  users  and  health 
care  professionals  developing  efficient  and  transparent  procedures,  to  allow 
timely  access  by  users  to  innovative  medicines  through  a  single  European 
marketing authorisation, and in particular through a pharmacovigilance network 
and the establishment of safe limits for residues in food producing animals”.  

The European regulatory system for medicinal products offers two routes for 
authorising medicinal products: 

A “centralised procedure” with applications made directly to EMEA, leading – 
if approval is obtained – to the grant of a European marketing authorisation 
by the Commission. Use of this procedure is compulsory for products derived 
from biotechnology, and optional for other innovative medicinal products. 

A  ”mutual  recognition”  procedure,  which  is  applicable  to  the  majority  of 
conventional  medicinal  products.  Applications  are  made  to  the  Member 
States  selected  by  the  applicant  and  the  procedure  operates  by  mutual 
recognition  of  national  marketing  organisations.  Purely  national 

57    Regulation  (EC)  No  726/2004,  Directive  2001/83/EC,  Directive  2003/94/EC,  Directive 
2003/63/EC. 
58 http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/pri/en/oj/dat/2001/l_311/l_31120011128en00670128.pdf 

 25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                    
 
authorisations are still available for medicinal products to be marketed in one  
Member State.  

Both  procedures  are  based  on  a  wide  range  of  requirements  laid  down  in 
implementing rules and – de facto binding – guidance documents.  National 
clinical trials preceding an EU authorisation must observe the rules laid down 
in  the  Declaration  of  Helsinki,  which  means,  among  other  things,  that  they 
must be assessed by an ethical review committee.59 Seen in an international 
context, this EU regulatory system is unique in providing a network between 
all national regulatory bodies, coordinated by EMEA. 

(b)  Medical  devices  are  also  covered  by  EU  regulation,  but  the  Directive  on 
medical  devices60  does  not  make  placing  on  the  market  subject  to  a  prior 
marketing authorisation issued by public authorities.  

A medical device is defined as “any instrument, apparatus, appliance, software, 
material  or  other  article,  whether  used  alone  or  in  combination,  together  with 
any  accessories,  including  the  software  necessary  for  its  proper  application 
intended  by  the  manufacturer  to  be  used  for  medical  purposes  for  human 
beings  for  the  purpose  of  diagnosis,  prevention,  monitoring,  treatment  or 
alleviation  of  disease,  …  investigation,  replacement  or  modification  of  the 
anatomy  or  of  a  physiological  process,  control  of  conception,  and  which  does 
not  achieve  its  principal  intended  action  in  or  on  the  human  body  by 
pharmacological, immunological or metabolic means, but which may be assisted 
in  its  function  by  such  means”.  The  Directive  does  not  apply  to  human  blood, 
blood products, blood cells of human origin, human tissue engineered products, 
etc.  

However,  depending  on  risks  involved,  devices  can  only  be  placed  on  the 
market  if  they  have  been  subject  to  a  conformity  assessment  procedure 
involving  a  third  party,  a  so-called  Notified  Body,  designated  by  a  Member 
State.  The  Directive  deals  primarily  with  risk  management.  Manufacturers 
are  obliged  to  carry  out  an  assessment  of  the  risks  and  to  adopt  a  risk 
management  strategy.  This  means  that  they  have  to  adopt  measures  to 
eliminate  risks,  or  to  reduce  risks  as  far  as  possible,  take  the  necessary 
protection measures in relation to risks that cannot be eliminated and, as a 
last resort, inform users of the residual risks due to any shortcomings of the 

59  “The  design  and  performance  of  each  experimental  procedure  involving  human  subjects 
should be clearly formulated in an experimental protocol. This protocol should be submitted 
for  consideration,  comment,  guidance,  and  where  appropriate,  approval  to  a  specially 
appointed  ethical  review  committee,  which  must  be  independent  of  the  investigator,  the 
sponsor or any other kind of undue influence.” See http://www.wma.net/e/policy/b3.htm. 
60  Directive  93/42/EEC  concerning  medical  devices  and  90/385/EEC  relating  to  active 
implantable medical devices. See: 
http://europa.eu.int/smartapi/cgi/sga_doc?smartapi!celexapi!prod!CELEXnumdoc&lg=EN&nu
mdoc=31993L0042&model=guicheti. 

 26 

 
 
 
 
 
                                    
 
protection  measures  adopted  and  advise  any  other  protective  measure 
regarding  risks  that  cannot  be  eliminated.  The  Directive  on  medical  devices 
includes a risk-benefit analysis.   

(c) Cosmetics   
Cosmetic  products  are  also  covered  by  an  EU  Directive.61  A  “cosmetic 
product” is defined in Article 1 as: 

“any substance or preparation intended to be placed in contact with the various 
external parts of the human body or with the teeth and the mucous membranes 
of the oral cavity with a view exclusively or mainly to cleaning them, perfuming 
them,  changing  their  appearance  and/or  correcting  body  odours  and/or 
protecting them or keeping them in good condition”.  According to Article 2, “a 
cosmetic  product  put  on  the  market  within  the  Community  must  not  cause 
damage to human health when applied under normal or reasonably foreseeable 
conditions  of  use,  taking  account,  in  particular,  of  the  product’s  presentation, 
its  labelling,  any  instructions  for  its  use  and  disposal  as  well  as  any  other 
indication or information provided by the manufacturer or his authorised agent 
or  by  any  other  person  responsible  for  placing  the  product  on  the  Community 
market”.  

The  Directive  lays  down  requirements  in  the  form  of  a  number  of  positive 
and negative lists of ingredients. The basic obligation on a manufacturer is to 
carry  out  a  risk  assessment.  The  manufacturer  must  have  available  an 
assessment  of  the  safety  for  human  health  of  the  finished  product.  To  that 
end, the manufacturer must take into consideration the general toxicological 
profile  of  the  ingredients,  their  chemical  structure  and  their  level  of 
exposure.  The  risk  assessment  must  take  particular  account  of  the  specific 
exposure characteristics of the areas on which the product will be applied or 
of the population for which it is intended. There must be inter alia a specific 
assessment for cosmetic products intended for use on children under the age 
of  three  and  for  cosmetic  products  intended  exclusively  for  use  in  external 
intimate hygiene.  

In contrast to the so-called “New Approach” type legislation (see below), the 
Cosmetics  Directive  does  not  provide  for  verification  of  the  manufacturer’s 
risk assessment by a third party before the product is placed on the market. 
This means that whether the legal requirements are met depends ultimately 
on assessment by manufacturer.   

 (d) Chemicals are embraced by one set of rules concerning the Registration, 
Evaluation,  Authorisation  and  Restriction  of  Chemicals  (REACH),62  which 

61Directive 1976/768/EEC. See: 
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/cosmetics/html/consolidated_dir.htm. 
62  The  REACH  Regulation  was  formally  adopted  on  18  December  2006  by  the  Council  of 
Environment  Ministers  following  the  vote  in  second  reading  of  the  European  Parliament  on 

 27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                    
 
introduces changes to the current regulatory system, inter alia by placing the 
burden of risk assessment on manufacturers instead of authorities, widening 
the 
replacing  decentralised 
implementation  by  a  centralised  European  system,  and  replacing  a  set  of 
rules that have grown over time by a single regulatory system.63  

registration  of 

chemicals, 

scope 

for 

(e)  Clinical  trials  for  medicinal  products  are  covered  by  an  EU  Directive  on 
Clinical Trials,64 which was amended in 200365 and 200566. The purpose is to 
rationalise  the  procedure  involving  documentation  and  administration 
required  for  conducting  clinical  trials,  and  to  ensure  that  patients  are 
afforded  the  same  protection  in  all  EU  Member  States.  Before  clinical  trials 
may  commence  a  number  of  criteria  must  be  satisfied,  including  the 
weighing  of  predictable  risks  and  drawbacks  as  regards  the  therapeutic 
benefit  for  each  trial  subject  and  society  as  a  whole;  respect  for  the  trial 
subject’s right to physical and mental integrity and right to personal privacy; 
and the obtaining of informed consent. 

(f) Data protection is covered by the Directive on the processing of personal 
data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector.67 
Article  8  provides  protection  regarding  health  data  and  establishes 

13 December 2006. REACH will enter into force on 1 June 2007. The text of the Regulation 
was  published  on  30  December  2006  in  Official  Journal  of  the  European  Union  L  396  
(Regulation  (EC)  No  1907/2006  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of 
18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of 
Chemicals  (REACH),  establishing  a  European  Chemicals  Agency,  amending  Directive 
1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation 
(EC)  No  1488/94  as  well  as  Council  Directive  76/769/EEC  and  Commission  Directives 
91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC. See:  
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/chemicals/reach/reach_intro.htm). 
63 “Article 1: Aim and scope 
1. The purpose of this Regulation is to ensure a high level of protection of human health and 
the environment, including the promotion of alternative methods for assessment of hazards 
of  substances,  as  well  as  the  free  circulation  of  substances  on  the  internal  market  while 
enhancing competitiveness and innovation. 
2. This Regulation lays down provisions on substances and preparations within the meaning 
of Article 3. These provisions shall apply to the manufacture, placing on the market or use of 
such substances on their own, in preparations or in articles and to the placing on the market 
of preparations. 
3.  This  Regulation  is  based  on  the  principle  that  it  is  for  manufacturers,  importers  and 
downstream  users  to  ensure  that  they  manufacture,  place  on  the  market  or  use  such 
substances that do not adversely affect human health or the environment. Its provisions are 
underpinned by the precautionary principle.” 
64 Directive 2001/20/EC. 
65 Directive 2003/63/EC. 
66 http://clusters.wallonie.be/servlet/Repository/Directive_2005/28/EC_EN__comp.PDF? 
IDR=5482. 
67 Directive 2002/58/EC, Directive 95/46/EC.  

 28 

 
 
 
                                                                                                                   
 
exemptions  from  the  provisions  laid  down  in  the  Directive  for  data  required 
for the purposes of preventive medicine, medical diagnosis, the provision of 
care  or  treatment  or  the  management  of  health-care  services,  and  where 
those data are processed by a health professional subject under national law 
or  rules  established  by  national  competent  bodies  to  the  obligation  of 
professional secrecy.68   

(g)  The  Patent  Directive,69  on  protection  of  biotechnological  inventions,  is 
designed to ensure effective legally harmonised protection of patents, and in 
doing  so  encourage  innovation  and  promote  investment  in  the  field  of 
biotechnology,  and  to  establish  legal  certainty.  The  inventor  secures 
exclusive  rights  to  control  commercial  exploitation  of  his  invention  for  20 
years and, in return, he must disclose a detailed description of his invention, 
making  the  new  knowledge  available  to  all.  This  disclosure  enables  others 
(researchers  etc.)  to  build  on  the  knowledge  gained.  The  patent  may  be  a 
product claim or a process claim.70

The  standard  criteria  for  patentability  include  novelty,  inventive  step  and 
industrial  application.  According  to  Article 3,  “biological  material  which  is 
isolated  from  its  natural  environment  or  produced  by  means  of  a  technical 
process may be the subject of an invention even if it previously occurred in 
nature”. The Directive contains provisions laying down restrictions based on 
ethical concerns, i.e. ordre public or morality (Article 671).  

In  addition,  diagnostic,  therapeutic  and  surgical  methods  are  traditionally 
excluded from patenting. This exclusion was intended to maintain the sharing 
of medical knowledge and know-how for the benefit of patients. It does not 
concern products or drugs used for medical purposes. In Europe there is also 
a  traditional  academic  exemption,  mentioned  in  most  national  laws,  which 

68  “Article  8:  The  processing  of  special  categories  of  data.  1.  Member  States  shall  prohibit 
the processing of personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious 
or  philosophical  beliefs,  trade-union  membership,  and  the  processing  of  data  concerning 
health or sex life. … 3. Paragraph 1 shall not apply where processing of the data is required 
for  the  purposes  of  preventive  medicine,  medical  diagnosis,  the  provision  of  care  or 
treatment or the management of health-care services, and where those data are processed 
by  a  health  professional  subject  under  national  law  or  rules  established  by  national 
competent bodies to the obligation of professional secrecy or by another person also subject 
to an equivalent obligation of secrecy.” See:  
http://europa.eu.int/ISPO/legal/en/dataprot/compenfr.html. 
69 Directive 98/44/EC. 
70 See also EGE Opinion No 16 on “Ethical aspects of patenting inventions involving human 
stem cells”  (http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/docs/avis16_en.pdf). 
71  According  to  the  Directive  on  biological  inventions,  “inventions  shall  be  considered 
unpatentable  where  their  commercial  exploitation  would  be  contrary  to  ordre  public  or 
morality; however, exploitation shall not be deemed to be so contrary merely because it is 
prohibited by law or regulation”.Directive 98/44/EC,  Article 6(1). 

 29 

 
 
                                    
 
allows  further  research  without  paying  a  licence  to  the  inventor,  if  such 
research is not commercial.  

The Directive above also states (Article 7) that the EGE  “evaluates all ethical 
aspects of biotechnology”. 

(h) Other EU legislation 

Other  European  Union  legislation  of  specific  importance  for  risk  assessment 
issues  includes  Directive  2001/18/EC  on  the  deliberate  release  into  the 
environment  of  genetically  modified  organisms  and  repealing  Council 
Directive  90/220/EC;72  Regulation  (EC)  No  1946/2003  on  transboundary 
movements  of  genetically  modified  organisms;73  Directive  90/219/EEC  on 
the  contained  use  of  genetically  modified  micro-organisms;74  and  Council 
Directive  98/81/EC  amending Directive 90/219/EEC on the contained use of 
genetically modified micro-organisms.75

3.3 World  Trade  Organisation  (WTO)  agreements  and  Trade-Related 
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) 

(a)  The  mission  of  the  World  Trade  Organisation  (WTO)  is  to  develop  a 
multilateral system of trade, the aim of which is to lower customs and trade 
barriers, and to abolish discrimination in international trade. The World Trade 
Organisation pledges to work for sustainable development and protection of 
the  environment.  The  heart  of  the  WTO  system  is  the  agreements, 
negotiated and signed by a large majority of the world's trading nations and 
ratified by their parliaments. These agreements are the legal ground rules for 
international commerce. 

The  General  Agreement  on  Tariffs  and  Trade  (GATT)  and  the  Sanitary  and 
Phyto  Sanitary  (SPS)  agreement  include  measures  that  might  impact  on 
trade between nations and stipulate, for example, that measures may not be 
introduced in breach of the principle of non-discrimination if these are based 
on  the  precautionary  principle.    In  cases  where  “relevant  scientific  evidence 
is insufficient”,  a Member may, according to Article 5(7), “adopt sanitary or 
phytosanitary  measures  on  the  basis  of  available  pertinent  scientific 
information,  including  that  from  the  relevant  international  organisations  as 
well as from sanitary or phytosanitary measures applied by other members. 
In  such  circumstances,  Members  shall  seek  to  obtain  the  additional 

72http://europa.eu/eur-lex/pri/en/oj/dat/2001/l_106/l_10620010417en00010038.pdf. 
73 http://europa.eu/eur-lex/pri/en/oj/dat/2003/l_287/l_28720031105en00010010.pdf. 
74 http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31990L0219:EN:HTML. 
75 http://europa.eu/eur-lex/pri/en/oj/dat/1998/l_330/l_33019981205en00130031.pdf. 

 30 

 
 
     
 
 
 
                                    
 
information  necessary  for  a  more  objective  assessment  of  risk  and  review 
the sanitary or phytosanitary measure accordingly within a reasonable period 
of time”.  

(b)  The  Trade-Related  Aspects  of  Intellectual  Property  Rights  (TRIPS) 
agreement  also  contains  a  provision  (Article  25(2))  allowing  Member  States 
to  exclude  from  patentability  inventions  that  are  contrary  to ordre  public  or 
morality  or  in  order  to  protect  human,  plant  or  animal  life,  or  in  order  to 
avoid serious detriment to the environment. It is unclear how the clause on 
morality  in  the  TRIPS  agreement  will  be  implemented  for  nanomedicine.76 
“Diagnostic,  therapeutic  and  surgical  methods  for  the  treatment  of  humans 
and  animals”  may  be  excluded  from  patentability  (Article  27(3)(a)), 
something which may impact on the patentability of nanomedicinal products 
(or on patentability in the domain of nanomedicine). 

3.4 Framework on ethics and human rights 

As  already  mentioned,  the  Council  of  Europe  Convention  on  Human  Rights 
and  Biomedicine  (the  Oviedo  Convention)  is  legally  binding  for  those  States 
that  have  signed  and  ratified  it.  Other  relevant  documents  (such  as  the 
Unesco  Declaration  and  the  EU  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights)  are  not 
legally binding, but have moral authority. 

(a) The Council of Europe has issued the Oviedo Convention – Convention on 
Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine.  Its  main  purpose  is  to  protect  individuals 
against  exploitation  arising  out  of  treatment  or  research.  The  article  on  the 
purpose  and  object  of  the  Convention  states  that  the  Parties  “shall  protect 
the dignity and identity of all human beings and guarantee everyone, without 
discrimination,  respect  for  their  integrity  and  other  rights  and  fundamental 
freedoms  with  regard  to  the  application  of  biology  and  medicine”.  The 
Convention  also  concerns  equitable  access  to  health  care,  professional 
standards,  protection  of  genetic  heritage  and  scientific  research.  It  contains 

76  In  the  Patent  Directive  (98/44/EC)  there  are  two  major  exclusions  from  patentability: 
“ordre  public”  and  “morality”.  Where  the  commercial  exploitation  or  publication  of  the 
invention would be contrary to morality or affect ordre public, patentability is excluded (not 
immoral experimentation leading to the invention). The TRIPS agreement permits exclusion 
on  these  grounds.  There  have  been  few  exclusions  on  the  grounds  of  morality,  although 
Article  6(2)  of  the  Patent  Directive  provides  examples  (stressing  that  these  are  non-
exhaustive) of possible “immoral” inventions which shall be unpatentable: (a) processes for 
cloning human beings; (b) processes for modifying the germ line genetic identity of human 
beings; (c) uses of human embryos for industrial or commercial purposes; and (d) processes 
for modifying the genetic identity of animals which are likely to cause them suffering without 
any  substantial  medical  benefit  to  man  or  animal,  and  also  animals  resulting  from  such 
processes. 

 31 

 
 
  
 
 
                                    
 
several  detailed  provisions  on  informed  consent.  The  Convention  is 
supplemented by a number of additional protocols.77

(b)  The  Universal  Declaration  on  the  Human  Genome  and  Human  Rights, 
adopted by Unesco’s General Conference in 1997 and subsequently endorsed 
by  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly  in  1998,  deals  with  the  human 
genome and human rights. Since the Declaration was drafted in 1997 it does 
not  refer  explicitly  to  nanomedicine,  but  modifications  that  are  targeted  to 
DNA  may  fall  within  its  scope.  It  states,  among  other  things,  that  the 
“human  genome  underlies  the  fundamental  unity  of  all  members  of  the 
human  family  as  well  as  the  recognition  of  their  inherent  dignity  and 
diversity”.  The  Declaration  asserts  that  “dignity  makes  it  imperative  not  to 
reduce  individuals  to  their  genetic  characteristics  and  to  respect  their 
uniqueness and diversity”. Moreover, the Declaration prohibits financial gain 
from the human genome in its natural state, and affirms that the benefits of 
advances  in  the  technologies  should  be  made  available  to  all,  and  that 
freedom  of  research  is  “necessary  for  the  progress  of  knowledge”.  The 
Declaration also contains provisions on the informed consent principle. 
The  recently  adopted  Unesco Universal  Declaration  on  Bioethics  and  Human 
Rights  (adopted  on  19  October  2005)  also  contains  specific  provisions  on 
ethical  issues  related  to  medicine,  life  sciences  and  associated  technologies 
and  advocates  several  ethical  principles,  including  human  dignity,  consent, 
autonomy  and  responsibility,  privacy,  equity  and  justice,  solidarity  and 
benefit  sharing.78  The  Declaration  is  not  legally  binding,  but  is  a  reference 
point for the protection of human rights and ethics. 

(c)  The  European  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights79  emphasises  that  the 
Union  is  founded  on  the  indivisible  and  universal  values  of  human  dignity, 
freedom, equality and solidarity and on the principles of democracy and the 
rule of law. It contributes to the preservation of these common values while 
respecting  the  diversity  of  the  cultures  and  traditions  of  the  peoples  of 
Europe,  as  well  as  the  national  identities  of  the  Member  States  and  the 
organisation of their public authorities. The Charter formulates a common set 
of  basic  shared  values  at  EU  level.80  Respect  for  human  dignity,  a  ban  on 
for  people’s  autonomy,  non-
respect 
human 

reproductive  cloning, 

77http://www.coe.int/t/e/legal_affairs/legal_cooperation/bioethics/texts_and_documents/1Tr
eaties_COE.asp#TopOfPage. 
78 http://portal.unesco.org/shs/en/file_download.php/46133e1f4691e4c6e57566763d474 
a4dBioethicsDeclaration_EN.pdf. 
79    Approved  on  28  September  2000  and  proclaimed  by  the  European  Parliament,  the 
Council and the Commission on 7 December 2000. 
80 For example Article 1 (respect for human dignity), Article 3 (ban on human reproductive 
cloning,  respect  for  people’s  autonomy,  non-commercialisation  of  biological  components 
derived  from  the  human  body,  prohibition  of  eugenic  practices),  Article  8  (data  protection 
issues), Article 13 (freedom of science). 

 32 

 
 
 
                                    
 
commercialisation  of  biological  components  derived  from  the  human  body, 
prohibition  of  eugenic  practices,  protection  of  people’s  privacy,  freedom  of 
science:  these  are  examples  of  values  enshrined  in  the  Charter,  which  was 
adopted at the Summit of Nice in 2001. 

3.5 Regulatory concerns 

The regulatory concerns include a number of questions:  

a.  Does  regulation  embrace  the  relevant  areas  of  nanomedicine, 
so that no major area is left out? 
b. Is the legislation clear and comprehensive, without overlap? 
c. Does regulation secure adequate protective measures, including 
evaluation of health-related risks? 
d. Is the implementation of existing regulations adequate? 
e.  Is  the  present  patent  system  adequate  to  deal  with  problems 
regarding  knowledge  protection  and  information  dissemination  in 
nanomedicine? 
f. What are the challenges for future regulatory discussions?  

a.  Does  regulation  embrace  the  relevant  areas  of  nanomedicine,  so  that  no 
major area is left out? 

There is extensive regulation of areas where nanomedicine is used 
in products. Medicinal products and medical devices are subject to 
strict rules. Cosmetics are also subject to rules requiring inter alia 
risk  assessment,  but  without  verification  of  the  manufacturer’s 
risk  evaluation.  These  provisions  will  probably  embrace  the 
products  for  which  nanomedicine  is  being  used.  A  regulatory 
framework  is  in  place  for  research  in  humans  and  clinical  trials, 
but  informed  consent  may  present  a  challenge:  see  below  in  the 
ethical  section  (4.3.1).  Patents  are  possible,  but  the  distinction 
between  products  and  drugs,  on  the  one  hand,  and  diagnostic, 
therapeutic  and  surgical  methods,  on  the  other,  may  be  blurred. 
These problems are dealt with in part 4 of this text.   

b. Is the legislation clear and comprehensive, without overlap? 

The  lack  of  a  clear  legal  definition  of  nanomedicine,  and  the  fact 
that  current  regulation  is  based  on  other  characteristics  where 
nanomedicine  was  not  part  of  the  considerations  on  which  the 
wording  was  based,  present  a  problem,  as  it  may  be  unclear 
whether nanomedicine is to be placed within or outside the scope 
of  certain  legislation.  Some  nanomedicinal  innovations  may  fall 
within  several  categories  of  regulation  which  may  apply 

 33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simultaneously. For example, nanomedical products may combine 
different  mechanisms  of  action,  be  they  mechanical,  chemical, 
pharmacological  or  immunological.  There  may  therefore  be  a  risk 
not  only  of  uncertainty  as  to  which  regulation(s)  are  applicable, 
but also of there being a plethora of regulatory provisions that are 
of relevance. Both situations are problematic from a legal point of 
view.  

Most  important  is  the  fact  that  it  is  not  in  the  present  legal 
situation always obvious which directives etc. apply and how they 
should be interpreted. Clarity would enable scientists, producers of 
nanomedicine etc. to make sure they operate on safe ground, and 
European  society  would 
feel  more  secure  knowing  which 
safeguards are required and applied.  

Uncertainty  and  overlap  may  result  in  a  situation  where  the 
manufacturer may have to apply different systems or can choose 
between different systems with different procedures and different 
risk evaluations and assessments.  

c. Does regulation secure adequate protective measures, including evaluation 
of health-related risks?  

Risk  assessment  is  included  in  virtually  all  product  legislation 
relevant  to  nanomedicine.  There  is  an  obligation  on  the  producer 
to carry out, although to different degrees, a risk assessment and 
to  adopt  risk-management  measures  for  the  risks  covered  by 
individual directives and regulations. As a general rule these risks 
are defined broadly. This is the case for medical devices, cosmetic 
products,  chemicals,  etc.  In  the  case  of  medical  devices  the  risk 
assessment and risk management approach is supplemented by a 
risk/benefit  analysis;  clearly  identified  risks  that  have  been 
reduced as far as possible can be accepted, provided the benefits 
outweigh  the  possible  adverse  effects.  Finally,  as  part  of  their 
post-market  obligations,  manufacturers  have  to  set  up  a  risk 
management  scheme  in  relation  to  aspects  not  covered  by  the 
marketing authorisation. 

Wide  experience  has  been  built  up  in  the  sector  regarding  new 
risks. EMEA has created the Innovation Task Force (ITF) to ensure 
EMEA-wide coordination of scientific and regulatory competence in 
the  field  of  emerging  technologies,  including  nanotechnologies, 
and  to  provide  a  forum  for  early  dialogue  with  applicants  on 
regulatory,  scientific  or  other  issues  that  may  arise  from  the 
development. 

 34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
d. Is the implementation of existing regulations adequate? 

Even if regulation includes provisions on risk assessment, this only 
provides  adequate  protection  if  the  implementation  includes 
sufficient scientific expertise and the risk actually can be assessed 
and managed. Specific efforts are needed to develop measures for 
implementing  existing  regulations  that  would  respond  to  the 
implications of nanomedicine.  

e.  Is  the  present  patent  system  adequate  to  deal  with  problems  regarding 
knowledge protection and information dissemination in nanomedicine? 

The  aim  of  the  patent  system  is  to  encourage  innovation  by 
striking  a  balance  between  knowledge  protection  and  information 
dissemination.  There  is,  however,  a  risk  of  excessively  broad 
patents  being  granted  and  the  risk  that  the  research  exemption 
and the exemption for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes can be 
challenged.  These  factors  make  the  present  patent  system  less 
well adapted to deal adequately with, on the one hand, knowledge 
protection  and,  on  the  other,  information  dissemination  in  the 
area  of  nanomedicine,  especially  if  combined  with  a  liberal  policy 
of  granting  patents.  The  balance  between  disclosure  and 
inventors' rights is skewed.  

f. What are the challenges for future laws and regulations?   

The challenges are primarily:  

- the risk evaluation for nanomedicine may not be adequate in all 
areas; 

-  the  implementation  of  risk  evaluation  measures  should  be 
carried out in a scientifically sound and transparent manner; 

-  there  is  a  need  for  legal  clarity  in  a  number  of  areas  especially 
where regulations and/or areas overlap; 

- ethical dimensions must be taken into account in legal provisions 
on nanomedicine. 

 35 

 
 
 
 
 
4. ETHICS, GOVERNANCE AND POLICIES: PROBLEMS AND CONCERNS

4.1 Introduction  

All  areas  of  science  and  new  technology  developed  within  the  European 
Union  must  be  consistent  with  the  ethical  principles  stated  in  the  European 
Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights.  The  overall  principle  of  human  dignity  is 
spelled out in several chapters of the Charter, both as protective or negative 
rights (rights not to be unjustly hindered in actions, be it on the individual or 
the  institutional  level;  and  rights  to  be  protected  against  maltreatment  or 
unjustified  risks  caused  by  the  actions  of  others)  and  as  positive  rights 
(rights to be upheld in people’s everyday lives and/or raising the standard of 
living  for  those  who  do  not  have  the  means  to  fully  participate  in  the 
activities of European society).  

Against this background the questions arising are: How should the dignity of 
people  participating  in  nanomedicine  research  trials  be  respected?  How  can 
we  protect  the  fundamental  rights  of  citizens  that  may  be  exposed  to  free 
nanoparticles  in  the  environment?  How  can  we  promote  responsible  use  of 
nanomedicine  which  protects  both  human  health  and  the  environment?  And 
what are the specific ethics issues, such as justice, solidarity and autonomy, 
that have to be considered in this scientific domain?  

All these questions call for a proper assessment of issues related to dignity, 
safety,  individual  and  social  ethics,  public  policy,  the  economy,  societal 
debates, and socio-cultural anthropology. 

As  can  be  seen  from  the  structure  set  out  in  the  table  of  contents,  social, 
economic,  political  and  ethical  concerns  will  be  separated  below,  though  in 
reality  they  are  interrelated  in  complex  ways  and  need  to  be  properly 
addressed  if  nanomedicine  is  to  be  used  in  a  way  which  is  ethically  sound, 
democratically discussed and respectful of citizens’ rights.  

Furthermore, it is important on the one hand to distinguish between: 

• 
• 
• 
• 

Present, near-future and more distant future (futuristic) uses; 
Specific and non-specific problems; 
Medical and non-medical issues; 
Traditional and new concepts of health and disease. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  also  important  to  recognise  that  these  distinctions 
raise  additional  problems.  Nevertheless,  because  nanomedicine  may  affect 
citizens,  both  directly  (trials)  or  indirectly  (possible  exposure  to  free 

 36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
nanoparticles into the environment), it is important to underline the safety of 
this  technology  in  order  to  protect  their  rights,  their  property  and  their 
aspirations.  

4.2 Toxicology and human health  

4.2.1 Safety   

Safety  issues  of  nanotechnology  and  nanomedicine  have  been  addressed  in 
several  reports  across  the  world.  The  SCHENIR  report  and  the  White  Paper 
Nanotechnology risk governance published in June 2006 by the International 
Risk  Governance  Council  are  two  examples  of  reports  on  risk  governance 
issues of nanotechnologies. Other examples have already been referred to in 
section 3.2 of this Opinion.  

While  using  different  approaches  and  methods,  the  above  reports  agree  in 
stressing the lack of data on possible risks associated with nanomedicine and 
the  human  health  and  ecological 
nanotechnology  with 
consequences of nanoparticles accumulating in the environment.  

regard 

to 

For  example,  the  Dutch  Health  Council  report  on  the  health  significance  of 
nanotechnology argues that “there is still a lack of understanding about the 
possible  dangers  of  new,  synthetic  nanoparticles.  This  applies  to  the  nature 
of  possible  health  and  environmental  impacts  as  well  as  to  their  severity  … 
there  are  good  grounds  for  thoroughly  investigating  the  toxicological 
properties of nanoparticles that do not readily dissolve or degrade”. 

the 

issue  of 

In  addition  (to  quote  the  Unesco  report  on  the  ethics  and  politics  of 
nanotechnology81), 
the  safe  and  responsible  use  of 
nanomedicine  and  nanotechnology  raises  “two  concerns:  the  hazardousness 
of nanoparticles and the exposure risk. The first concerns the biological and 
chemical  effects  of  nanoparticles  on  human  bodies  or  natural  ecosystems; 
the  second  concerns  the  issue  of  leakage,  spillage,  circulation,  and 
concentration  of  nanoparticles  that  would  cause  a  hazard  to  bodies  or 
ecosystems.”  

For clarity, however, a distinction needs to be drawn here between risks for 
the patients undergoing an application of nanomedicine (for example risks of 
toxic  effects  on  a  person  involved  in  clinical  trials  or  a  medical  treatment) 
and  health-related  risks  associated  with  the  toxicological  and  eco-
toxicological effects of nano-pollution (impact of free nanoparticles on public 
health and the environment).   

Since this Opinion deals with nanomedicine, the key concerns in terms of risk 
assessment  refer  mainly  to  the  first  kind  of  risk.  But  the  impossibility  of 

81 http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0014/001459/145951e.pdf. 

 37 

 
 
                                    
 
drawing  a  precise  borderline  between  the  two  dimensions  will  make  it 
necessary  to  comment  on  risks  to  health  also  in  a  broad  sense.  Risk 
assessment  is  therefore  conceived  here  not  only  as  a  technical  element  for 
the  safe  governance  of  nanotechnology  but  rather  as  a  factor  conducive  to 
the  protection  of  the  human  dignity  and  autonomy  of  the  persons  directly 
(medical applications) or indirectly (exposure to free nanoparticles) involved, 
as well as the protection of the environment. 

As  far  as  nanomedicine  is  concerned,  the  risk  assessment  issues  refer  to 
possible  health  effects  in  terms  of  toxicity  for  the  patients  involved.  For 
example,  how  do  we  check  that,  because  of  their  greater  capacity  to  pass 
through biological systems (for instance, crossing the blood-brain barrier and 
penetrating  into  the  brain),  nanodevices  designed  for  drugs  delivery  would 
not  induce  negative  side-effects  for  the  patients  (for  example,  because  of 
possible  accumulation  of  cross-effects  in  tissue  or  organs;  or  consequences 
with regard to the cellular metabolism of the organism involved)? Or how can 
we  devise  valid  animal  testing  models to  monitor  such  side-effects?  Or  how 
can  we  promote  the  safe  use  of  nanomedicine  and  prevent  some  potential 
protein conformational change or possible promotion of tumour formation in 
the absence of adequate toxicological data? 

Concerns  have  also  been  raised  about  the  potential  health  risks  for 
individuals other than patients due to the spread of free nanoparticles in the 
environment.  The  recycling  of  free  and  bound  nanoparticles,  and  the 
possibility  that  such  particles  may  pollute  water,  air  and  soil,  raise  issues 
about  safety,  and  how  the  interests  of  the  industry,  competing  for  market 
shares, are to be balanced against other interests.  

4.2.2 Risk governance 

Concerns  are  also  raised  by  the  difficulties  of  identifying,  estimating  and 
managing  risks  in  an  area  where  there  are  considerable  uncertainties  and 
knowledge  gaps,  and  when  the  short-term  and  long-term  risks  may  be 
different.  Similar  concerns  are  raised  by  benefit  management.  These  issues 
have been dealt with in several already published reports.82  

In this context, the temptation of exaggerating benefits (“hype”) should also 
be  considered.  The  competition  for  research  funds  may,  with  the  assistance 
of media and science fiction writers, contribute to creating nanomedical hype 
with  regard  to  the  curability  of  all  diseases.  Likewise,  concerns  need  to  be 
documented too, in order to avoid hyped-up hopes being replaced by hyped-
up  fears.  The  risks  associated  with  nanotechnologies  are  well  addressed  in 
the SCENIHR report. 

82  See  the  White  Paper  Nanotechnology  risk  governance  published  in  June  2006  by  the 
International Risk Governance Council and the references in that report. 

 38 

 
 
                                    
 
In  addition  to  more  technical  risk  governance,  a  broader  approach  must  be 
developed that is better able than present instruments to adjust to possible 
changes, in the environment, in societies, in market economics or in national 
policies.  

4.2.3 The Precautionary Principle  
As  stated  in  EGE  Opinion  No  20,83  the  Precautionary  Principle  does  not 
necessitate impassable boundaries or bans. It is a general risk management 
tool  (which  was  originally  restricted  to  environmental  matters).  The 
Commission Communication of February 2000 states that:  

“The  precautionary  principle  is  not  defined  in  the  Treaty,  which 
prescribes  it  only  once  -  to  protect  the  environment.  But  in 
practice,  its  scope  is  much  wider,  and  specifically  where 
preliminary  objective  scientific  evaluation  indicates  that  there  are 
reasonable  grounds  for  concern  that  the  potentially  dangerous 
effects on the environment, human, animal or plant health may be 
inconsistent  with  the  high  level  of  protection  chosen  for  the 
Community” (Communication Summary, paragraph 3).84  

The basic constituents of the Precautionary Principle and the prerequisites for 
its  application  are  the  existence  of  a  risk,  the  possibility  of  harm,  and 
scientific  uncertainty  concerning  the  actual  occurrence  of  this  harm.  Having 
referred  to  the  Precautionary  Principle  the  risk  manager  has  to  decide  on 
precautionary  actions  which  are  proportionate  to  the  potential  harm  being 
mitigated and which do not attempt to create “zero risk” situations. The risk 
management  actions  should  be  aimed  at  identifying  the  “acceptable  risk” 
threshold  with  regard  to  the  values  at  stake  –  and  respect  for  the  human 
body is undoubtedly one of the values deserving the highest legal protection.  
Though rooted in fundamental requirements, the Precautionary Principle is a 
dynamic  tool  that  can  follow  developments  in  a  sector  and  continuously 
verify  that  the  conditions  for  the  acceptability  of  a  given  innovation  are 
fulfilled – thereby enhancing governance.85

4.3 Bioethical questions  

4.3.1 Protection of individuals  

The protection offered by international declarations and guidelines applies to 
both  health  care  and  medical  research;  it  includes  the  obligation  to  obtain 

83 http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/docs/avis20_en.pdf. 
84 http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/health_consumer/library/pub/pub07_en.pdf. 
85  See  the  White  Paper  Nanotechnology  risk  governance  published  in  June  2006  by  the 
International Risk Governance Council and the references in that report. 

 39 

 
 
 
 
 
                                    
 
free  and  informed  consent  from  patients  and  participants  in  research  and 
specifies  the  measures  to  be  taken  when  patients  and  participants  in 
research  are  for  various  reasons  (minors,  mentally  incapacitated,  etc.) 
unable to give consent.  

The  principles  stated  in  the  above  declarations  and  guidelines  also  specify 
the obligations to protect individuals and societies against unpredictable risks 
on the basis of the precautionary principle and a risk-benefit analysis, which 
includes  also  long-term  risks  and  benefits.  The  principles  mentioned  above 
are  also  applied  to  health-related  risks  of  nanotechnology,  not  only  in  the 
medical  contexts,  which  are  in  focus  here,  but  also  in  other  contexts  where 
nanotechnologies are used.  

Some  particular  problems, which  will  also  be  addressed  in  this  text,  include 
how  to  deal  with  medical  information,  considering  the  knowledge  gaps  and 
uncertainties,  and  with  predictive  information  where  more  extensive 
information becomes available much more rapidly than before. 

4.3.2 Informed consent 

Consent  may  not  be  too  difficult  to  obtain  -  but  when  is  it  informed?  And 
when is it free? Informed consent requires the information to be understood. 
How is it possible to give information about future research possibilities in a 
rapidly  developing  research  area  and  to  make  a  realistic  risk  assessment  in 
view of the many unknowns and the complexities?  

In view of the knowledge gaps, and the complexity of the matter, concerning 
the long-term effects of nanomedical diagnostic and therapeutic tools, it may 
be difficult to provide adequate information concerning a proposed diagnosis, 
prevention  and  therapy  needed  for  informed  consent.  Here  the  distinction 
between invasive and non-invasive procedures is very important, since they 
raise different concerns.  

4.3.3 Diagnostic complexity and increased personal responsibility 

Nanomedicine  offers  new  diagnostic  possibilities,  where  the  results  will  be 
available  with  unprecedented  speed,  magnitude,  and  precision  at  the 
molecular  level.  The  results  may  be  complex  and  difficult  to  interpret.  New 
disease  dispositions  not  known  today  may  be  discovered.  However,  the 
increased  speed  of  the  diagnosis  and  the  implications  for  personal 
responsibility  are  hardly  new  in  principle;  these  issues  have  been  discussed 
extensively  in  the  context  of  genetic  testing.86  Genetic  testing  can,  like 

86  The  EGE  has  addressed  the  manifold  problems  in  previous  opinions.  They  also  apply  to 
genetic tests using nanomedical devices.  

 40 

 
 
 
                                    
 
nanomedicine,  provide  tools  for  predictive  information.  With  the  use  of 
micro-array  analysis,  for  example,  the  speed  of  this  kind  of  genetic 
diagnostics will increase further.  

This  trend  in  nanomedicine  reinforces  tendencies  in  health  care  where  the 
improved  precision,  the  increasing  number  of  options  and  the  speed  of  the 
diagnostics  will  on  the  one  hand  enhance  personal  freedom,  at  least 
theoretically. But it can also, on the other hand, create anxiety by increasing 
individual  responsibility  for  the  choices  made.  This  may  lead  to  a  shift  of 
responsibility  between  doctors  and  patients  so  that  the  responsibility  of 
patients  for  their  health  will  increase.  If  the  most  enthusiastic  advocates  of 
nanomedicine  are  right,  it  may  also  affect  the  very  concepts  of  health  and 
disease.  

4.3.4 Third-party uses? 

What  are  the  implications  of  nanomedicine  for  problems  raised  in  cases 
where  the  information  obtained  by  refined  nanomedical  diagnostic  methods 
is  used  by  third  parties,  in  particular  insurance  companies  and  employers? 
Will these have access to the extensive diagnostic data that may be collected 
from citizens? If so, under what conditions? 

If there is a risk that the traditional system of insurance, based on solidarity 
and the principle of equal ignorance, can be undermined by the availability of 
new  and  more  precise  diagnostic  tools  based  on  nanotechnology,  and  we 
want to keep the traditional system, we need to think about how to limit the 
access  to  this  more  precise  information.  These  issues  are  not  in  principle 
new, however – they have been discussed already in the literature and in the 
EGE Opinion on Genetic testing in the workplace.87

4.3.5 Medical and non-medical uses: therapy and enhancement? 

Another issue that may raise concerns here is the fine line between medical 
and  non-medical  uses  of  nanomedical  methods  for  diagnostic,  therapeutic 
and preventive purposes.  

The  borderline  between  medical  and  non-medical  applications  is  not  all  that 
clear, but it is possible to give examples illustrating fairly clear cases of both. 
Non-medical applications include intentional changes in or to the body due to 

See  EGE  Opinion  No  18,  28.7.2003:  Ethical  aspects  of  genetic  testing  in  the  workplace 
(http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/docs/avis18_en.pdf): 
http://ec.europa.eu/research/conferences/2004/genetic/report_en.htm;  Opinion  No  16  of 
the  Group  of  advisers  to  the  European  Commission  on  the  ethical  implications  of 
biotechnology (GAEIB) (http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/docs/opinion6_en.pdf). 
87 http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/docs/avis18_en.pdf. 

 41 

 
 
 
                                                                                                                   
 
what  a  person  wants,  when  these  wants  are  not  related  to  medical  needs, 
even if such medical needs are difficult to define clearly.  

Another  problem  is  that  non-medical  applications  can  allow  us  to  obtain 
information  about  solutions  to  health  problems,  as  was  discussed  in  our 
previous Opinion on ICT implants.88 So there are several problems with the 
medical/non-medical  distinction  apart  from  the  well-known  ones  discussed 
for example in the context of cosmetic surgery. 

Concerns have also been expressed that new nanomedical tools can be used 
not only to transgress the border between medical and non-medical uses but 
also to open the door to ethically problematic enhancements, for the reasons 
discussed  in  the  Opinion  on  ICT  implants.  This  raises  questions  not  only  for 
the  state  but  also  for  the  individual:  how  can  we  preserve  the  plurality  of 
life-styles  and  avoid  the  transformation  of  the  medical  system  into  a  mere 
service system for whatever desire individuals may have? 

4.3.6 Access from an individual perspective  

Access  to  health-care  and  new  medical  technologies  is  often  seen  as  a 
challenge  for  fair  health-care  systems.  Individuals  may  struggle  to  gain 
access  to  nanomedical  innovations,  even  taking  on  considerable  financial 
costs.  If  they  cannot  afford  new  diagnostics,  drugs,  or  therapies  offered  to 
them, they may feel left behind or even as second-class citizen. Apart from 
the  social  question  of  discrimination  and  injustice,  how  do  individuals  cope 
with  the  gap  between  availability  in  principle  and  non-availability  in  their 
concrete  lives?  Simultaneously  to  the  development  of  new  nanomedical 
diagnostics,  drugs,  and  therapies,  this  question  needs  to  be  addressed  as 
part  of  a  societal  and  ethical  debate.  This  may  also  apply  to  some 
nanomedical applications. 

4.4 Social ethics 

Social  ethics  addresses  questions  that  are  of  economic,  social  and  public 
concern and issues concerning governance and institutions. 

4.4.1 Economic issues 

In  January  2006,  following  a  decision  taken  at  the  Hampton  Court  Summit 
during  the  UK  Presidency  of  the  EU,  an  Independent  Expert  Group  on 
Research,  development  and  Innovation  produced  a  report  on  how  research 
should  be  fully  integrated  into  the  EU’s  strategy  plan  for  economic  growth 
and economic development. The Group, chaired by the former Prime Minister 
of Finland, Mr Esko Aho, provided a clear and comprehensive analysis of the 

88 http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/docs/avis20_en.pdf. 

 42 

 
 
 
                                    
 
fundamental  steps  to  be  taken  to  bring  research  into  the  core  of  economic 
development: from investment of 3% of Gross Domestic Product in research 
to the creation of an innovation-friendly market, from financial mobility and 
venture  capital  to  mobility  in  organisation  and  knowledge.  The  report 
indicated  nanotechnology  as  one  of  the  most  promising  research  areas  for 
economic development, innovation and the goals of the Lisbon agenda.89

There  are  numerous  companies  involved  in  the  invention,  development  and 
marketing of drugs, delivery systems, analytical tools and diagnostic systems 
based on, or using, nanomaterials. For an estimation of the economic impact 
and  the  market  potential  of  nanomedicine,  see  the  forecasts  in  section  3  of 
the Vision Paper (reprinted here as an Appendix). 

Investment  in  nanotechnology  is  very  large  throughout  the  world.  In  2004 
the  British  Royal  Society90  quoted  EU  sources  indicating  the  amount  of 
funding for this technology as follows: 

Europe 

Japan  

US  

Current funding for research in nanotechnology is about €1.6 billion in 
2005,  two  thirds  of  which  comes  from  national  and  regional 
programmes. 

With  the  launch  of  its  nanotechnology  strategy  in  2003,  the  UK 
Government  pledged  £45  million  (around  €  68.63  million)  per  year 
from 2003 to 2009. 

Funding rose from USD 400 million  (around € 307 million) in 2001 to 
USD  800  million  (around  €  614  million)  in  2003  and  reached  USD 
1 000 million (around € 768 million) in 2005. 

The  United  States’  21st  Century  Nanotechnology  Research  and 
Development  Act  (passed  in  2003)  allocated  nearly  USD  3.7  billion  to 
nanotechnology  from  2005  to  2008  (which  excludes  a  substantial 
amount  of defence-related  expenditure).  This  compares  with  USD  750 
million  in  2003.  About  USD  1 250  million  was  allocated  at  the  federal 
level in 2005. 

China 

USD 83.3 million (around € 70 million) in 2004 

Singapore 

USD 8.4 million (around € 6.4 million) in 2004  

Others 

About USD 400 million (around € 307 million) in 2004 

The  US  National  Science  Foundation  estimates  that  the  nanotechnology 
market  will  be  worth  USD  700  billion  (around  €  537.7  billion)  by  2008  and 
exceed  one  trillion  dollars  annually  by  2015.  Biomaterials  and  medical 

89 http://ec.europa.eu/invest-in-research/pdf/download_en/aho_report.pdf. 
90  The  Royal  Society  &  The  Royal  Academy  of  Engineering  (2004)  Nanoscience  and 
nanotechnologies: Opportunities and uncertainties. 

 43 

 
 
 
 
 
                                    
 
devices  represent  a  fast  emerging  market  that  is  estimated  at  about  USD 
260 billion worldwide, including Europe’s share91.  

4.4.2 Societal debates  

4.4.2.1 Pluralism 
As stated in our previous Opinion No 15,92 pluralism is a characteristic of the 
European Union, mirroring the richness of its traditions and adding the need 
for  mutual  respect  and  tolerance.  Respect  for  different  philosophical,  moral 
or  legal  approaches  and  for  diverse  cultures  is  implicit  in  the  ethical 
dimension of building a democratic Europe. This is relevant also for the moral 
controversies prompted by nanomedicine.  

Respect  for  pluralism  is  in  line  with  Article  22  of  the  European  Charter  of 
Fundamental Rights, on “Cultural, religious and linguistic diversity” and with 
Article  6  of  the  Amsterdam  Treaty,  which  ensures  the  protection  of 
fundamental  rights  at  EU  level,  based  in  particular  on  international 
instruments as well as common constitutional traditions, while also stressing 
respect for the national identity of all Member States. 

In  European  societies,  pluralism  of  life-styles,  values  and  beliefs  is 
presupposed  and  respected  within  society  itself  as  much  as  at  the  level  of 
institutions. Social and ethical pluralism requires that a culture of debate and 
communication  needs  to  be  established  wherever  and  whenever  wide-
ranging changes to the lives of individuals, or in social practices, take place 
or are liable to take place in the future.  

The European Union has furthermore taken several steps in the development 
of  ethical  standards  to  guide  decisions  in  the  medical  field  within  the 
constraints of the principle of respect for the rights of individuals, respect for 
multiculturalism, dialogue and tolerance.  

These  standards  do  not  hinder  deliberation  and  ethical  evaluation  of  new 
technologies;  on  the  contrary,  they  stimulate  such  evaluation  and  provide 
the necessary criteria. 

91 The European Union has invested around € 1.4 billion in nanomedicine under FP6 and this 
amount is expected to be more than doubled under FP7. (see section 4.4.4.2 and 4. 4.4.3) 
92 “Ethical aspects of human stem cell research and use”  
(http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/docs/avis15_en.pdf). 

 44 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                    
 
4.4.2.2 Societal dialogue 

Public  participation  is  of  vital  concern  in  democratic  states.  But  such 
participation  also  raises  questions.93  In  what  way,  and  on  what  terms,  can 
the public be an active partner in these debates? How can the development 
of nanomedicine and nanotechnology be tailored to the benefit of the public? 
How  can  we  ensure  that  the  public  participates  not  only  in  discussions 
associated  with  nanotechnology  and  nanomedicine  but  in  the  overall  design 
of research and development policy?  

This  raises  wider  issues  of  trust  and  confidence  building  between  the 
scientific  community  and  the  public,  including  the  need  to  promote  proper 
debate  (in  particular  on  uncertainties),  and  ultimately  leads  to  issues  of 
deliberative  democracy,  including  questions  about  who  draws  the  lines 
between  what  is  allowed,  acceptable,  and  what  is  not;  and  who  overviews 
those who draw the lines. The role of the media in such a process has to be 
taken into account. 

Public  participation  and  discourse  about  new  and  emerging  technologies  is 
important.  What  ways  or  means  can  be  used  to  engage  the  general  public 
about issues raised by the use of nanotechnological applications in medicine?  
Consensus  conferences,  public  opinion  surveys,  and  preparation  of  proper 
communication  tools  accessible  to  the  general  public  (including  new 
audiovisual tools) are all examples of possible actions to be taken to promote 
proper interaction between the public and the scientific and decision-making 
community (including industry, academia and NGOs). The participation of the 
public  in  all  stages  of  the  development  of  this  innovative  research  sector  is 
therefore  important  not  only  for  the  public  acceptance  of  nanomedicine  and 
nanotechnology,  but  also  for  the  adoption  of  a  nanotechnology  strategy 
where public concerns are approached and discussed from the beginning. 

4.4.3. Institutional/political issues  

Nanomedicine  is  part  of  a  process  that  can  already  be  observed  in  other 
areas of research and technological development, demanding new models of 
governance,  or  structures  to  fashion  the  relations  between  society,  the 
economy  and  research  institutions.  Depending  on  what  policies  on  funding 
and,  for  example,  patenting  are  chosen  in  this  area,  research  and 
development  in  nanomedicine  will  take  different  paths.  How  can  societies 

93  As  part  of  the  preparatory  work  on  this  Opinion  the  Group  held  on  21  March  2006  in 
Brussels a roundtable debate on the ethical aspects of nanomedicine, in order to discuss the 
topic  with  scientific  experts,  lawyers,  philosophers,  representatives  from  the  European 
Parliament  and  international  organisations,  representatives  of  patients,  industry,  religions, 
and other interested parties.  See:  
http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/activities/index_en.htm. 

 45 

 
 
                                    
 
remain at least partly autonomous in their decisions, when the development 
of  nanomedicine  is  closely  connected  to  the  economic  prosperity  of  a  given 
society and plays a part in international competition on the global market?   

4.4.3.1 The individual and the state 

The  basic  rights  of  individuals  are  protected  by  the  conventions  and 
declarations  mentioned  in  section  4.4.  These  rights  include  protection  of 
human  dignity,  integrity  and  autonomy,  protection  of  privacy  and  of 
confidentiality of personal data, as well as protection of the right not to know 
and of property rights. 

These  rights  must  be  protected  by  the  Member  States.    The  conventions 
establish  the  basis  for  a  legal  system  to  prevent  and  punish  violations  of 
these  rights.  Within  these  constraints,  freedom  of  research  and  free 
movement of goods and services is respected and encouraged. 

The  concerns  raised  by  nanomedicine  for  the  relationship  between  the 
individual  and  the  state  include  in  particular  the  following:  How  can  privacy 
be protected, when more and more information can be used for surveillance 
rather than only for medical reasons? Where can the line be drawn between 
useful  data  storage  within  the  medical  context  and  non-medical  data 
storage? What strategies are implemented to protect the individual’s privacy 
in both contexts?  

4.4.3.2 Institutional and regulatory questions 

The  development  and  implementation  of  new  technologies  does  not  take 
place in a vacuum. What kind of prospective technology assessment will take 
place  in  the  Member  States  and  at  European  level?  Which  institutions  are 
responsible  for  this  work  and  on  what  assumptions  are  such  technology 
assessments  being  carried  out?  What  role  should  be  played  by  what 
institutions in the debate on the ethical dimension? 

The  broader  perspective  of  technology  development  includes  intellectual 
property  rights,  the  protection  of  the  health  and  safety  of  individuals  other 
than patients, and research funding. Some of these issues are dealt with by 
particular  institutions  in  the  Member  States.  Against  the  background  of  the 
obligation  for  European  communities  to  improve  the  standard  of  living  in 
particular  for  those  who  do  not  have  sufficient  resources,  technology 
development in this broader context raises further concerns. 

Nanotechnologies have major applications in fields outside of medicine – but 
some of them will also have implications for individual and public health. This 
is  true  in  particular  for  cosmetic  applications  but  may  also  be  relevant  for 

 46 

 
 
 
 
military  applications  and  agrifood.  The  implications  cannot  always  be 
completely separated from medical concerns. 

Regulatory  issues  arise  at  different  levels,  with  regard  not  only  to  clinical 
research  and  testing  of  new  drugs  but  also  to  the  development  of  new 
technologies.  The  relationship  between  development  and  use  of  commercial 
technologies  on  the  one  hand  and  the  freedom  and  integrity  of  citizens  on 
the other raises issues that have to be settled politically.  

4.4.3.3 Intellectual property rights  

Patenting  of  biomaterial  for  medical  use  has  become  an  issue  of  ethical 
concern where and insofar as it may limit the provision of medical treatment 
on  financial  grounds.  Patent  law  represents  an  attempt  to  strike  a  balance 
between  several  legitimate  interests.  Researchers  and  companies  should  be 
able  to  protect  their  intellectual  property  rights  and  benefit  financially  from 
their  investment,  but  regulation  will  be  needed  in  order  to  protect  patients. 
European Patent law does not permit patenting of “methods for treatment of 
the  human  or  animal  body  by  surgery  or  therapy”.94  These  issues  will  need 
to be subjected to ethical analyses, particularly when systems involving both 
tissues  and  nanomaterials  are  available  for  surgical  procedures.  Some  have 
argued  that  there  may  be  a  conflict  over  patentability  if  a  new  product  is 
both  a  pharmaceutical  and  a  “diagnostic,  therapeutic  and  surgical  method” 
used  for  humans  or  animals.  The  European  Patent  Convention  specifically 
excludes  from  patentability  methods  for  “treatment  of  the  human  or  animal 
body  by  surgery  or  therapy  or  diagnostic  methods”,  but  permits  patents  on 
products  (substances  or  compositions)  used  in  these  methods.95  It  is 
possible that a nanoproduct may be patented even if it constitutes a method, 
given  the  wording  of  the  Article.  In  addition,  the  TRIPS  agreement  (Article 
27)  permits  the  exclusion  from  patentability  of  “diagnostic,  therapeutic  and 
surgical  methods  for  the  treatment  of  humans  or  animals”.  It  therefore 
seems that the material itself may be patented in Europe, but the associated 
method may only be patentable in the United States. Recital 35 of the Patent 

94  European  Patent  Convention,  Article  52(4):  “Methods  for  treatment  of  the  human  or 
animal  body  by  surgery  or  therapy  and  diagnostic  methods  practised  on  the  human  or 
animal  body  shall  not  be  regarded  as  inventions  which  are  susceptible  of  industrial 
application within the meaning of paragraph 1. This provision shall not apply to products, in 
particular substances or compositions, for use in any of these methods.” 
95 Article 52(4): “Methods for treatment of the human or animal body by surgery or therapy 
and  diagnostic  methods  practiced  on  the  human  or  animal  body  shall  not  be  regarded  as 
inventions which are susceptible of industrial application within the meaning of paragraph 1. 
This provision shall not apply to products, in particular substances or compositions, for use 
in any of these methods.”  

 47 

 
 
                                    
 
Directive96 provides as follows: 

“Whereas this Directive shall be without prejudice to the provisions of national 
patent  law  whereby  processes  for  treatment  of  the  human  or  animal  body  by 
surgery  or  therapy  and  diagnostic  methods  practised  on  the  human  or  animal 
body are excluded from patentability”. 

4.4.4 Research policies  

4.4.4.1 Clinical research involving nanomedical applications 

The  usual  guidelines  for  clinical  trials  and  research  ethics  (Declaration  of 
Helsinki,  Oviedo  Convention,  CIOMS  guidelines,97  etc.)  will  be  applied  by 
research  ethics  committees  in  approving  research  proposals.  As  with  other 
new technologies, concerns may be raised by the difficulties of meeting some 
of  these  requirements  in  the  nanomedicine  area,  in  particular  those 
concerning confidentiality of patient data and data protection generally, since 
such data may be used by many different specialists. 

4.4.4.2  Nanotechnology  in  the  6th  Research  and  Development 
Framework Programme (FP6) 

One  of  the  objectives  of  the  theme  “The  nano  revolution”  in  FP6  is  “to 
develop  intelligent  materials  for  applications  in  sectors  such  as  transport, 
energy,  electronics  and  biomedicine  representing  a  potential  market  of 
several billion Euros”.98

The  European  Technology  Platform  on  NanoMedicine  was  launched  in 
September  2005  with  the  publication  of  the  Vision  Paper  and  Basis  for  a 
Strategic  Research  Agenda  for  NanoMedicine.99  The  European  Technology 
Platform on NanoMedicine has the following policy objectives: 

•  Establish  a  clear  strategic  vision  in  the  area,  resulting  in  a  Strategic 

Research Agenda; 

•  Decrease fragmentation in nano-medical research; 
•  Mobilise additional public and private investment; 
•  Identify priority areas; 

96 Directive 98/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council  of 6 July 1998 on the 
legal protection of biotechnological inventions. Official Journal L 213 of 30 July 1998, pp. 13 
– 21. 
97  The  relevant  European  and  International  regulatory  framework  that  applies  to  research 
and may be used by research ethics committees is available at: 
http://ec.europa.eu/research/science-society/page_en.cfm?id=2995. 
98 http://europa.eu.int/comm/research/fp6/index_en.cfm?p=3. 
99 ftp://ftp.cordis.lu/pub/nanotechnology/docs/nanomedicine_visionpaper.pdf. 

 48 

 
 
 
 
                                    
 
•  Boost innovation in nano-biotechnologies for medical use. 

Three key priorities have been confirmed by the stakeholders: 

•  Nanotechnology-based diagnostics including imaging; 
•  Targeted drug delivery and release; 
•  Regenerative medicine. 

In  addition  to  the  technology-oriented  research  projects  financed  under  the 
relevant  programmes  of  FP6,  the  Commission  has  also  financed  projects 
dealing  with  Ethical,  Legal  and  Social  Implications  of  nanotechnology. 
Examples  of  ELSI  projects  under  FP6  are  presented  in  the  Appendix  to  this 
Opinion.  

4.4.4.3  Nanotechnology  in  the  7th  Research  and  Development 
Framework Programme (FP7) 

The  proposal  for  a  Decision  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council 
concerning the Seventh Framework Programme of the European Community 
for research, technological development and demonstration activities (2007 – 
2013) (COM(2005) 119 final, 6.4.2005) covers nine themes.100 One of them 
is  entitled  “Nanosciences,  Nanotechnologies,  Materials  and  New  Production 
Technologies”.  Annex  I  describes  each  theme  and  health  applications  are 
mentioned when reference is made to the integration of new knowledge and 
technologies in these areas.  

4.4.4.4 Military research and use  

There  is  no  open  access  to  military  research.  A  new  generation  of  weapons 
could  be  created  with  nanotechnologies  that  could  have  disastrous 
consequences  for  health  and  the  environment.  EU  Member  States  have 
signed  and  ratified  international  conventions  on  chemical  and  biological 
weapons  that  are  in  the  process  of  being  revised.  This  would  provide  an 
opportunity to include new technological developments, including the use of 
nanotechnology  for  military  purposes.  In  any  event,  the  use  of  these 
technologies in a military situation does not preclude the obligation to inform 
those exposed to these products. 

Attempts  have  been  made  to  document  the  resources  spent  on  military 
research  involving  applications  of  nanotechnologies,  and  to  describe  the 
direction  of  this  research.101    This  research,  though  not  in  focus  in  the 

100http://www.cc.cec/sg_vista/cgi-
bin/repository/getdoc.cgi?full_file_name=COMM_PDF_COM_2005_0119_F_EN_ACTE.pdf. 
101 See Altmann, Jürgen. Nanotechnology and preventive arms control, Osnabrück: Deutsche 

 49 

 
 
 
 
                                    
 
present  report,  clearly  raises  concerns  about  its  potential  impact  on  safety 
and human welfare, which need to be addressed in a different context. 

4.4.5 Questions of justice  

According to the EU treaties, the role of the European Union and the Member 
States  is  to  guarantee  fair  exchange  and  fair  distribution  of  goods,  equal 
participation  and  equal  access  to  these  goods.  This  is  also  in  line  with  the 
provisions  of  the  earlier  European  Convention  for  the  protection  of  human 
rights and fundamental freedoms (1950).  

To achieve these goals, injustice due to socio-economic or ethnic conditions, 
age  or  gender  status  should  be  corrected  by  taking  “affirmative  action”  in 
order  to  improve  the  chances  of  participation  and  access.  The  development 
and  introduction  of  nanomedical  tools  (drugs,  diagnostic  methods  and 
therapies)  are  –  like  any  new  or  emerging  technology  –  to  be  assessed 
against this background.  

The  central  questions  relating  to  justice  for  present  and  near-future 
applications of nanomaterials and nanotechnologies in medicine are: 

• 

• 

• 

To  what  extent  is  there  fairness  in  the  exchange  of  pharmaceutical 
goods (drugs, devices, analytical tools)? 
To what extent is fairness of distribution guaranteed, in the private as 
well as in the public health sector? 
To  what  extent  can  every  citizen  gain  access  to  the  benefits  of 
nanomedicine in Europe? And globally? 

•  What,  if  any,  measures  are  taken  to  correct  existing  inequalities  at 
national, European and global level with a view to the development of 
nanomedicine? 

4.4.6 Anthropological questions: Changing the human condition  

The  overarching  anthropological  questions  have  to  do  with  our  view  of 
ourselves and, in this context, the extent to which this view will be affected 
by the applications of nanotechnologies in medicine. Nano-scale implants and 
devices  may  have  an  impact  on  autonomy,  integrity,  self  identity  and 
freedom.  In  particular,  what  are  the  implications  of  the  “man/machine” 
distinction, and in the perception of it, on a social level? How do our concepts 
of human beings change? What is the role of the media, literature and films 

Stiftung  Friedensforshung  (DSF),  2005  (also  available  electronically)  and  Altmann,  Jürgen, 
Military  nanotechnology:  potential  application  and  preventive  arms  control,  London: 
Routledge , 2006. 

 50 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                   
 
(e.g. science fiction)? Such questions can be answered by social, cultural and 
ethical  research  in  dialogue  with  biomedicine.  Research  of  this  kind  may 
improve the communication between science, humanities and society102.  

102 See EGE Opinion N. 20 

 51 

 
 
                                    
 
 52 

 
 
II. OPINION 

5.1 Introduction 

The  Group  acknowledges  that  nanomedicine  offers  the  possibility  of  new 
diagnostic,  treatment  and  preventive  methods  that  may  open  up  promising 
areas of medicine. 

5.2 Scope of the Opinion 

The  scope  of  this  Opinion  is  ethical  issues  raised  by  nanomedicine  in  the 
sense indicated by the European Science Foundation definition quoted in the 
introduction  and  repeated  here:  The  field  of  ‘Nanomedicine’  is  the  science 
and technology of diagnosing, treating and preventing disease and traumatic 
injury,  of  relieving  pain,  and  of  preserving  and  improving  human  health, 
using molecular tools and molecular knowledge of the human body.  

In this context, the Group will consider nanomedicine including a number of 
issues  raised  by  nanotechnology  insofar  as  it  concerns  primarily  health-
related issues.  

5.3 Fundamental values and rights 

Nanomedicine,  like  many  other  domains,  raises  issues  about  protection  of 
the  fundamental  rights  enshrined  in  various  European  documents,  such  as 
the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights,  the  European  Convention  on  Human 
Rights  and  its  five  protocols,  as  well  as  the  Oviedo  Convention  and  its 
protocols.  

These  rights  are  rooted  in  the  principle  of  human  dignity  and  shed  light  on 
core European values, such as integrity, autonomy, privacy, equity, fairness, 
pluralism and solidarity. 

As  stated  in  many  European  and  international  documents,  the  interests  of 
science  are  legitimate  and  justified  insofar  as  they  are  compatible  with 
human  dignity  and  human  rights.  New  technologies  are  scrutinised  with 
respect to the prospects of contributing to the improvement in human well-
being they are aiming at, and with respect to possible threats to human well-
being, be it at European or global level.  

According  to  the  Treaty  (Article  152),  the  principle  of  subsidiarity  applies  to 
public health policies at EU level and Community actions should complement 
national policies.103

103 Article 152 allows incentive measures designed to protect and improve human health to 
be adopted under the codecision procedure. Harmonisation of national laws and regulations 
is,  however,  expressly  prohibited.  Article  152  also  confers  on  the  Council  the  power,  again 
under the codecision procedure, to set “high standards of quality and safety of organs and 

 53 

 
 
                                    
 
As  stated  in  the  United  Nations  Millennium  Development  Goals,  the  Group 
considers  that  there  is  a  moral  duty  to  make  affordable  health  care  and 
biomedical  technologies  available  to  all  those  who  need  them  on  a  fair  and 
equitable basis,  

5.4 Safety  

In  order  to  safeguard  the  core  values  mentioned  above,  including  the 
precautionary  principle,  concern  for  safety  with  respect  to  nanomedical 
developments  (and,  in  fact,  nanotechnology  in  general)  is  of  vital 
importance.  Measures  should  be  established  to  verify  the  safety  of 
nanomedical  products  and  to  ensure  that  nanomedical  devices  are  properly 
assessed with regard to public health.  

In  particular,  the  uncertainties  and  knowledge  gaps  associated  with  new 
nanotechnology-based  diagnostics,  therapies  and  preventive  measures 
should  be  identified.  These  uncertainties  need  to  be  characterised  and 
measures  have  to  be  developed  in  order  to  reduce  them  as  far  as  possible. 
Research  needs  to  be  carried  out  to  develop  new  methods  for  risk 
management specific to individual nanotechnology applications.  

The  Group  proposes  that  relevant  authorities  should  carry  out  a  proper 
assessment  of  the  risks  and  safety  of  nanomedicine.  Such  risk  assessment 
should cover the whole life cycle of the products, from production to handling 
of waste. The same level of safety currently applied to medicine and medical 
devices should then apply to nanomedical products.  

The  Group  considers  it  essential  that  reliable  and  cost-effective  systems  for 
toxicology  screening  of  nanomaterials  are  developed  (including  instruments 
to  quantify  exposure  and  to  characterise  nanostructures  in  detail).  The 
required  animal  testing  should  strictly  follow  the  3R  principles  (Refinement, 
Reduction,  and  Replacement);  before  starting  in  vivo  testing,  relevant  data 
has  to  be  gathered  about  the  produced  quantity,  quantity  and  fate  of 
uncontained nanostructures, and risk of exposure.  

The  Group  proposes  that  institutions  already  operating  at  European  and 
national level to protect the safety of patients and citizens should be charged 
with  the  additional  task  of  overviewing  the  safety  and  security  aspects  of 
new  tools  and  devices  in  nanomedicine.  Networking  of  relevant  bodies,  at 
national,  European  and  international  level  should  then  be  encouraged  to 
favour  the  proper  implementation  of  safety  measures  and  the  adoption  of 
common and validated standards.  

substances  of  human  origin,  blood  and  blood  derivatives”.  Nevertheless,  the  power  in 
question is still one which complements the powers of the Member States. 

 54 

 
 
                                                                                                                   
 
The Group also proposes that capacity building on how to address accidents 
and  other  unexpected  situations  should  be  encouraged  and  shared  at 
European and international level. Publication of any results, whether positive 
or  negative,  which  are  relevant  for  safety  must  be  part  of  the  research 
contract. 

5.4.1 Risk assessment 

The  Group  recognises  that  “understanding  and  preventing  risk  often  has  a 
low  priority  in  the  competitive  world  of  research  funding”  and  bringing 
products  to  the  market  and  believes  that  “without  strategic  risk  research 
public  confidence  in  nanotechnologies  could  be  reduced  through  real  or 
perceived dangers”.104 The lack of knowledge and data regarding the toxicity 
of  nanoparticles  in  humans  and  in  the  environment  is  a  cause  of  concern. 
The  existing  methodologies  for  risk  assessment  are  inadequate  (see  the 
SCENIHR report) and need to be adapted or new methods devised.  

The  Group  proposes  that  this  should  be  considered  a  top  priority  for 
researchers  and  the  relevant  authorities  and  that  data  on  adverse  effects 
have to be communicated without delay to the public. 

The  Group  considers  it  necessary  for  appropriate  safety  research  to  be 
carried out and information provided to the public before medical devices and 
medicinal products derived from nanotechnologies are marketed. The Group 
asks  the  European  Commission  to  examine  existing  regulations  in  order  to 
propose any amendment that might be needed. 

The Group proposes that initiatives be taken at national and European level 
to  stimulate/facilitate  cooperation  between  institutions  dealing  with  risk 
assessment.  

The  Group  considers  it  paramount  that  no  nano-based  products  enter  the 
market without risk assessment, thereby securing their safety with regard to 
users’  health.  For  example  cosmetics  are  of  particular  interest  in  relation  to 
risk  assessment  as  nanocosmetics  penetrate  the  skin  and  may  cross  the 
blood-brain barrier. On this basis we recommend that consideration be given 
to the question whether specific measures should be implemented regarding 
nanocosmetics, 
the 
of 
manufacturer’s risk assessment should be introduced in certain cases.  

evaluating  whether 

verification 

including 

104 Maynard AD (2006)  et al “Safe handling of Nanotechnology” Nature 444(16) 267-269. 

 55 

 
  
 
 
 
 
                                    
 
5.4.2  The  need  for  prospective  technology  assessment,  including 
consideration of social effects 

In the rapidly developing fields of nanomedicine Research and Development, 
in  addition  to  the  usual  retrospective  risk  assessment  there  is  a  need  for 
prospective  technology  assessment  at  national  and  European  level,  not  just 
for post factum evaluations. 

Prospective technology studies should be performed with special reference to 
the  health  impact  of  nanoparticles;  this  would  also  involve  prospective 
technology  assessment  of  possible  adverse  events  that  may  derive  from 
nanotechnology or nanomedicine.105 As suggested in the Canadian report,106 
scenarios need to be elaborated about possible adverse events related to the 
use  of  nanotechnologies  in  medicine,  and  responses  should  be  prepared  to 
deal with these events in such scenarios. 

The  Group  proposes  that  such  prospective  technology  assessment  should 
consider issues of safety (agri-food and environment) and security (including 
dual use, impacts of bioterrorism and military research). Social effects should 
also be addressed, e.g. how new nano-scale technologies applied in medicine 
will  affect  social,  economic  and  institutional  structures,  with  particular 
concern  for  justice  (equal  access  and  participation  in  decision-making)  and 
fair distribution of goods. 

Furthermore,  the  Group  suggests  that  the  Commission  should,  inter  alia, 
fund  a  study  of  the  social  effects  of  nanomedicine  in  the  developing 
countries.  Such  research  should  also  focus  on  macroeconomic  trends,  trade 
implications  and  possible  international  problems,  and  in  particular  examine 
the  risk  of  creating  a  nano-divide  which  could  widen  the  gap  between  the 
developed and developing countries.  

5.5 Legal issues 

As can be seen from the legal background (see section 3), many regulations, 
which  are 
in 
nanomedicine,  are  already  in  place.  Implementing  these  regulations  is  of 
crucial importance to safeguard the core values mentioned above.  

for  nanotechnology-based  applications 

relevant  also 

105 On this issue, see also the already quoted Report on ethics and nanotechnology produced 
in Quebec in November 2006:  
http://www.ethique.gouv.qc.ca/eng/ftp/Resume_nanos_ang.pdf. 
106 http://www.ethique.gouv.qc.ca/eng/ftp/Resume_nanos_ang.pdf. 

 56 

 
 
 
 
 
                                    
 
5.5.1 General issues 

The Group does not propose new broad regulatory structures that specifically 
deal  with  nanomedicine  at  this  point.  Changes  should  primarily  be  made 
within existing structures. The focus should then be on the implementation of 
existing regulations. 

Monitoring  is  needed  to  ensure  that  regulatory  systems  exist  to  address  all 
in  the  content  of 
nanomedicinal  products.  Moreover  the  difference 
regulations e.o. regarding the conditions of risk evaluation, the responsibility 
for its performance and the involvement of third parties should be addressed 
by the relevant Authorities. 

Nanomedical products may combine different mechanisms of action, be they 
mechanical,  chemical,  pharmacological  or  immunological,  for  instance.  The 
mechanism of action is a key factor in deciding whether a product should be 
regulated as a medicinal product or a medical device.107

The Group proposes that possible cases of nanomedicine applications where 
there  might  be  overlap  between  regulations,  which  could  create  uncertainty 
as to which regulations should be applied, should be explored by the relevant 
authorities  so  that  the  existing  regulations  can  be  implemented  in  an 
unambiguous way. 

The Group proposes that networking between relevant authorities should be 
encouraged  in  order  to  deal  in  an  optimal  way  with  the  problems  outlined 
above, and that – if necessary – new specific implementing measures should 
be derived from the current regulations. 

The  Group  stresses  that  the  protection  offered  by  the  Data  Protection 
Directive has to be properly applied to the type of health data obtained and 
collected by nano-based DNA chips, nano-scale sensors and devices.108 This 
should be addressed in detail by the Article 29 Working Group. 

Product  liability  legislation  addresses  many  of  the  problems  that  may  be 
associated with the new materials, but as the risks are not readily assessed 
and assessable, liability based on negligence and lack of knowledge becomes 
a serious ethical problem. This requires careful scrutiny and monitoring. 

5.5.2 Intellectual property rights 

According  to  the  current  regulatory  system  for  patenting,  some  exemptions 
are  allowed  with  regard  to  the  patentability  of  therapeutic  and  surgical 
procedures.  The  exemptions  in  the  present  patent  system  are  based  on  a 
balance  of  interests  whereby  diagnosis,  therapy  and  research  should  be 

107 Directive 2001/83/EC, as amended, Article 1(2)(b). 
108 http://ec.europa.eu:8082/european_group_ethics/docs/avis20_en.pdf. 

 57 

 
 
                                    
 
available  to  patients  without  patents  being  a  hindrance.  This  is  likely  to  be 
blurred  because  the  new  nanomaterials  may  logically  fall  within  more  than 
one  category.  To  protect  the  ethical  position  that  has  led  to  these 
exemptions it is important to ensure that patents in these new areas do not 
alter  the  current  balance.  There  are  risks  of  overly  broad  patents  being 
granted that may hinder their therapeutic availability.109

This is also the case for nanomedicine. The Group therefore draws attention 
to  the  need  for  research  into  the  manner  in  which  the  patent  system  can 
properly balance the need to reward innovation and ensure availability. This 
could  lead  to  a  more  general  review  of  the  nature  of  the  patent  system  in 
relation  to  new  technologies  that  do  not  easily  fit  into  a  system  devised  in 
the 19th Century, possibly with a focus on use or process patents rather than 
product  patents.  There  is  a  need  to  look  further  into  the  balance  between 
knowledge protection and information dissemination. 

Comparative  research  on  the  merits  and  short  comings  of  different  patent 
systems in various parts of the world is needed. 

5.6 Offering nanomedicine tests on the market 

Medical  tests  of  various  kinds  are  currently  offered  for  sale  on  the  market, 
especially via Internet and other media, without medical prescription. In the 
near future such tests may also be based on applications of nanomedicine. 

The  Group  emphasises  that  the  first  concern  is  the  scientific  validation  of 
these  tests,  including  their  clinical  utility,  and  the  accuracy,  interpretation 
and communication of the results. Such validation is considered a necessary 
(but not sufficient) condition for the acceptability of putting such tests on the 
market.  

In  order  to  protect  consumers’  rights,  the  Group  proposes  that  policies  be 
developed  to  monitor  the  introduction  of  tests  directly  marketed  to 
consumers, in line with the relevant documents of the Council of Europe.110

109 EGE Opinion No 16 on Ethical aspects of patenting inventions involving human stem cells 
(http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/docs/avis16_en.pdf). 
110  The  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine  (Oviedo  Convention,  Art.  12  in 
particular) 
at: 
Additional 
http://www.coe.int/t/e/legal_affairs/legal_co-
operation/bioethics/texts_and_documents/1Treaties_COE.asp#TopOfPage. 

Protocols 

available 

and 

are 

its 

 58 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                    
 
5.7 Information and consent 

The  requirement  for  informed  consent  is  of  crucial  importance  in  both 
medical  research  and  health  care.  But  both  the  lack  of  knowledge  and  the 
uncertainties that exist create problems for the attempts to provide adequate 
and  understandable  information  and  obtain  consent  that  cannot  exclusively 
be met by informed consent forms signed by patients.  

It  is  especially  important  to  consider  these  problems  in  the  context  of 
developments  that  may  contribute  to  a  shift  of  responsibilities  from  the 
doctor to the patient.  

The Group considers it important that initiatives are taken on different levels 
to  help  ensure  that  decision-making  is  in  the  long-term  interest  of  the 
concerned citizens themselves.  

Against  this  background,  the  Group  encourages  further  efforts  at  national 
and  European  level  to  develop  improved  methods  of  providing  information 
and obtaining consent e.g. through research projects under the ELSI (Ethical, 
Legal and Social Implications) programme. 

5.8 Economics and research funding 

Research  funding  affects  research  in  nanomedicine,  and  emerging  research 
in  nanomedicine  will  affect  research  funding.  Research  funding  in  general 
raises  ethical  issues  concerning  the  criteria  used  in  priority  setting.  The 
Group  acknowledges  that  nanomedicine  offers  promising  opportunities  to 
meet  the  need  of  patients  and  therefore  should  be  funded.  However,  the 
overall  goals  of  health-related  research  must  be  seen  in  the  context  of  fair 
distribution and the overall goal of alleviation of the global health status. In 
this  context,  patenting  and  private  gain  derived  from  research  funded  by 
public  money  raises  the  issue  of  the  fair  sharing  of  burdens  and  benefits 
between taxpayers and companies, and should therefore be further explored. 

Against this background the Group proposes that further initiatives be taken 
at  national  and  European  level  to  clarify  the  ways  in  which  public 
investments  in  this  area  will  benefit  the  citizens  of  Europe.  The  initiatives 
should  be  conducive  to  European  economic  growth  and  social  welfare  but 
also contribute to the UN Millennium Development Goals.  

 59 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.9 Communication and public trust 

Transparency is essential for public trust. This also holds for openness about 
uncertainties  and  knowledge  gaps.  Such  transparency  and  openness  should 
not  be  limited  only  to  safety  issues  but  should  also  extend  to  funding  of 
research and development.  

The Group proposes that initiatives should be taken at national and European 
level to prepare surveys of public perception of the benefits and risks of the 
applications of nanotechnologies, with special reference to medical sectors.  

The  Group  also  recommends  that  there  should  be  an  EU  website  on  ethics 
and  nanomedicine  which  is  updated  regularly,  and  where  citizens  can  find 
information and raise questions. 

The Group finally proposes that initiatives be taken to organise academic and 
public  debates  on  problems  and  possibilities  of  present  and  near-future 
nanomedicine.   

The  Group  draws  attention  to  the  question  of  labelling  of  nanomedical 
products  and  recommends  a  thorough  analysis  of  this  issue  by  the 
Commission. 

5.10 The need for interdisciplinary research on the Ethical, Legal and 
Social Implications (ELSI) of nanomedicine  

The Group proposes that a considerable amount – up to 3% – of the budget 
invested in research in nanotechnology should be set aside for ELSI research. 
This is comparable to the budget allocated to ELSI research under FP5 (3% 
of the Life Science budget) and following the HUGO approach in the Human 
genome project (3% ELSI research).   

With  respect  to  nanomedicine,  cooperation  between  different  academic 
disciplines,  research  centres,  hospitals  and  other  important  players  is 
required  for  progress  in  this  area  and  should  be  promoted  at  the  different 
levels of nanomedicine research and applications. 

The Group proposes that initiatives to support ELSI research should be taken 
at  both  national  and  European  levels  and  that  there  should  be  an  ELSI 
programme  within  FP7  to  promote  research  in  the  various  fields  of 
application mentioned in the ESF definition.  

 60 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.11  Ethical  deliberation  on  the  concept  of  humanity,  human  rights, 
social and political conflicts in relation to Nanotechnology 

In addition to technology-induced ELSI studies, the Group also suggests that 
initiatives  be  taken  at  European  level  to  promote  more  research  on 
philosophical,  ethical  and  anthropological  questions  raised  by  recent 
developments  in  nanomedicine,  looking  into  the  broader  questions  of 
nanomedicine,  among  other  things  individual  responsibility,  including  the 
shifts  in  the  concept  of  the  self,  personal  identity,  societal  goals  and  global 
health care.  

For  this  purpose,  a  dedicated  European  Network  on  Nanotechnology  Ethics 
should  be  established  and  financed  by  the  Commission  under  FP7.  The 
Network  should,  among  other  things,  cluster  experts  from  different  fields, 
promote  deeper  understanding  of 
from 
nanotechnology  and  nanomedicine,  promote  education  in  the  fields  above, 
and 
the  community  of  ethicists  and 
nanotechnologists  and  the  embedding  of  ethics  into  research  practices  in 
nanomedicine and nanotechnology. 

interaction  between 

issues  arising 

the  ethical 

facilitate 

5.12 Clinical research involving nanomedical applications 

Nanomedicine,  like  other  clinical  research,  is  subject  to  the  relevant  EU 
legislation  requiring  trials  to  be  approved  by  local  or  regional  ethics 
committees. Member States are thus responsible for making sure that there 
is  an  adequate  ethical  review  process  also  for  research  projects  involving 
studies of nanomedical devices on human beings. 

In  addition  to  research  on  nanomedicine  carried  out  at  national  level,  a 
international  research  trials  are  being 
number  of  pan-European  or 
performed; the Group therefore proposes that initiatives should be taken to 
enhance  information  exchange  between  research  ethics  committees  in 
different Member States.  

The  Group  underlines  the  need  to  share  relevant  information  among 
competent bodies and to properly address informed consent procedures with 
regard  to  safety.  The  Group  also  draws  attention  to  the  specific  problems 
that  nanomedicine  may  give  rise  to  in  terms  of  toxicity  and  environmental 
problems. 

 61 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.13 Medical and non-medical uses 

Medical  and  non-medical  uses  of  new  medical  technologies  have  been  an 
issue  for  several  years.  Nanomedicine  is  expected  to  broaden  the  overlap 
between  medical  and  non-medical  uses  in  specific  ways:  on  the  one  hand, 
the  distinction  between  therapeutic  goals  and  enhancement  goals  may 
become  less  clear,  if,  for  example,  predisposition  tests  are  available  more 
easily and cheaply. Especially in the reproductive context of Pre-Implantation 
Genetic  Diagnosis,  the  line  between  “negative”  and  “positive”  selection  may 
be blurred.  

In  other  areas,  such  as  where  the  cosmetic  industry  deals  with  common 
allergies and the medical field addresses the same symptoms, the distinction 
may become even more difficult to draw than today.  

Future  applications  are  difficult  to  foresee  today.  For  example,  it  may 
become  difficult  to  ensure  that  neurological  stimulation  of  brain  activity  is 
restricted  to  therapeutic  and  diagnostic  use.  Therefore,  appropriate 
monitoring and guidelines of the use of nanotechnology in this field should be 
implemented. 

Maintaining  the  distinction  between  medical  and  non-medical  uses  is 
important  with  respect  to  European  research  funding  policies,  too,  because 
non-medical  research  funding  of  nanomedicine  may  not  be  advocated  as 
easily  as  research  funding  within  the  medical  sphere.  The  Group  proposes 
that  enhancement  technologies  should  not  be  given  priority.  Health  care 
concerns must be met first.  

The  Group  suggests  that  this  concern  should  be  explored  both  under  the 
ELSI  programme  and  within  a  European  network  (involving  ethicists  and 
scientists) devoted to exploring the ethical aspects of different applications of 
nanotechnologies.  

5.14 Sharing of information and establishing databases 

Relevant  scientific  and  ELSI  information  related  to  nanomedicine  is  not 
always  collected  or  publicly  available.  Against  this  background  the  Group 
underlines  the  importance  of  sharing  of  information  in  order  to  safeguard 
some  of  the  values  mentioned  above  (sections  4.3  and  4.5).  The  Group 
therefore  proposes  that  initiatives  be  taken  at  European  level  to  establish 
databanks,  not  only  on  scientific  aspects  of  nanomedicine,  for  instance  the 
biodistribution  of  nanoparticles  and  results  of  toxicity  studies,  but  also  on 
ELSI-related aspects of nanomedicine. 

 62 

 
 
 
 
 
 
5.15 The need for revision of this Opinion 

Since research in the area of nanomedicine is undergoing rapid development, 
this text should be reconsidered and possibly revised in the light of scientific, 
legal and social developments within the next five years. 

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 

The Chairperson: Göran Hermerén 

The Members: 

Emmanuel Agius 

Diana Banati 

Anne Cambon-Thomsen 

Rafael Capurro 

Inez de Beaufort  

Jozef Glasa 

Hille Haker 

Julian Kinderlerer 

Krzysztof Marczewski   

Paula Martinho Da Silva 

  Linda Nielsen 

Pere Puigdomenech-Rosell 

  Günter Virt 

 63 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 64 

 
 
APPENDIX I 

Examples of projects funded under FP6 

EXPERTISSUES111

Novel  Therapeutic  Strategies  for  Tissue  Engineering 
of  Bone  and  Cartilage  Using  Second  Generation 
Biomimetic Scaffolds 

AUTOBONE112

Production  unit  for  the  decentralised  engineering  of 
autologous cell-based osteoinductive bone substitutes 

NANOTEMPLATES113  

HIPPOCRATES114

BARP+115

RAMATI116

I-IMAS117

Templates  for  Engineered  Nano-Objects  for  use  in 
Microwave,  Electronic  Devices  and  Biomedical 
Sensing Applications 

A  Hybrid  Approach  for  Bone  and  Cartilage  Tissue 
Engineering using Natural Origin Scaffolds, Progenitor 
Cell and Growth Factors 

Development  of  a  bioartificial  pancreas  for  type  I 
diabetes therapy 

Rapid manufacturing of titanium implants 

Intelligent  Imaging  Sensors  for  Industry,  Health  and 
Security   

CORNEA 
ENGINEERING118

Three-dimensional-reconstruction-of  human  corneas 
by tissue engineering 

GENSENSOR-

Nano-biotechnical  components  of  an  advanced  bio-

http://icadc.cordis.lu/fep-

http://icadc.cordis.lu/fep-

111 
cgi/srchidadb?CALLER=FP6_PROJ&ACTION=D&RCN=74345&DOC=18&QUERY=2.  
112 
cgi/srchidadb?CALLER=FP6_PROJ&ACTION=D&RCN=74411&DOC=11&QUERY=2. 
113 
cgi/srchidadb?CALLER=FP6_PROJ&ACTION=D&RCN=74330&DOC=17&QUERY=2. 
114 
cgi/srchidadb?CALLER=FP6_PROJ&ACTION=D&RCN=73827&DOC=24&QUERY=2. 
115 
cgi/srchidadb?CALLER=FP6_PROJ&ACTION=D&RCN=73827&DOC=24&QUERY=2. 
116 
cgi/srchidadb?CALLER=FP6_PROJ&ACTION=D&RCN=74329&DOC=77&QUERY=1. 
117 
cgi/srchidadb?CALLER=FP6_PROJ&ACTION=D&RCN=74395&DOC=90&QUERY=1. 
118 
cgi/srchidadb?CALLER=FP6_PROJ&ACTION=D&RCN=74357&DOC=95&QUERY=1. 

http://icadc.cordis.lu/fep-

http://icadc.cordis.lu/fep-

http://icadc.cordis.lu/fep-

http://icadc.cordis.lu/fep-

http://icadc.cordis.lu/fep-

http://icadc.cordis.lu/fep-

 65 

 
 
 
                                    
 
NANOPARTS119

analytical microarray system 

MUSTWIN120

CELLPROM121

GANANO122

Micromachined Ultrasound transducers for wide range 
application  in  Medical  imaging  and  Non  Destructive 
Testing 

Cell Programming by Nanoscaled Devices 

New  Generation  of  GaN-based  sensor  arrays  for 
nano-  and  pico-fluidic  systems  for  fast  and  reliable 
biomedical testing 

119 
cgi/srchidadb?CALLER=FP6_PROJ&ACTION=D&RCN=74415&DOC=99&QUERY=1. 
120 
cgi/srchidadb?CALLER=FP6_PROJ&ACTION=D&RCN=74398&DOC=107&QUERY=1. 
121 
cgi/srchidadb?CALLER=FP6_PROJ&ACTION=D&RCN=74334&DOC=112&QUERY=1. 
122 
cgi/srchidadb?CALLER=FP6_PROJ&ACTION=D&RCN=74403&DOC=123&QUERY=1. 

http://icadc.cordis.lu/fep-

http://icadc.cordis.lu/fep-

http://icadc.cordis.lu/fep-

http://icadc.cordis.lu/fep-

 66 

 
 
                                                                                                                   
 
Appendix II 

Examples of ELSA projects in the programmes funded under FP6 in the 
area of nanomedicine 

Nanotechnology Capacity Building NGOs  (NANOCAP)  

Goals:  To  give  support  to  environmental  NGOs  and  trade  unions  to  develop  their  own 
position  in  the  debate  on  nanotechnology  based  on  scientific  information.  To  give 
academic  and  industrial  RESEARCH  AND  DEVELOPMENT  performers  tools  to  introduce 
"responsible  nanotechnology".  To  develop  preliminary  recommendations  for  public 
authorities to address ethics and health, safety and environmental risk issues. 

Deepening Ethical Engagement and Participation in Emerging Nanotechnologies 
(DEEPEN) 

Goals:  Development  of  a  deepened  ethical  understanding  of  issues  related  to  emerging 
nanotechnologies through an interdisciplinary approach utilising insights from philosophy, 
ethics, and the social sciences.  

Development of  ways to map de-facto ethics embedded in the world of nanoscience and 
technology actors, and on that basis develop ways of enhancing ethical reflexivity in the 
nanoscience  and  technology  world.  Instigation  of  a  programme  of  cross-European 
empirical  research  aimed  at  unravelling  the  ethical  categories  of  lay  people  to  ethical 
issues  posed  by  emerging  nanotechnologies.  Organising  new  public  fora  where  citizens, 
stakeholders, experts and decision-makers can develop common understandings of such 
dilemmas.  Development  of  recommendations  for  integrating  ethical  reflection  into 
nanoscience practice and into governance and regulatory processes. 

Nanobiotechnology:  Responsible  Action  on  Issues  in  Society  and  Ethics 
(Nanobio-RAISE) 

Goals:  To  bring  together  the  key  relevant  players  in  the  field  including  committed 
ethicists,  Delft  University  of  Technology,  European  Commission  Nano2Life  Network  of 
Excellence,  European  Federation  of  Biotechnology’s  Task Group  on  Public  Perceptions  of 
Biotechnology,  EuropaBio,  DECHEMA  (Fachsektion  Nanotechnologie),  Royal  Institute  for 
Technology in Stockholm, Church of Scotland Society, Religion and Technology Project , 
SMEs and major companies using nanobiotechnology. Horizon-scan for the scientific and 
commercial developments which are likely to cause public and political concern. To clarify 
the  ethical  issues  and  public  concerns  involved  or  as  they  arise,  and  recommend  and 
carry out strategies for public communication to address the emerging questions, take on 
board  the  experiences  and  lessons  learned  from  the  European  GM  debate  of  the  last 
decade  and  apply  them  with  this  project  to  the  nanobiotechnology  discussions, 
incorporate  the  recommendations  of  the  European  Commission’s  Communication 
“Towards  a  European  Strategy  for  Nanotechnology”  and  the  results  of  its  Nanoforum 
public consultation which surveyed European public opinion on these issues, prepare for 
the relevant actions in the European Commission’s Action Plan for Nanotechnology to be 

67

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recommendations  of  the  European  Commission’s  Communication  “Towards  a  European 
Strategy  for  Nanotechnology”  and  the  results  of  its  Nanoforum  public  consultation  which 
surveyed  European  public  opinion  on  these  issues,  prepare  for  the  relevant  actions  in  the 
European Commission’s Action Plan for Nanotechnology to be published in Spring 2005 and 
the Technology Platform on Nanotechnology foreseen in its Seventh Framework Programme 
commencing in 2006. 

Additionally  there  are  two  projects  of  relevance:  The  SSA  (specific  support  action) 
Nanologue  (http://www.nanologue.net/)  addresses  Nanomedicine,  and  the  Network  of 
Excellence Nano2Life (http://www.nano2life.org/) specifically addresses ethical and social 
aspects of nanobiotechnology. The European Technology Platform on Nanomedicine also 
addresses such issues. 

 68 

 
 
 
 
 
Appendix III 

Extract from the Opinion on the appropriateness of existing methodologies to 
assess  the  potential  risks  associated  with  engineered  and  adventitious 
products  of  nanotechnologies,  produced  by  the  Scientific  Committee  on 
Emerging  and  Newly  Identified  Health  Risks  (SCENIHR)  (SCENIHR/002/05. 
European  Commission  Health  &  Consumer  Protection  Directorate-General, 
Directorate  C  -  Public  Health  and  Risk  Assessment,  Unit  C7  -  Risk 
assessment.  Adopted  by  SCENIHR  during  its  7th  plenary  meeting  on  28-29 
September 2005) 

1. 

2. 

Are  existing  methodologies  appropriate  to  assess  potential  and 
plausible  risks  associated  with  different  kinds  of  nanotechnologies  and 
processes associated with  nano-sized materials as well as the engineered 
and adventitious products of nanotechnologies? 

If  existing  methodologies  are  not  appropriate 

the 
hypothetical  and  potential  risks  associated  with  certain  kinds  of 
nanotechnologies  and  their  engineered  and  adventitious  products,  how 
should existing methodologies be adapted and/or completed? 

to  assess 

3. 

In general terms, what are the major gaps in knowledge necessary to 

underpin risk assessment in the areas of concern? 

Question 1 

Although  the  existing  toxicological  and  eco-toxicological  methods  are 
appropriate to assess many of the hazards associated with the products and 
processes  involving  nanoparticles,  they  may  not  be  sufficient  to  address  all 
the hazards. Specifically, particular attention needs to be given to the mode 
of delivery of the nanoparticle to the test system to ensure that it reflects the 
relevant  exposure  scenarios.  The  assays  may  need  to  be  supplemented  by 
additional tests, or replaced by modified tests, as it cannot be assumed that 
current scientific knowledge has elucidated all the potential adverse effects of 
nanoparticles. 

For exposure, the use of mass concentration data alone for the expression of 
dose is insufficient, and the number concentration and/or surface area need 
to  be  included.  Equipment  that  enables  routine  measurements  in  various 
media for representative exposure to free nanoparticles is not yet available. 
The  existing  methods  used  for  environmental  exposure  assessment  are  not 
necessarily  appropriate  for  determining  the  distribution,  partitioning  and 
persistence of nanoparticles in the various environmental compartments. 

Given  the  above  uncertainties,  the  current  risk  assessment  procedures 
require modification for nanoparticles. 

 69 

 
 
 
 
Question 2 

Three different situations can be identified where existing methodologies are 
considered unsuitable: 

•  Routine methodologies have not yet been made available and / or have 
not  been  included  in  the  testing  guidance  and/or  achieved  regulatory 
acceptance. 

•  Scientific  research  has  identified  a  phenomenon  to  be  evaluated  and 

existing methodologies need to be adapted. 

•  Advances  in  nanotechnology  may  require  additional  methodological 

principles and developments. 

•  Included 

in  the  areas  of  requirements 

for  new  or  modified 

methodologies are: 

•  Appropriate methodologies must be made available for the routine and 
the  physico-chemical  properties  of 

careful  characterisation  of 
nanoparticles. 

•  Methodologies  and  equipment  need  to  be  developed  that  enable 
routine measurements, in various media, of representative exposure to 
free nanoparticles. 

•  Although  conventional  toxicity  and  ecotoxicity  tests  have  been  shown 
to be useful in evaluating the hazards of nanoparticles, some methods 
may  require  modification  and  some  new  testing  methods  may  also  be 
needed in order to optimise this process of hazard evaluation, including 
the  assessment  of  whether  nanoparticles  can  exacerbate  pre-existing 
medical conditions. 

•  In this context, although again some potentially suitable methods exist 
for  the  detection  of  nanoparticle  translocation,  these  need  to  be 
developed  further  and  incorporated  into  new  testing  strategies  and 
for  the  assessment  of  the  systemic  distribution  of 
guidelines 
nanoparticles. 

More  specifically  the  above  mentioned  methodologies  need  to  provide 
information  on  how  nanoparticles  distribute  in  human  tissues  and  in 
environmental  compartments.  This  information  can  then  be  used  in  the 
exposure assessment algorithm provided in figure 6 in section 3.10.5 of this 
opinion. 

Question 3 

In  general,  and  in  spite  of  a  rapidly  increasing  number  of  scientific 
publications  dealing  with  nanoscience  and  nanotechnology,  there 
is 
insufficient  knowledge  and  data  concerning  nanoparticle  characterisation, 

 70 

 
 
 
their detection and measurement, the fate (and especially the persistence) of 
nanoparticles  in  humans  and  in  the  environment,  and  all  aspects  of 
toxicology and environmental toxicology related to nanoparticles, to allow for 
satisfactory risk assessments for humans and ecosystems to be performed. 

The  major  gaps  in  knowledge  that  need  to  be  filled  in  relation  to  improved 
risk assessment for the products of nanotechnology include: 

•  The  characterisation  of  the  mechanisms  and  kinetics  of  the  release  of 
nanoparticles  from  a  very  wide  range  of  production  processes, 
formulations and uses of the products of nanotechnology. 

•  The actual range of exposure levels to nanoparticles, both to man and 

to the environment. 

•  The extent to which it is possible to extrapolate from the toxicology of 
non-nano  sized  particles  and  other  physical  forms  e.g.  fibres  of  the 
same substance to the toxicology of nanosized materials, and between 
nanoparticles of different size ranges and shape. 

•  Toxicokinetic  data  following  exposure,  so  that  target  organs  can  be 
identified  and  doses  for  hazard  assessment  determined.  This  includes 
dose  response  data  for  the  target  organs,  and  knowledge  of  the 
subcellular location of nanoparticles and their mechanistic effects at the 
cellular level. 

•  Information  from  the  occupational  exposure  and  associated  health 
effects  on  workers  involved  in  the  manufacture  and  processing  of 
nanoparticles. 

•  The 

fate,  distribution  and  persistence  and  bioaccumulation  of 
nanoparticles  in  the  environment  and  environmental  species  including 
micro-organisms. 

•  The effects of nanoparticles on various environmental species, in each 
of  the  environmental  compartments  and  representative  of  different 
trophic levels and exposure routes. 

In  addition,  there  are  several  aspects  of  the  fundamental  properties  of 
nanoparticles that require elucidation, including the ability of nanoparticles to 
act  as  vectors  of  chemicals,  micro-organisms  and  interactions  with  other 
stressors. 

 71 

 
 
 
 
 72 

 
 
Appendix IV:  

Nanomedicine, Nanotechnology for Health, from the 

European Technology Platform, Strategic Research 
Agenda for Nanomedicine, November 2006 

 73 

 
 
 
 
74

 
 
K
I
-
7
6
-
0
6
-
0
8
1
-
E
N
-
C

Nanomedicine
N a n o t e c h n o l o g y   f o r   H e a l t h

m
r

o

f

t

a

l

P

y

g

o

l

o

n

h

c

e
T

n

a

e

p

o

r

u

E

e

n

i

c

i

d

e
m
o

n

a
N

r

o

f

a

d

n

e

g

A

h

c

r

a

e

s

e
R

c

i

g

e

t

a

r

t
S

N o v e m b e r   2 0 0 6

 
 
 
 
 
 
For further information on nanomedicine, please contact:

European Commission

Research DG

Renzo Tomellini
Uta Faure
Oliver Panzer

E-mail: rtd-nanotech@ec.europa.eu
http://cordis.europa.eu/nanotechnology/nanomedicine.htm

European Technology Platform on NanoMedicine 
Nanotechnology for Health – Strategic Research Agenda

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities

2006 – 39 pp. – 21.0 x 29.7 cm

ISBN 92-79-02203-2

Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number(*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers or these calls may be billed.

SALES AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

Publications for sale produced by the Office for Official Publications of the European Communities 
are available from our sales agents throughout the world.

You can find the list of sales agents on the Publications Office website (http://publications.eu.int) 
or you can apply for it by fax (352) 29 29-42758.

Contact the sales agent of your choice and place your order.

The Commission accepts no responsibility or liability whatsoever with regard 
to the information presented in this document.

This brochure has been produced thanks to the efforts of the stakeholders group 
of the European Technology Platform on NanoMedicine.

A great deal of additional information on the European Union is available on the internet.
It can be accessed through the Europa server (http://ec.europa.eu).

Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Photo cover: © G. von Bally, Laboratory of Biophysics, Medical Centre
University of Münster / Other pictures: © B. Kleinsorge, University of Cambridge
© SINTEF Materials and Chemistry 2005, © Tyndall National Institute “Lee Maltings”
University College, Cork

Printed in Belgium

PRINTED ON WHITE CHLORINE-FREE PAPER

Nanomedicine
N a n o t e c h n o l o g y   f o r   H e a l t h

E u r o p e a n   T e c h n o l o g y   P l a t f o r m

S t r a t e g i c   R e s e a r c h   A g e n d a   f o r   N a n o m e d i c i n e

N o v e m b e r   2 0 0 6

Executive Summary
1. Introduction
1.1. Nanomedicine: Answering Clinical Needs
1.2. The Impact of Nanomedicine on the Care Process
1.2.1. Preventive Medicine
1.2.2. Diagnosis
1.2.3. Therapy
1.2.4. Follow-Up Monitoring
1.3. Selected Disease Areas
1.3.1. Cardiovascular Diseases
1.3.2. Cancer
1.3.3. Musculoskeletal Disorders
1.3.4. Neurodegenerative Diseases and Psychiatric Conditions
1.3.5. Diabetes
1.3.6. Bacterial and Viral Infectious Diseases
1.4. Outlook

2. Technology Development driven by Healthcare Needs
Technologies for Therapeutic Benefits
2.1. Nanotechnology based Diagnostics and Imaging
2.1.1. Introduction
2.1.2. In Vitro Applications
2.1.3. In Vivo Imaging
2.1.4. Medical Devices
2.1.5. Strategic Research Priorities
2.2. Targeted Delivery
2.2.1. Introduction
2.2.2. Strategic Research Priorities
2.3. Regenerative Medicine
2.3.1. Introduction
2.3.2. Intelligent Biomaterials and Smart Implants
2.3.3. Bioactive Signalling Molecules
2.3.4. Cell Based Therapies
2.3.5. Strategic Research Priorities

3. Providing the Environment to Facilitate Nanomedicine
3.1. Ethical and Social Aspects of Nanomedicine
3.2. Public Acceptance of Nanomedicine
3.3. Risk Assessment
3.4. Regulatory Framework
3.5. Intellectual Property Rights
3.6. Required Research Infrastructure
3.7. Education and Training Needs

4. Making it Happen

Strategic Research Priorities
Diagnostics
Targeted Delivery
Regenerative Medicine

Strategic Research Agenda of the ETP 
NanoMedicine: Members & Contributors

Key References

Images

1
2
2
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
5
6
6
7
8
9

10
10
10
11
11
11
12
12
15
15
15
18
18
19
20
21
21

24
24
25
26
26
28
28
29

30

32
32
33
34

35

38

39

Executive Summary

Nanomedicine, the application of nanotechnology in healthcare, offers numerous
very promising possibilities to significantly improve medical diagnosis and therapy,
leading  to  an  affordable  higher  quality  of  life  for  everyone.  At  the  same  time
nanomedicine is a strategic issue for the sustainable competitiveness of Europe.

In  order  to  avoid  that  this  young  and  very  fast  growing  discipline  suffers  from 
fragmentation and a lack of coordination, industry and academia – together with 
the European Commission – have identified the need for a European initiative to
intermesh the several strands of nanomedicine into a firm strategy for advancement.

The resulting “European Technology Platform on NanoMedicine” is an industry-led
consortium,  bringing  together  the  key  European  stakeholders  in  the  sector. 
In  September  2005  it  delivered  a  common  vision  of  this  technologically  and 
structurally multi-faceted area 1, and defines the most important objectives in this
Strategic Research Agenda (SRA).

The  SRA  addresses  the  Member  States  of  the  European  Union,  its  Candidate
Countries  and  Associated  States  to  the  EU  Framework  Programmes  for  research
and  tech no lo gi cal  development,  as  well  as  the  European  Commission  itself. 
Its main aim is to put forward a sound basis for decision making processes for policy
makers  and  funding  agencies,  providing  an  overview  of  needs  and  challenges,
existing technologies and future opportunities in nanomedicine. The SRA also takes
into  consideration  education  and  training,  ethical  requirements,  benefit/risk
assessment, public  acceptance,  regulatory  framework  and  intellectual  property
issues, thus representing a possible reference document for regulatory bodies.

The  proposed  disease  oriented  priority  setting  of  this  SRA  is  based  on  several
parameters such as mortality rate, the level of suffering that an illness imposes on
a patient, the burden put on society, the prevalence of the disease and the impact
that nanotechnology might have to diagnose and overcome certain illnesses.

The  scientific  and  technical  approach  is  horizontal  and  exploits  the  benefits  of
interdisciplinarity  and  convergence  of  relevant  technologies  via  breakthrough 
de ve lop ments in the areas of diagnosis, targeted delivery systems, and regenerative
medicine.

The effective implementation of the SRA is expected to provide a major step forward
in patient oriented affordable healthcare.

1. European Technology Platform on NanoMedicine “Nanotechnology for Health: 

Vision Paper and Basis for a Strategic Research Agenda for NanoMedicine”, September 2005
Available online at: http://cordis.europa.eu/nanotechnology/nanomedicine.htm

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

1

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

2

1. Introduction

1.1. Nanomedicine: Answering

Clinical Needs

Over  the  coming  decades,  the  populations  of  many
countries  around  the  world  will  age  due  to  a  declining
birth rate and an increasing life expectancy. At the same
time  life-styles  in  developed  countries  have  become
increasingly sedentary. These developments will dramati-
cally  impact  the  healthcare  system:  certain  diseases
related to life-style will become more prevalent earlier in
life, and the older generation wants to spend their addi-
tional  years  with  a  higher  quality  of  life.  Nevertheless,
healthcare  costs  should  be  kept  affordable.
Nanomedicine,  the  application  of  nanotechnology  to
healthcare,  will  be  an  essential  tool  to  address  many
unmet clinical needs of today and in the future. 

This  document  describes  the  potential  of  nanomedicine
to address clinical needs in significant diseases. It identifies
those diseases that cause the most suffering for patients
and the highest burden on society, and for which nano-
medicine is expected to have a major impact. It describes
where  in  the  care-process  and  by  which  technology
nanomedicine could have an impact. Finally it develops a
Strategic Research Agenda, prioritising the most important
technologies, which Europe has to develop in the near future,
to realise the potential of nanomedicine for health care.

Nanomedical research should be initiated and supported
in those areas of the care process, where the benefit for
the patient is highest and should focus on diseases that
have  the  highest  socio-economical  impact.  The  major
diseases  that  impose  the  highest  burden  on  society
should  be  addressed  first  such  as:  cardiovascular 
diseases,  cancer,  musculoskeletal  and  inflammatory
conditions, neurodegenerative and psychiatric diseases,
diabetes,  and  infectious  diseases.  Cardiovascular 
disease remains the most frequent cause of death in the
European  Union,  myocardial  infarction  and  stroke
accounting for about half of all deaths in Europe. Cancer
is currently the number two cause of death behind cardio-
vascular diseases in the western world. Due to an aging
population  and  improvements  in  the  therapy  of  cardio-
vascular diseases, cancer will become the number one

cause of death in the coming decades. Musculoskeletal
and inflammatory diseases such as arthritis have a devast -
ating impact  on  the  quality  of  life  and  require  constant
medication.  Neurodegenerative  diseases  such  as
Alzheimer's or Parkinson's are other age related diseases,
reducing the quality of life and furthermore put a tremen-
dous burden on society. Diabetes is another example of
a disease that requires constant monitoring and medica-
tion, and is expected to increase in occurrence dramati-
cally.  Globally,  bacterial  and  viral  infections  claim  many
lives with inadequate therapeutic options in some cases. 

As  soon  as  the  onset  of  a  disease  is  suspected,  the
patient enters into a care process comprising diagnosis,
therapy, and follow-up monitoring. In the future, health-
care will start before the onset of symptoms. New sensi-
tive  diagnostics  devices  will  permit  very  early  personal
risk  assessment  by  monitoring  disease  indicative  bio-
markers.  Due  to  its  much  larger  analytical  capacity,
nanomedicine will allow an earlier and more personalised
treatment  for  many  diseases,  exploiting  the  in-depth
understanding  of  diseases  at  a  molecular  level.  Nano-
medicine holds the promise to greatly improve the efficacy
of pharmaceutical therapy, reduce side-effects and make
drug-administration  more  convenient.  Nano-assisted
regenerative medicine has the potential to create a para -
digm shift in the healthcare systems of tomorrow, aiming
to  trigger  endogenous  self-repair  mechanisms  rather
than just managing or palliating the symptoms.

Therefore, nanomedicine has the potential, by enabling
earlier diagnosis, better therapy and improved follow-up
care, to make the care process more effective in terms
of clinical outcome for the patient, and more affordable
for society. 

Nanomedicine
Definition: Nanomedicine, for the purpose of this document is
defined as the application of nanotechnology to achieve break-
throughs in healthcare. It exploits the improved and often novel
physical, chemical and biological properties of materials at the
nanometer  scale.  Nanomedicine  has  the  potential  to  enable
early detection and prevention, and to essentially improve diag-
nosis, treatment and follow-up of diseases.

1.2. The Impact of Nanomedicine

on the Care Process

Nanotechnology allows the manufacturing and manipu-
lation of matter at basically any scale, ranging from single
atoms and molecules to micrometer-sized objects. This
already  enables  the  miniaturisation  of  many  current
devices, resulting in faster operation or the integration of
several  operations.  Furthermore,  at  this  scale,  man-
made structures match typical sizes of natural functional
units in living organisms. This allows them to interact with
the biology of living organisms. Finally, nanometer sized
materials and devices often show novel properties. These
three aspects hold the promise to provide breakthroughs
in nanomedicine, leading to clinical solutions within pre-
ventive medicine, diagnosis, therapy and follow-up care. 

1.2.1. Preventive Medicine  
New  diagnostic  tests  making  use  of  nanotechnology  to
quantify disease-related biomarkers could offer an earlier
and  more  personalised  risk  assessment  before  symp-
toms show up. In general, these analyses must be cost-
effective,  sensitive,  and  reliable.  The  test  itself  should
inflict only minimal discomfort on the patient. Supported
by  such  an  analysis  and  bioinformatics,  health  profes-
sionals  could  advise  patients  with  an  increased  risk  to
take up a personalised prevention program. People with
an increased risk for a certain disease could benefit from
regular personalised check-ups to monitor changes in the
pattern of their biomarkers.

Nanotechnology could improve in vitro diagnostic tests by
providing  more  sensitive  detection  technologies  or  by
providing  better  nano-labels  that  can  be  detected  with
high sensitivity once they bind to disease-specific mole-
cules present in the sample. Nanotechnology could also
improve the ease-of-use of in vitro diagnostic tests done
by  untrained  users  or  even  by  patients  at  home.  For
example a relatively painless minimally invasive sampling
technique  would  greatly  improve  patient  comfort.
Diseases  with  no  secretion  of  biomarkers  into  blood  or
urine  will  require  imaging  procedures  of  high  specificity

Biomarkers 
A biomarker is an indicator of a biological process or state, for
example a disease, or the response to a therapeutic intervention.
Biomarkers are diverse in nature, ranging from an altered gene,
to a change in protein-production, to a change in a regulated
metabolic  pathway,  or  even  physical  features  of  cells.
Biomarkers can be analysed using in vitro diagnostics of samples,
or they can be visualised and quantified in vivo. 

for their early detection. One well-known example used
already is x-ray mammography for the early detection of
breast cancer. Novel targeted imaging agents, precisely
homing in on diseased cells, promise a much higher sen-
sitivity than today's imaging procedures making possible
the detecting of cancer at an even earlier stage.

1.2.2. Diagnosis
If a medical check-up had found an indication or a hint
of  symptoms  for  a  disease,  it  is  important  that  “false 
positives”  are  excluded  by  applying  more  specific 
diagnostic procedures. These can be more laborious and
expensive  as  they  are  applied  to  a  smaller  number  of
patients. In this case, molecular imaging, which makes
use  of  specific  targeted  agents,  plays  a  crucial  role  for
localisation  and  staging  of  a  disease,  or  –    equally 
important – for ascertaining the health of a patient. Here,
nanotechnology could help to design a plethora of very
specific  imaging  agents  over  the  next  ten  years.
Miniaturised  imaging  systems  will  make  it  possible  to
perform  image-based  diagnostics  everywhere  and  not
only  in  research  centres.  Automatic  methods  will  give
diagnostic results without an on site expert. Conceptually
novel methods, combining biochemical techniques with
advanced  imaging  and  spectroscopy  provide  insight  to
the  behaviour  of  single  diseased  cells  and  their  micro-
environment for the individual patient. This could lead to
personalised  treatment  and  medication  tailored  to  the
specific needs of a patient. 

The  main  advantage  of  nanomedicine  on  quality  of  life
and  on  costs  for  healthcare  is  earlier  detection  of  a 
disease,  leading  to  less  severe  and  costly  therapeutic
demands, and an improved clinical result. However, once
a  disease  is  diagnosed,  therapeutic  action  is  required. 
A decision needs to be taken as to which cure offers the
best therapeutic ratio (risk/benefit) for the patient. Here,
diagnostic  imaging  procedures  provide  crucial  input  for
clinical decision taking and therapy planning. 

1.2.3. Therapy
In many cases, therapy will not be restricted to medica-
tion  only  but  requires  more  severe  therapeutic  action
such as surgery or radiation treatment. Planning of thera-
peutic interventions will be based on imaging, or may be
performed under image guidance. Here, nanotechnology
will lead to a miniaturisation of devices that enable mini-
mally  invasive  procedures  and  new  ways  of  treatment.
The possibilities range from minimally invasive catheter-
based interventions to implantable devices. Targeted deli-
very systems and nanotechnology-assisted regenerative

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

3

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

4

medicine  will  play  the  central  role  in  future  therapy.
Targeted  delivery  agents  will  allow  a  localised  therapy
which targets only the diseased cells, thereby increasing
efficacy while reducing unwanted side effects. Thanks to
nanotechnology, pluripotent stem cells and bioactive sig-
nalling  factors  will  be  essential  components  of  smart,
multi-functional  implants  which  can  react  to  the  sur-
rounding  micro-environment  and  facilitate  site-specific,
endogenous  tissue  regeneration  (making  lifelong
immune-suppressing medication obsolete). Imaging and
biochemical  assay  techniques  will  be  used  to  monitor
drug release or to follow the therapy progress. This thera-
peutic  logic  will  lead  to  the  development  of  novel, 
disease  modifying  treatments  that  will  not  only  signifi-
cantly  increase  quality  of  life  of  European  citizens  but
also  dramatically  reduce  societal  and  economic  costs
related to the management of permanent disabilities. 

1.2.4. Follow-Up Monitoring
Medical  reasons  may  call  for  an  ongoing  monitoring  of
the  patient  after  completing  the  acute  therapy.  This
might be a regular check for reoccurrence, or, in the case
of chronic diseases, a frequent assessment of the actual
disease  status  and  medication  planning.  Continuous
medication could be made more convenient by implants,
which release drugs in a controlled way over an extended
length of time. In vitro diagnostic techniques and mo lec u -
lar  imaging  play  an  important  role  in  this  part  of  the
care-process,  as  well.  Biomarkers  could  be  systema-
tically monitored to pick up early signs of reoccurrence,
complemented  by  molecular  imaging  where  necessary.
Oncology is one of the areas where these techniques are
already  being  evaluated  today.  Some  types  of  tumours
can  be  controlled  by  continuous  medication  extending
life expectancy. However, in the case of drug resistance,
signs of disease progression can be immediately picked
up and alternative treatments can be prescribed. 

1.3. Selected Disease Areas

Nanomedicine should focus on the patient; it should aim
for  meaningful  improvements  in  areas  that  contain  the
most severe challenges in future healthcare appropriate to
the technology. Therefore, six disease areas were selected
based on  the  following  criteria:  all  chosen  diseases
strongly reduce  the  patient's  quality  of  life  and  have  a
very  high  prevalence,  they  impose  a  high  socio-econo-
mical burden on society, and nanotechnology is expected
to  have  a  high  impact  on  the  care  process  for  these
diseases. 

1.3.1. Cardiovascular Diseases
Cardiovascular diseases remain the most frequent cause
of death in the European Union and in the world, accord-
ing  to  the  World  Health  Organisation,  with  myocardial
infarction  and  stroke  accounting  for  about  half  of  all
deaths  in  Europe.  The  underlying  cause  of  cardiovas-
cular disease is in most cases the formation of a plaque
in the blood vessels. The formation of plaque can lead to
a  stenosis  of  the  blood  vessels,  accompanied  by  a
decreased tissue perfusion and a lack of oxygen. In acute
cases,  such  as  an  infarct  or  a  stroke,  the  plaque
becomes  unstable  and  ruptured  leading  to  an  acute
clogging of the blood vessel with death or disability as the
consequence. Many aspects of cardiovascular diseases
at  present,  for  example  the  biochemistry  of  unstable
plaques, are not completely understood. Cardiovascular
diseases are often associated with risk factors such as
little  exercise,  high  cholesterol  that  are  typical  for 
western  life-style;  however,  recent  research  also 
indicates inherited causes. 

1

i

.
g
F
©

Nanomedicine is anticipated to aim for improvements in
early diagnosis, acute intervention and follow-up-therapy.
For  early  diagnosis,  nanotechnology  could  be  used  to
realise new in vitro diagnostic tests for atherosclerosis or
even  for  the  presence  of  highly  unstable  plaque.  While
today's imaging procedures only indicate the presence of
a stenosis, research should try to develop imaging methods
that visualise plaques that are at the brink of rupturing. 

Targeted agents could deliver a therapeutic payload, for
example a drug that stabilises the plaque and prevents
rupturing.  Already,  nanometer-sized  agents  are  being
preclinically tested that render an unstable plaque visible
in  magnetic  resonance  imaging  and  at  the  same  time
release a drug to stabilise the plaque. In the case of an
acute  stenosis  and  aneurysms  in  the  vascular  system,
ballooning  and  drug  eluting  stents  are  interventional,

 
 
 
minimally  invasive  therapeutic  options  that  are  used
today.  They  should  be  further  optimised  using  intravas-
cular micro-navigation and image guided technologies as
well as smart materials.

In case of an infarct of the heart muscle itself, some of
the  heart  tissue  usually  gets  seriously  damaged.  The
regeneration potential of the heart and its ability for tissue
repair after ischemic injury has been considered limited
or  nonexistent.  However,  recent  scientific  results  in
regenerative  medicine  have  radically  changed  this  view
and thus opened the possibility of cell therapy as well as
new  pharmacological  concepts  for  the  treatment  of 
cardiac insufficiency. New treatments will include intelligent
nanobiomaterials  with  the  ability  to  attract  local  adult
stem cells or cultured cells to the site of injury, providing
cell  therapy  that  should  improve  heart  function  and
decrease mortality for patients with severe heart insuffi-
ciency.  Early  treatment  in  myocardial  infarction  with
cells/stem cell modifying drugs could improve early res-
cue of injured myocardium and thus reduce the number
of patients with severe cardiac insufficiency.

1.3.2. Cancer
Cancer is currently the second leading cause of death in
Europe, while it shows probably the highest clinical com-
plexity. Nanomedicine bears the potential to provide an
effective  answer  to  the  complexity  of  the  disease  as  it
offers  more  therapeutic  options  compared  to  present
conventional therapy. 

Especially in cancer, early diagnosis is of utmost impor-
tance.  Late-stage  metastatic  cancer  is  difficult  to  cure
and  treatment  leaves  severe  side-effects,  suffering  for
the patient, and high costs. Diagnostic tests that allow
measurement  of  a  biomarker  panel  are  necessary  to
catch  the  disease  at  on-set.  Nanotechnology  could
enable the parallel in vitro measurements of many bio-
markers at the same time, while keeping the test itself
simple,  sensitive,  reliable,  and  inexpensive.  In  addition
nanotechnology provides the tools to discover novel bio-
markers, enhancing reliability and accuracy of diagnosis.

In  over  50 %  of  all  cancer  cases,  radiation  therapy  is
the standard form of therapy. Today, dose planning for
radiation  therapy  is  based  on  computer  tomography,
and prescribes a constant dose within the tumour out-
line. This ignores the tumour's inner structure consisting
of  sections  being  more  or  less  sensitive  to  radiation.
Molecular imaging procedures, using dedicated agents
together with imaging systems and software, may soon

be able to reveal these inner sections. The imaging pro-
cedure  will  serve  as  an  input  to  a  better  radiotherapy
planning that puts higher doses on the radiation-resistant
sections  and  lower  doses  on  the  radiation-sensitive
sections,  thereby  reducing  damage  in  the  healthy
neighbourhood. Chemotherapy is today the other stan-
dard form of therapy. Chemotherapy is usually applied
systemically  which  leads  to  damage  of  healthy  tissue
causing  severe  side  effects  for  the  patients.  Targeted
delivery schemes can be used to accumulate the thera-
peutic  agent  specifically  on  the  diseased  cells.  An
example,  already  in  clinical  use,  is  an  antibody  that 
is  either  labelled  with  a  radioactive  isotope  for  single
photon emission computed tomography imaging or with
a beta-radiation emitting isotope, which efficiently kills
metastases throughout the body. Targeted nano-carriers,
both loaded with pharmaceutical and acting as imaging
agent, are promising concepts under development. The
drug release can be purely passive over time or can be
induced  actively  from  outside,  i.e.  by  highly  focused
ultrasound  pulses  or  heating  with  radio  frequency
waves.  The  combination  of  imaging  with  drug  release
allows  a  higher  control  over  dosing  and  an  improved
quantification of the treatment. Today, shrinking of the
tumour  is  monitored  by  computer  tomography,  which
occurs  usually  weeks  after  the  treatment.  Molecular
imaging would allow faster assessment of the response
of  a  patient  to  a  therapy;  making  possible  an  earlier
modification  of  the  oncological  treatment  regime,
reducing stress and pain for the patient.

Regenerative medicine offers unique therapeutic options
to deal with side effects of standard chemotherapy like
secondary  immunodeficiency.  Regenerative  medicine
may be applied to create a new lymphocyte factory that
re-establishes a normal immune response in a patient.
One option is to make haemopoietic stem cells that pro-
liferate  without  differentiating,  in  order  to  correct  the
bone  marrow  condition  and  to  have  a  large  number  of
haemopoietic  cells  available 
immunodeficient
patients. Secondly, the thymic structure and function has
to be reproduced so as to stimulate haemopoietic stem
cells to differentiate and become lymphocytes. The criti-
cal issue and challenge is to construct an environment
able  to  trigger  proliferation  and  differentiation.  Possible
avenues for development include the use of microporous
scaffolds,  paved  with  stromal  cells,  which  may  be 
coupled  with  attached/eluted  signalling  molecules  and
growth factors.

in 

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

5

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

6

1.3.3. Musculoskeletal Disorders
Musculoskeletal disorders are the most common causes
of severe long-term pain and physical disability, affecting
hundreds  of  millions  of  people  across  the  world  and
having a  negative  influence  on  the  quality  of  life  and
industrial output, inflicting an enormous cost on health
systems.  The  extent  of  the  problem  and  its  burden  on
patients  and  society  can  be  illustrated  by  considering
that joint diseases account for half of all chronic condi-
tions  in  persons  aged  65  and  over.  Back  pain  is  the
second leading cause of sick leave, and fractures related
to  osteoporosis  have  almost  doubled  in  number  in  the
last decade. It is estimated that 40% of all women over 
50 years in age will suffer from an osteoporotic fracture.
The  clinical  symptoms  are  pain  and  functional  impair-
ment that induce joint stiffness and dysfunction with sub-
sequent  impaired  performances  in  daily  living  and  at
work.  About  25%  of  patients  cannot  cope  with  daily 
activities,  often  resulting  in  depression  and  social  isola-
tion. In the European Union and the USA combined, over
one million joint replacements are performed each year. 

2

i

.
g
F
©

A focus area here is osteoarthritis. The main risk factors
for  osteoarthritis  are  age,  obesity  and  joint  traumata
where the limited repair capacity of articular cartilage is
a  confounding  factor.  The  diagnosis  of  osteoarthritis  in
the late stage by symptoms is obvious but the challenge
for  the  future  is  to  provide  early,  pre-symptomatic  dia-
gnosis by the use of biomarkers or by novel imaging tech-
niques. Molecular imaging should focus on methods to
visualise disease progression and monitor therapy in vivo.

cules  coupled  to  biomaterials  based  on  nanostructures
locally implanted in the area of injury or a systemic tar-
geted approach, both aiming at recruiting, attracting and
stimulating  local  stem  cells  for  local  repair  or  anabolic
actions. Cell-based therapies could involve the delivery of
a universal donor stem cell line alone or in combination
with a biomaterial to modulate the immune system and
inhibit inflammation. Other treatments could be the deli-
very of nanoparticles that selectively attach to stem cell
niches and release local stimulating factors. Together with
anti-inflammatory drugs this treatment might allow repair
of articular cartilage and regain homeostasis within the joint.

Both arthritis and diabetic nephropathy are thought to be
ultimately a consequence of modern European life-style.
It  is  expected  that  treatments  for  these  diseases  may
well impact other inflammatory diseases such as Crohn's
disease  and  psoriasis.  At  present,  nanomedicines  for
these diseases are under research, but there is signifi-
cant  scope  for  improvement  in  the  quality  of  life  for
patients and to improve the availability of these drugs.

1.3.4. Neurodegenerative Diseases and

Psychiatric Conditions

Age-associated  neurodegenerative  conditions 
like
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease will strongly increase
in  prevalence  over  the  next  decade  due  to  changing
demographics. Neurodegenerative diseases come with a
diminution in quality of life, while necessary patient care
puts  a  financial  and  social  burden  on  society.  Three
aspects make this disease area particularly challenging
for healthcare: the diseases are slowly progressing and
difficult  to  detect,  responsiveness  to  therapy  strongly
depends on the individual patient and often needs to be
personalised, and all present and future medication will
have to cross the blood brain barrier. The latter imposes
in  a  literal  sense  a  barrier  to  early  diagnostic  and  new
medication. 

Nanomedical research in this area should tackle the above
ambitious  challenges.  In  particular,  new  types  of  nano-
agents may be transported through the blood brain barrier.
Regenerative  medicine  holds  the  remarkable  promise  to
not only treat symptoms but also restore neural func tion -
al i ty. The challenge is to convert this to a reality. 

Osteoarthritis  and  osteochondrosis  induce  a  severe
process  of  inflammation,  which  results  in  a  dramatic
increase  in  the  degenerative  processes.  Nano-assisted
regenerative medicine treatments of osteoarthritis could
include disease modifying therapies with bioactive mole-

Also here, in vitro detection of disease specific biomarkers
may hold the answer to early diagnosis of degenerative
conditions,  preventing  irreversible  damage  of  neural 
tissue. Imaging tracers that pass the blood brain barrier
could  indicate  the  status  of  the  brain  tissue  and  the

 
 
expression level of neuro-receptors in the brain. The dis-
tribution  and  metabolism  of  relevant  body-immanent
neurotransmitters could be monitored in vivo for this pur-
pose. Secondly finding the correct drug and its dosing to
treat a psychiatric condition often relies a good deal on
trial-and-error today. This is well illustrated by the exam-
ple of depression where there is a growing assortment of
anti-depressives. However, it often needs many trials of
several weeks each until the symptoms of an individual
patient can be assessed; and about 25% of the patients
show  no  benefit.  Improved  positron  emission  tomo-
graphy of the brain could allow an earlier recognition of
patients,  who  don't  respond  to  a  certain  medication.
Getting  more  information  about  the  patient's  individual
response  by  imaging  in  connection  with  genomic  and
proteomic analysis, opens the long-term opportunity to
a  treatment  tuned  to  the  individual  patient's  needs.
Furthermore,  the  very  same  methods  could  clarify  the
underlying specific defect mechanisms of several neuro-
degenerative and psychiatric conditions, which manifest
with the same symptoms.

Treating the symptoms and slowing down further degene-
ration  is  often  all  that  can  be  achieved  today.  Recent
findings  have  shown  that  adult  stem  cells  can  be
retrieved from many kinds of human tissue and in various
differentiation  stages,  and  that  they  can  be  controlled 
in vitro to de-differentiate or differentiate into many types
of  cells,  including  neuronal  cells,  precursor  cells,  and
sensory  cells.  There  are  several  disorders  related to  the
central  nervous  system,  which  would  benefit  tremen-
dously from safe and affordable therapeutic strategies to
regenerate tissue. Some major disorders of the central
nervous system are characterised by the malfunctioning
of  specific  types  of  cells,  and  subsequent  reduction  of
inter alia the level of neurotransmitters being secreted. 
A therapy for advanced stages of these diseases would
consist of regenerating cells secreting certain proteins or
metabolites in order to keep surrounding tissue function-
al. In addition, it would require inhibition of those factors
that  had  killed  the  cells  prior  to  treatment  –  factors,
which today are unknown in most cases – or protective
measures for the regenerated cells, including absorbing
matrices,  or  matrices,  including  enzymes  to  degrade
those factors, or modified cells expressing protective fac-
tors. The ultimate goal would be to carry out the integra-
tion of the cells inside the human body to ensure that full
integration, even in nerve tissue, takes place. However,
earlier development steps would probably require partial
expansion in vitro. 

3

i

.
g
F
©

The blood brain barrier usually prohibits brain uptake of
larger  molecules,  which  excludes  many  potential  drugs
for  neurodegenerative  or  psychiatric  conditions.  Nano-
carriers  with  special  surface  properties  may  offer  new
and  efficient  options  to  carry  a  therapeutic  payload
through the blood brain barrier. For severe cases, brain
implantable  devices  are  conceivable  which  release  the
drug over extended periods of time, or stimulate specific
regions of the brain electrically. Here, miniaturisation and
biocompatibility of the device are crucial challenges that
may be effectively addressed by nanotechnology.

Regenerative  medicine  has  enormous  potential  for
neuro-degenerative conditions, an area where there is no
therapy  available  that  reverses  or  cures  the  disease.

1.3.5. Diabetes
Diabetes presents an increasingly severe problem, with
48  million  patients  in  Europe,  with  often  serious  side
effects which require costly long-term medical care. It is
the major cause of blindness in adults aged 20-74 years,
and of renal dysfunction, where diabetes type 2 induces
renal inflammation. Diabetes can result in heart infarcts
and stroke, doubling the risk of myocardial infarction in
men,  and  raising  the  risk  fourfold  in  women.  It  is  the
leading cause of non-traumatic lower-extremity amputa-
tion (with more than 85% of diabetic foot amputations
preceded  by  a  chronic  wound).  Type  2  diabetes,  from
which  approximately  90%  of  all  diabetics  suffer,  is
expected 
in  prevalence  by  46% 
during 2000-2010, following the approximately five-fold
increase  since  1960.  It  is  becoming  increasingly 
common, partly because people are living longer, but the
current epidemic of obesity and the prevalence of seden-
tary life-styles are driving a rapid increase in both children
and  adolescents  worldwide.  In  early  disease  stages,
many  patients  are  asymptomatic.  Therefore,  diagnosis
often occurs late or by chance. The typical patient had

increase 

to 

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

7

 
 
 
I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

8

diabetes type 2 for at least 4-7 years before diagnosis.
The  pathophysiological  processes  leading  to  complica-
tions are already active in 50% of all patients who are not
yet diagnosed.

Early diagnosis of pre-diabetes type 2 offers both indivi-
dual health and economic benefits, because many people
with inadequate glucose tolerance can reduce their rela-
tive  risk  of  progressing  to  diabetes  by  58%  by  lifestyle
changes, if diagnosed early enough. The disease has a
polygenetic  background,  obesity  promoting  its  occur-
rence in those genetically disposed. Nanomedicine has
significant  contributions  to  make  here,  providing  rapid
and effective in vitro diagnostic tests capable of detecting
genes associated with diabetes type 2, and of assaying
peptides, permitting differential diagnoses between various
diabetes types. Since some genes responsible for type 2
diabetes  can  be  detected  already,  using  commercially
available assays, progress here could be quite rapid.

4

i

.
g
F
©

The  need  for  daily  injections  and  blood  measurements
worsens  compliance  in  millions  of  patients,  promoting
earlier appearance of the devastating and costly compli-
cations. The development of a glucose sensor that allows
non-invasive monitoring of the blood glucose level is one
of the important clinical needs to improve patient com-
pliance.  The  development  and  clinical  introduction  of
better application forms, both for insulin and also for the
newly-developed  incretin  agents,  is  therefore  urgent.
Non-parenteral formulations of nanoparticles containing
insulin,  designed  to  cross  physiological  barriers  and  to
release  the  insulin  in  the  bloodstream  are  becoming 
possible, and should be extended to the newly available
therapeutic agents as soon as possible. Nanotechnology
should also improve on this by developing non-injectable
forms of drug-bearing nanoparticles capable of feedback-

modulated  release  of  therapeutic  agents  to  control 
glucose  homeostasis  according  to  the  current  physio-
logical needs of the patient.

Regenerative  medicine  will  be  crucial  in  achieving  the
ultimate goal in diabetes treatment- i.e. to free diabetic
patients  from  the  need  to  inject  insulin.  While  conven-
tional medication serves purely a disease management,
regenerative  medicine  may  actually  allow  restoring
endogenous  insulin  production  by  providing  stem-cell-
based therapeutic modalities capable of conserving and
rebuilding pancreatic islets. A breakthrough in this tech-
nology may finally provide curative therapies for both type
1 and type 2 diabetes. In addition, regenerative medicine
therapeutic strategies could also play a significant role in
the management of the most serious and complex com-
plication  of  diabetes  by  providing  therapies  with  intelli-
gent  nanostructured  biomaterials  releasing  bioactive
molecules  with  the  purpose  of  efficient  healing  of 
diabetic foot ulcers.

1.3.6. Bacterial and Viral Infectious

Diseases 

Worldwide, various bacterial and viral infections add up
to  being  one  of  the  most  common  causes  of  death. 
In general, infectious diseases are more prevalent in the
poor and less developed countries. The most threatening
diseases  are  HIV,  tuberculosis,  malaria  and  influenza. 
In 2001, HIV, tuberculosis and malaria claimed together
5.7 million lives, with 90% and more in less developed
countries. The recent threat of the avian influenza virus
to  become  a  highly  infectious  human  disease  demon-
strated  that  infectious  diseases  still  impose  a  severe
global health risk. In western countries, the extensive use
of antibiotics has generated a problem as many bacteria
develop resistance. Not diagnosed or treated with alter-
native  antibiotics  in  time,  the  patient  can  enter  into 
septic shock. Currently, an increasing number of deaths
due  to  infection  by  antibiotic  resistant  bacteria-strains
can be observed in many western countries. 

Nanotechnology research should focus on new diagnostic
tools  that  allow  a  rapid  identification  of  the  underlying
cause  of  infection.  These  diagnostic  tests  need  to  be
affordable for third world countries and should be easy to
use.  One  example  here  is  a  rapid  and  reliable  sputum
smear test to diagnose tuberculosis. Another example is
the  need  for  a  rapid  diagnosis  of  the  bacterial  strain
responsible  for  an  infection.  Subsequently,  dedicated
antibiotics  can  be  prescribed  for  a  more  effective 
treatment. 

 
 
 
Nanotechnology  may  in  the  first  instance  not  come  up
with  novel,  more  effective  drugs;  however,  it  may 
certainly help to administer vaccines or current drugs in
a more effective way. 

1.4. Outlook

Nanomedicine will be important to improve healthcare in
all  phases  of  the  care  process.  New  in  vitro  diagnostic
tests  will  shift  diagnosis  to  an  earlier  stage,  hopefully
before  symptoms  really  develop  and  allow  pre-emptive
therapeutic  measures.  in  vivo  diagnosis  will  become
more  sensitive  and  precise  thanks  to  new  imaging 
techniques and nano-sized targeted agents. Therapy as
well could be greatly improved in efficacy by new systems
that allow targeted delivery of therapeutic agents to the
diseased  site,  ideally  avoiding  conventional  parenteral
delivery. Regenerative medicine may provide a therapeu-
tic  solution  to  revitalise  tissue  or  organs,  which  may
make life-long medication unnecessary.

While  the  diseases  vary  in  their  pathways,  and  often
demand  very  different  levels  of  maturity  from  the  pro-
posed technologies, they also share some common clin-
ical  needs.  Those  activities  which  could  be  applied
broadly should have top priority. For example, in all dis-

Seamlessly connecting Diagnostics,
Targeted Delivery and Regenerative Medicine
Diagnostics,  targeted  delivery  and  regenerative  medicine 
constitute the core disciplines of nanomedicine. The European
Technology  Platform  on  NanoMedicine  acknowledges  and 
wishes  to  actively  support  research  at  the  interface  between 
its  three  science  areas.  It  is  committed  to  supporting  such
activities  as  theranostics,  where  nanotechnology  will  enable
diagnostic  devices  and  therapeutics  to  be  combined  for 
a real benefit to patients. 

eases new in vitro diagnostic tests are generally required
that  allow  rapid,  sensitive  and  reliable  detection  of  a
broad set of disease indicative biomarkers. The discovery
of disease-specific biomarkers itself is beyond the scope
of  nanomedicine  and  should  be  the  focus  of  medical
research.  Following  the  same  line  of  thought,  research
on  multi-tasking  agents  for  in  vivo  use  and  aspects  of
regenerative medicine that could offer broad applications
in  different  diseases  should  be  supported.  Additionally,
research is needed on clinical needs, which are specific
to one disease. For example, the clinical need for non-
invasive  measurement  of  blood  glucose  levels  or  the
need  for  agents  that  cross  the  blood  brain  barrier  are
unique  aspects  to  diabetes  and  neurodegenerative 
diseases respectively. 

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

9

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

10

2. Technology Development 

driven by Healthcare Needs

Technologies for Therapeutic Benefits
This Strategic Research Agenda addresses a choice of
diseases,  selected  by  their  impact  on  patients,  their
prevalence and burden to society, and by the expected
beneficial  impact  nanomedicine  is  likely  to  have  on
them in the near future.

Consideration  has  been  given  to  the  prospects  from
more conventional approaches as well as the industrial
progress  made  to  date  with  nanomedicines.  All  three
research  areas  –  diagnostics,  targeted  delivery  and
regenerative  medicine  –  have  different  priorities  on 
different  diseases  but  they  can  significantly  impact 
virtually all of the chosen disease areas.

2.1. Nanotechnology based

Diagnostics and Imaging

2.1.1. Introduction
The  application  of  micro-  and  nanobiotechnology  in
medical diagnostics can be subdivided into three areas:
in  vitro  diagnostics,  in  vivo  diagnostics  and  medical
devices.  The  development  of  these  applications  relies
on a common ground of enabling technologies.

The basis of modern medicine was laid already in the
middle of the 19th century by the recognition that the
cell is the source of health and disease. It followed that
basic research to provide a better understanding of the
highly complex working of cells is mandatory for medi-
cine.  Therefore,  the  improvement  and  combination  of
methods to characterise cells or cell compartments in
vitro (like novel optical and luminescence microscopy,
scanning  probe  microscopy,  electron  microscopy  and
imaging  mass-spectrometry)  will  be  of  importance  for
nanomedicine.

In vitro diagnosis for medical applications has traditionally
been  a  laborious  task.  Blood  and  other  body  fluids  or 
tissue  samples  are  sent  to  a  laboratory  for  analysis,
which  could  take  hours,  days  or  weeks,  and  could  be
highly  labour  intensive.  Steadily,  miniaturisation,  paral-
lelisation and integration of different functions on a single

device, based on techniques derived from the electronics
industry, have led to the development of a new generation
of  devices  that  are  smaller,  faster  and  cheaper,  do  not
require  special  skills,  and  provide  accurate  readings.
These  analytical  devices  require  much  smaller  samples
and will deliver more complete and more accurate bio-
logical data from a single measurement.

The  requirement  for  smaller  samples  also  means  less
invasive  and  traumatic  methods  of  sample  extraction.
Nanotechnology enables further refinement of diagnostic
techniques, leading to high throughput screening (to test
one sample for numerous diseases, or screen large num-
bers of samples for one disease) and ultimately point-of-
care  diagnostics.  These  technological  advancements
pave  the  way  towards  major  changes  in  the  way  drugs
can be prescribed in future, by enabling “personalised”
medicine tailored to individual needs.

Many  new  in  vitro  techniques  initially  developed  for
medical  testing  often  find  diverse  applications  in  other
important areas later, such as in environmental monitoring
and security.

Medical  imaging  has  advanced  from  a  marginal  role  in
healthcare  to  become  an  essential  tool  of  diagnostics
over  the  last  25  years.  Molecular  imaging  and  image-
guided  therapy  are  now  basic  tools  for  monitoring 
disease and in developing almost all the applications of
in  vivo  nanomedicine.  Originally,  imaging  techniques
could only detect changes in the appearance of tissues
when  the  symptoms  were  relatively  advanced.  Later, 
contrast agents were introduced to more easily identify
and map the locus of disease. Today, through improved
positron emission tomography, the advanced applica-
tions of magnetic resonance techniques and the appli-
cation  of  nanotechnology  both  imaging  tools  and
marker/contrast-agents  are  being  refined  towards  the
goals of detecting disease as early as possible. Ultimately
this will occur at the level of a single cell, combined with
monitoring the effectiveness of therapy. 

Molecular imaging has had a late start in Europe. One of
the challenges has been to define research partnerships

between the imaging industry and the contrast agent indus-
try, which bring complementing competencies to the table.

The convergence of nanotechnology and medical imaging
opens  the  doors  to  a  revolution  in  molecular  imaging
(also  called  nano-imaging)  in  the  foreseeable  future,
leading to the detection of a single molecule or a single
cell in a complex biological environment.

2.1.2. In Vitro Applications
An  in  vitro  diagnostic  tool  can  be  a  single  chemo-  or
biosensor,  or  an  integrated  device  containing  many
sensors. A  sensor  contains  an  element,  capable  of
recognising  and  'signalling'  through  some  biochemical
change,  the  presence,  activity  or  concentration  of  a
specific molecule  of  biological  importance  in  solution. 
A  transducer  is  used  to  convert  the  biochemical  signal
into a quantifiable signal. Key attributes of theses types
of sensors are their specificity, sensitivity, and robustness.

Techniques  derived  from  the  electronics  industry  have
made  possible  the  miniaturisation  of  sensors,  allowing
for smaller samples and highly integrated sensor arrays,
which take different measurements in parallel from a sin-
gle sample. Higher sensitivity and specificity reduce the
invasiveness of the diagnostic tools and simultaneously
increase their effectiveness significantly in terms of pro-
viding biological information such as phenotypes, geno-
types  or  proteomes.  Several  complex  preparation  and
analytical steps can be incorporated into “lab-on-a-chip”
devices,  which  can  mix,  process  and  separate  fluids
before carrying out sample identification and quantification.
Integrated  devices  can  measure  tens  to  thousands  of
signals  from  one  sample,  thus  providing  the  general
practitioner  or  the  surgeon  with  much  more  extensive
data  from  the  patient's  sample.  Some  nanobio-devices
for diagnostics have been developed to measure parts of
the genome or proteome using DNA fragments or anti-
bodies as sensing elements and are thus called gene or
protein chips. “Cells-on-chips” use cells as their sensing
elements, employed in many cases for pathogen or
toxicology screening. 

A  range  of  microscopic  and  spectroscopic  methods  is
used for analysing ex vivo the biological samples. Optical,
near  field  or  electron  microscopies  are  the  most  usual
ones.  Nanoanalytical 
like  scanning  probe
tools 
microscopy,  imaging  mass  spectrometry,  and  advanced
ultrasound  technologies  offer  new  opportunities  for  in
vitro  diagnostics,  like  molecular  pathology  or  reading
highly integrated ultra-sensitive biochips. 

2.1.3. In Vivo Imaging
In  vivo  diagnostics  refers  in  general  to  imaging  tech-
niques, but also covers implantable devices. Nano-imaging
or molecular imaging includes techniques for the study of
molecular events in vivo and for molecule manipulation.
The  main  benefits  of  molecular  imaging  for  in  vivo 
diagnostics are the early detection of diseases and the
monitoring of disease stages (e.g. in cancer metastasis),
leading to individualised medicine and real-time assess-
ment of therapeutic and surgical efficacy.

Imaging techniques cover advanced optical and lumines-
cence  imaging  and  spectroscopy,  nuclear  imaging  with
radioactive  tracers,  magnetic  resonance  imaging  and
spectroscopy,  ultrasound,  and  X-ray  imaging,  most  of
which depend on targeting agents or contrast agents that
have been introduced into the body to mark the disease
site. In vivo molecular diagnostics performed by improved
positron emission tomography (quantitative-PET) and by
advanced  applications  of  magnetic  resonance  tech-
niques  such  as  magnetic  resonance  spectroscopy
(MRS),  magnetic  resonance  spectroscopic  imaging
(MRSI),  diffusion  spectroscopy  (d-MRI)  and  functional
magnetic  resonance  (f-MRI)  have  made  it  possible  to
study human biochemical processes in different organs
in  vivo,  opening  up  new  horizons  in  instrumental  diag-
nostic medicine. 

However, in order to avoid potential problems regarding
toxicity  and  patient  safety,  label-free  techniques  like
optical nano-imaging methods offer interesting alterna-
tives.  This  holds  true  especially  when  exploiting  their
capabilities for quantitative measurement in functional
(imaging)  analysis  and  quality  assessment  of  tissue
engineered implants or self-repaired tissue in regener-
ative medicine.

Targeted molecular imaging is important for a wide range
of diagnostic purposes, such as the identification of the
locus of inflammation, the visualisation of vascular struc-
tures  or  specific  disease  states  and  the  examination  of
anatomy.  It  is  also  important  for  research  on  controlled
drug release, in assessing the distribution of a drug, and
for  the  early  detection  of  unexpected  and  potentially 
dangerous  drug  accumulations.  The  ability  to  trace  the
distribution of a drug leads to the possibility of activating
it  only  where  needed,  thus  reducing  the  potential  for 
toxicity (see chapter on targeted delivery). Nano-imaging
is  also  expected  to  bring  a  real  improvement  in  the 
monitoring  of  therapy  thus  providing  direct  feedback  to
the physician. 

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

11

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

12

A wide range of particles or molecules is currently used
for medical imaging. Some recent developments in optical
imaging focus on using nanoparticles as tracers or con-
trast agents. Fluorescent nanoparticles such as quantum
dots and dye-doped silica nanoparticles are systems that,
depending on their coating and their physical and chem-
ical properties, can target a specific tissue or cell. Their
fluorescence  can  easily  be  tuned 
for  specific
imaging purposes. They offer a more intense fluorescent
light emission, longer fluorescence lifetimes and a much
broader  spectrum  of  colours  than  conventional  fluo-
rophores. They are expected to be particularly useful for
imaging  in  living  tissues,  where  scattering  can  obscure
signals.  Toxicological  studies  are  underway  to  precisely
study their impact on humans, animals and the environ-
ment.  New  developments  are  focusing  on  the  nano-
particle coating, to improve its efficiency of targeting and
biocompatibility.  Other  agents  are  based  on  liposomes,
emulsions,  dendrimers  or  other  macromolecular 
constructs.

5

i

.
g
F
©

Besides  the  use  of  nano-agents  for  in  vivo  imaging  of
molecules or cells, the use of nanoscale agents for diag-
nosis and manipulation may lead to an improvement of
surgical techniques in the clinic. This may be achieved,
for example, through a better mapping of cancer distri-
bution  using  near-infrared  imaging  and  applying  photo-
thermal therapy or heat treatment, the characterisation
and non-destructive removal of cells or tissue in a specific
area,  the  tracking  of  specific  cell  types  used  in 
therapy,  as  well  as  the  visualisation  of  bio-therapeutic
agents. 

2.1.4. Medical Devices
Integrated  systems  will  deliver  new  functionalities  that
provide assistance during therapy. They will open up addi-
tional possibilities of treatment and on the monitoring and
optimisation  of  medical  treatment.  These  aids  can  be

grouped into four blocks concerning innovative and mini-
mally  invasive  surgery,  heart  assisting  devices,  drugs  on
demand and finally pain therapy and management.

Medical devices can be used in vitro or in vivo. In the
latter  case  their  development  is  aimed  at  minimising
their invasiveness.

Nanotechnology  has  application  in  transfection  devices
for therapeutic uses. An example of a future application
would be the development of devices that can cross bio-
logical  barriers,  like  the  blood-brain  barrier,  to  deliver
multiple therapeutic agents at high local concentrations
directly to cancer cells and to their neighbouring tissues
that play a critical role in the spread of the disease.

Nanotechnology  also  has  many  implications  for  in  vivo
diagnostic  devices  such  as  the  swallowable  imaging,
diagnostic  and  therapeutic  'pill'  and  new  endoscopic
instruments. Monitoring of circulating molecules is also
of great interest for some chronic diseases such as dia-
betes or HIV. Continuous, smart measurement of glucose
or  blood  markers  of  infection  constitutes  a  substantial
market for implantable devices. Miniaturisation for lower
invasiveness,  combined  with  surface  functionalisation
and  the  'biologicalisation'  of  instruments  will  help  to
increase their acceptance by the body. Minimally invasive
image guided therapy using navigation technologies and
advanced multi-modal imaging will improve accuracy and
outcome of therapy. Autonomous power, self-diagnosis,
remote  control  and  external  transmission  of  data  are
other considerations in the development of these devices.

Nanosensors, for example those used in catheters, will
also provide data to surgeons making it possible to guide
an  interventional  procedure  with  increased  safety,  less
radiation and improved patient outcome. In addition, in
vivo sensors can follow up important parameters as pres-
sure  or  biological  structures,  which  are  essential  for 
further follow up of the patient. Nanoscale entities could
identify pathology/defects, and the subsequent removal
or correction of lesions by nanomanipulation could also
set a future vision.

2.1.5. Strategic Research Priorities
In Vitro Diagnostics
Within  the  next  five  years,  the  priority  for  improving  in
vitro  diagnostics  is  designing  integrated  multifunctional
devices  with  a  broad 
range  of  applications.
Nanotechnology is expected to enable fast, reliable, and
user  friendly  diagnostic  devices  for  a  wide  range  of

 
 
 
pathologies. Nevertheless, centralised analytical labora-
tories require reliable, cheap, fast and multiplexed highly
sensitive detectors providing high content results from a
single sample, with fewer constraints in terms of minia-
turisation. While the precise specifications will depend on
the target users of the diagnostic devices, whether the
analysis is centralised or decentralised, operated by the
patient  or  by  trained  medical  staff,  the  following  are
examples of envisaged improvements in the new gener-
ations of diagnostic devices:  
(cid:129) Pre-test  non-destructive,  minimally  invasive  or  non-
invasive sampling for biopsy material should be possible
with  painless  collection  of  bio-samples  usually  from
body fluids or tissue.

(cid:129) Sample preparation should no longer be a bottleneck
for  routine  applications  of  micro-  and  nanobio-
diagnostic  devices,  based  on  integration  of  sample
preparation with analysis devices, enabling secure and
user friendly sample preparation by laboratory personnel.
(cid:129) Improvements in micro- and nanofluidics should help
achieve  significant  reductions  in  the  volumes  of  bio-
logical samples and reagents, gaining speed in reaction
times.  

(cid:129) Miniaturisation  should  deliver  faster  and  more  cost
effective systems with higher performance in terms of
resolution, sensitivity, specificity, reliability, robustness
(stability of the analytical process in a single laboratory,
independent of the laboratory personnel), reproducibility
(from  laboratory  to  laboratory)  and  integration  (all
operations in a single device).

(cid:129) The detection process should enable multiplex analysis
of  a  complete  bio-pattern  including  genes,  peptides,
and small molecules in a complex, non-amplified and
preferably unlabelled sample. 

(cid:129) A broad range of detection sensitivity is needed, such
as for analysis of certain proteins that can occur over
a wide concentration range.

(cid:129) Diagnostic  systems  should  be  developed  with  fully
integrated  hardware  and  associated  software.  The
hardware  should  enable  remote  data  collection  in  a
wireless  environment  and  smart  data  processing
needs to be addressed simultaneously in the develop-
ment of coherent and reliable in vitro diagnostic devices. 

E-health, data management, telemedicine, and networking
rely  on  the  acquisition,  management,  analysis  and
exchange  of  biotech/life  science  data  and  on  the  inte-
gration of this data with information from clinical sources.
To determine which procedures and clinical protocols are
most effective, it is crucial to understand the underlying
relations and patterns in this collected data.

(cid:129) Data-acquisition  and  -processing  by  micro-  and
nanobiosystems  requires  specific  investment  in  data
mining, data integration and data presentation.  
(cid:129) Tools  are  required  for  microarray  analysis,  both  for
gene  expression  levels  and  genotype  analysis,  to
enable detection of new types of interactions and cell
networking. 

(cid:129) Production of accurate, validated and calibrated quan-
titative results will require new specialised centres for
data analysis and interpretation. 

(cid:129) The  management  of  data  from  in  vitro  diagnostics
should also be integrated with other analytical data of
the patient coming from other instruments.  

Modelling  and  computational  tools  are  required  to
improve  the  design  and  manufacturing  of  devices  with
molecular  constituents  such  as  proteins  and  nucleic
acids. Computer simulation represents a useful tool for
technological  investigation.  Computer  models  of  micro-
and nano-biosystems are tuned for the identification of
the fundamental characteristics of the processes. More
potently,  they  allow  quantitative  tests  of  a  given  theory
and  also  allow  the  reconstruction  of  a  process  on  the
basis of a set of responses to stimulations. In-silico tools
should  simulate  the  interaction  between  artificial  and
biological constituents. 

In parallel to technological development, new diagnostic
markers specific to diseases have to be identified so that
in vitro diagnostic techniques can enable an earlier and
personalised diagnosis for patients. Development of nano-
technology-based tools for recognising specific markers,
will provide accurate diagnosis not only at an early disease
stage, but also before onset of symptoms, where diag-
nosis is the first step in treating patients with the most
appropriate therapeutic protocols. 

In the case of diseases like Alzheimer's, where only limited
therapy exists at present, a synergistic effort between the
development  of  nanotechnology  for  diagnosis  and
research towards finding effective therapy is required. In
that sense, adequate instruments are needed to initiate 
parallel  R&D  programs  for  research  into  successful
therapeutic tools  that  are  closely  associated  with  the
nanotechnology-based diagnosis research projects. 

In Vitro Imaging
Better  ex  vivo  imaging  of  biological  samples  could  be
achieved  by  nanotechnology-based  enhancements  of  a
range of techniques including: 
(cid:129) Optical, electron or X-ray microscopies

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

13

(cid:129) Scanning probes/near field methods 
(cid:129) Hybrid  microscopies  like  combinations  of  scanning
probe/optics, scanning probe/force, magnetic manipu-
lation and optical microscopy, vibrational and fluores-
cence  imaging,  scanning  probe  nanography  and
electrophysiology 

(cid:129) Combinations  of  the  above  with  spectroscopies  like

spectrally resolved photo-acoustic imaging.

Investment  in  enabling  basic  science  such  as  physics
and engineering is needed to support this kind of techno-
logical development.

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

14

6

i

.
g
F
©

In Vivo Imaging
The ultimate objective of in vivo imaging is to get highly
sensitive,  highly  reliable  imaging  techniques  usable  for
diagnosis in personalised medicine for delivering drugs,
following their distribution, and monitoring therapy. This
concept is called theranostics (therapy and diagnostics),
and is based on the “find, fight and follow” approach. 

Research  priorities  for  in  vivo  imaging  should  address
simultaneously each step of the analytical process:
(cid:129) The development of improved nanoprobes or of label-

free detection 

(cid:129) The improvement of detection systems 
(cid:129) The  analysis  and  the  management  of  the  acquired

data.

Image guided intervention and therapy as well as meta-
bolic  imaging  are  also  applications  related  to  in  vivo
nanoimaging.

The expected improvements in detection systems focus
on developing smaller, more efficient and cheaper cameras
for whole body imaging, with multi-isotopes, and ideally
multimodal  detectors  enabling  imaging  techniques  that
combine some of the following:

(cid:129) Positron emission tomography 
(cid:129) Magnetic resonance imaging/spectroscopy 
(cid:129) Ultrasound 
(cid:129) Optics/biophotonics
(cid:129) Photo-acoustic.
Existing  detectors  should  also  be  improved  with  new
architectures and materials.

New probes with enhanced capabilities and performance
should be developed specific to micro- and nanoimaging
techniques including: 
(cid:129) An ability to penetrate into cells 
(cid:129) The  ability  to  crossover  biological  barriers  like  the

blood-brain barrier 

(cid:129) Compatibility with external activation by magnetic field,
radio frequency, ultrasound, X-ray, or optics to trigger
the therapeutic activity

(cid:129) Non-toxic 
(cid:129) Free from any immune or inflammatory response. 
Therefore,  ADME-Tox 1 studies  of  nano-probes  will  be
most probably needed as for any new drug of this type.
The  development  of  multi-modal  detectors  requires 
specific multi-modal probes, which should be suitable for
active drug release on the site of disease, and for reporting
on  the  efficacy  of  the  therapy.  The  required  develop-
ments  on  particle  design,  on  their  surface  functionali-
sation, and on adequate labelling techniques are more
extensively elaborated in chapter 2.2 on targeted delivery.

Both the use of labels, and label-free imaging strategies
based  on  physical  properties  are  very  promising  for
analysing in vivo target molecules, cells or tissues. In this
respect,  improvements  in  the  following  basic  enabling
technologies will benefit in vivo imaging: 
(cid:129) Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) 
(cid:129) Magnetic resonance spectroscopy imaging (MRSI) 
(cid:129) Diffusion spectroscopy (d-MRI) 
(cid:129) Functional magnetic resonance (f-MRI) 
(cid:129) Holography
(cid:129) Coherent optics 
(cid:129) Auto-fluorescence 
(cid:129) Raman methods 
(cid:129) Coherent anti-Stokes Raman (CARS) methods 
(cid:129) Radio-frequency 
(cid:129) Measurement of small local temperature gradients. 

With  new  detectors  and  smart  probes,  the  last  bottle-
necks  of  in  vivo  imaging  are  signal  acquisition,  image
analysis and data management. Thus remote transduction

1.  ADME-Tox: Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion and Toxicity (aspects of toxicity-testing are addressed in chapter 2.2 

on targeted delivery in more detail).

 
 
 
of signals from detectors should be implemented. Efforts
in 3D, 4D, and 5D reconstruction (multiple parameters)
in 3D space and time, or real time intracellular tomogra -
phy are needed to get a dynamic analysis of biological
events.  Of  course,  this  would  require  computer  aided
detection and diagnosis for facilitating the extraction of
information.

In general, the development of all new in vivo techniques
will  need  better  (small)  animal  models  for  translational
research  and  adapted  imaging  techniques  to  be  used 
on  these  animal  models  for  a  more  accurate  probe
development.  This  need  is  valid  in  general  for  all  new
development  of  drugs  as  well  (see  chapter  2.2  on 
targeted delivery).

Medical Devices
Medical devices can be classified according to their inva-
siveness. Envisaged improvements from nanotechnology
will yield enhanced: 
(cid:129) Catheters 
(cid:129) Endoscopes 
(cid:129) Needles for electro-stimulation 
(cid:129) Smart stents 
(cid:129) Gene or cell transfection systems 
(cid:129) Syringes for less traumatic sampling 
(cid:129) Local delivery of therapeutic agents
(cid:129) On-line monitoring sensors for detection of circulating

molecules with low concentration.

These minimally invasive instruments should get an ability
to cross biological barriers like the blood-brain barrier or
on the contrary prevent crossing of biological barriers.

By  reducing  the  size  of  the  active  components  or  the
components  interacting  with  the  biological  samples,
micro- and nanotechnologies are expected to bring real
breakthroughs by revising some existing techniques, and
by introducing some novel concepts for challenges such as:
(cid:129) Improved  instrumental  biocompatibility  (can  be
achieved with improved surface functionalisation) 
(cid:129) Sustainable power supply (can be achieved with energy

provided by external sources) 

(cid:129) Remote control 
(cid:129) Self-diagnosis capacity.

Non-invasive  medical  devices  like  sensors  for  glucose
monitoring, swallowable pills or surface electrodes could
also  benefit  from  miniaturisation  and  integration  of
several functions on a chip or on a device. Data acquisition
and processing from these devices should be thought of
in an integrated approach.

2.2 Targeted Delivery- 

Multi-Tasking Medicines

2.2.1 Introduction
This  area  deals  with  synthetic  nanometre  sized  delivery
systems  for  therapeutic  agents,  and  biologically  active
drug products, consisting of at least two components, one
of  which  is  the  active  component.  This  application  of 
nanotechnology encompasses not only delivery of pharma-
ceuticals  or  other  therapeutic  agents,  but  offers  also 
util i ties  for  diagnostics  and  regenerative  medicine, 
areas where research is at an earlier stage.

Therapeutic systems in this class are larger than classi-
cal drugs like aspirin – up to a million times larger. Being
larger  there  is  more  scope  for  diversity  and  complexity,
which  makes  their  description  much  more  challenging
and  their  delivery  more  difficult.  Their  increased  com-
plexity, however, gives these systems the unique power to
tackle more challenging diseases. This steady increase in
the complexity of technology has parallels in many other
aspects  of  our  daily  life.  These  systems  for  diagnosis, 
targeted delivery, and regenerative medicine are capable
of  multi-tasking  and  can  even  combine  roles  such  as
diagnosis  and  therapy  –  leading  to  a  new  paradigm,
theranostics.

It should be noted that, as with more conventional drugs,
the timescale for developing new nanomedicines to the
point where they are approved and marketed could be up
to a decade. For society, patients, medical professionals,
and regulatory bodies this timescale allows for changes
in the regulatory process and for communication with the
public  and  patients,  to  facilitate  the  growing  of  aware-
ness,  acceptance  and  patient  adherence  to  these  new
therapeutic regimens. Targeted delivery is one of the most
developed  areas  in  nanomedicine  with  early  products
starting to reach the market; as such it is expected that
this will be a significant growth area in the next decade.

2.2.2 Strategic Research Priorities 
Moving Established and Novel Nano-
Therapeutic Delivery Systems from the
Laboratory to the Clinic
By virtue of their increased size targeted delivery systems
are  more  complex,  covering  a  much  wider  range  of
chemistries (and physics) than conventional drugs or bio-
logicals. This drug class has been around for a decade
but exploiting relatively simple chemistries. It is expected
that more complex approaches will be explored; with the
caveat that these will have to provide a real benefit for

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

15

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

16

the  patient  for  them  to  get  to  the  market.  An  early
research  focus  should  be  moving  the  most  advanced
therapeutic modalities into the clinic. These include:
(cid:129) Liposomes
(cid:129) Micellular and micro-emulsion Systems
(cid:129) Liquid crystal based formulations
(cid:129) Nanocrystals
(cid:129) Antibodies and conjugates
(cid:129) Naturally occurring proteins as delivery systems
(cid:129) Polymer conjugates and bio-conjugates based on the
conjugation of polypeptides and polymers, which can
be hierarchically self-assembled into well-defined ter-
tiary and quaternary structures

(cid:129) Biodegradable nanoparticles/nanocapsules. This
in cludes systems, which dissemble in vivo for targeting
or clearance

(cid:129) Virus-like particles for gene delivery. These still present
major  problems  in  vivo  but  offer  an  alternative and
probably longer term approach 

(cid:129) Delivery of small nucleic acids or mimetics
(cid:129) Delivery of vaccines
(cid:129) Synthetic  biomimetics  to  induce  physiological 
mechanisms,  for  example  they  may  activate  either
immune stimulatory or immune regulatory cascades.

Besides development of approaches with a clear intrinsic
therapeutic activity, targeted nano-delivery systems that
facilitate other medical interventions should be subject of
study,  e.g.,  those  that  facilitate  external  radiotherapy
planning,  monitoring,  and  radioimmunotherapy  that
combines diagnostic and therapeutic potential.

Exploring the more novel nanomedicines should focus on
measuring critically their efficacy and safety in vitro and
in vivo as well as potential scale-up issues. These broadly
include:
(cid:129) Polymersomes based on the self-assembly of linear or
highly branched hydrophilic-hydrophobic copolymers
(cid:129) Prodrug therapy, in situ activation, self and/or covalent

assembly of drugs in situ in vivo 

(cid:129) Activation  of  smart/responsive  prodrugs  (pH,  light,
temperature,  metabolites/analytes,  enzymes,  protein
interactions).  Imaging  of  in  vivo  prodrug  activation
(prodrug-proprobe constructs)

(cid:129) Systems  that  localise/image  the  agent  followed  by
ac ti va tion by an external source, e.g. targeted boron
neutron  capture  therapy,  guided  photodynamic
therapy, magnetotherapy

(cid:129) Self-assembling  systems,  including  host  –  guest

systems.

Such systems have to be capable of taking major steps
towards clinical application. To do so, such systems have
to  have  appropriate  DMPK  (Drug  Metabolism  and
Pharmaco-Kinetics) and toxicological properties and any
pharmaceutics  liabilities  should  be  known.  They  should
also have a realistic prospect of successful therapy in the
chosen  disease  area,  based  on  pre-clinical  models
including perhaps biomarker studies.

7

i

.
g
F
©

Improving Targeting Agents
Targeted  delivery  systems  can  have  multiple  functions, 
a  key  one  is  their  ability  to  recognise  specific  molecules
implicated in disease which can be located either in the
membrane  of  target  cells,  or  in  specific  compartments
within the cell. Research efforts to enhance this function
and particularly to reduce production costs are essential, if
the benefits of this approach are to be available to all. The
identification of such molecules can be rational design or
by high throughput screening or even by a combination of
the two.

Key research areas are: 
(cid:129) New types of targeting agents by rational design that
uses  structural  knowledge  of  a  docking  interaction
between two (bio)molecules 

(cid:129) New  targeting  agents  arising  from  random,  but  high
throughput  methods,  using  active  selection.  Suitable
approaches  could  be  from  chemistry  or  biology  or
hybrids

(cid:129) Targeting to specific intracellular compartments
(cid:129) Multi-target  approaches,  to  deal  with  target  cell 
heterogeneity  and  pharmacological  target  hetero-
geneity, aiming to increase efficacy

(cid:129) New methodologies for the activation of prodrugs and
smart  agents  in  situ,  in  vivo  drug  assembly,  pre-
targeting, and in vivo chemistry.

 
 
 
Interactions  between  Biological  Systems
and Artificial Nanostructures
The potential of targeted delivery will only be realised with
a  much  better  understanding  of  how  such  structures
interact  with  the  body  and  its  components  –  in  vitro, 
ex  vivo  and  in  vivo.  Very  few  studies  are  in  the  public
domain on how potential nanomedicines are transported
and  eliminated  in  vivo,  and  what  the  possible  serious
consequences  such  as  immunogenicity  will  mean  for
body homeostasis. Areas of priority are:
(cid:129) Design of nanostructures with stealth properties that
prevent them from being opsonised or cleared before
reaching the target cells

(cid:129) Fundamental studies on the interaction of nano -
structures  with  plasma  proteins  and  the  relation
between protein adsorption and removal of nano -
structures  from  the  circulation  by  the  reticulo-
endothelial system

(cid:129) Absorption of nanostructures to cells (with emphasis
on  relation  to  the  surface  chemical  characteristics,
size and shape of the nanostructures)
(cid:129) Uptake and recycling of nanostructures
(cid:129) Trans-endocytosis of nanostructures
(cid:129) Endosomal escape of nanostructures
(cid:129) Safety evaluation. In vitro/in vivo cytotoxicity, haemo-
compatibility, immunogenicity and genotoxicity testing.
Immunogenicity is an expensive function to evaluate in
the clinic and other non-in vivo methodologies should
be evaluated and validated, it is recognised that this 
is a challenging objective 

(cid:129) In vivo carrier biodistribution and degradation.

Pharmaceutics – Formulation and Stability
There  are  many  basic  problems  associated  with  nano-
particles, before they can become therapeutic agents –
such  as  removing  their  tendency  to  aggregate  either 
during  storage  or  under  physiological  conditions.
Understanding and preventing aggregation of nano-scale
therapeutic agents must be a top research priority before
any development. Many diseases of the central nervous
system  are  the  result  of  protein-protein  interactions
(aggregation) and there may be useful spin-offs from this
research. Complex delivery systems must be chemically
analysable and stable over extended times to both cova-
lent  and  non-covalent  changes  to  be  manufacturable.
The importance of this area cannot be over emphasised
as it is a major hurdle with many technical challenges. 

Easier Routes of Administration – Crossing
Biological Barriers
Most  nanomedicines  are  currently  administered 

parenterally,  but  both  the  market  and  patients  would
prefer other routes such as oral, pulmonary or transdermal.
Getting such large molecules to cross biological barriers is
challenging and requires an understanding of macromole-
cular transport. This is difficult, but perhaps less so than a
decade ago and should be an objective of future research.
Success  would  fundamentally  change  the  way  nano -
technology-based drugs were administered and perceived. 

The oral route continues to be the most intensively studied
one for drug administration. Priorities will be placed on
the  ability  on  nano-formulations  to  cross  the  gastro-
intestinal  tract  epithelium  overcoming  enzymatic  and
permeability barriers. Pulmonary delivery is another non-
invasive  method  of  delivery  where  priority  should  be
focused  on  aerodynamic  characterisation  of  delivery 
systems  and  their  ability  to  deliver  drugs  with  excellent
bioavailability. There are several advantages in delivering
drugs to the lungs. These include a non-invasive method
of delivery, a large surface area for drug absorption and
thin alveolar epithelium, permitting rapid absorption, and
absence of first-pass metabolism. 

The ability of delivery systems to cross the blood-brain
barrier  should  also  be  assessed  especially  for  some 
diseases  of  the  central  nervous  system.  Rational  and
high  throughput  screening  methods  for  technologies 
to  transport  through  biological  barriers  and  target  an
entity to a specific location is perceived as an important
issue.  There  is  early  data  suggesting  this  could  be  a
fruitful area. 

The use of Nano-Devices for Targeted Delivery
Cutting across many therapeutic areas is the use of na no -
de vi ces for  targeted  delivery.  Examples  are  nanoneedles
with  programmable  injection  regimes.  Such  alternative
devices are important, as traditional methods of injection by
a needle are much less popular with patients. Knowledge
of  microfluidics  is  also  to  be  supported  for  such  devices,
which are described below.  

To miniaturise pumps, including nanosensors to measure
the actual concentration of the therapeutic agent in body
fluids, combined with a delivery unit is an interesting con-
cept. Delivery systems can also be a part of biomedical
devices  for  implantation  or  tools  for  surgical  use,  e.g.
endoscopy,  cannulas,  etc,  are  some  examples  which
could  provide  a  real  benefit  for  the  patient.  Areas  of 
priority are:
(cid:129) Controlled  release  mechanisms  –  sustained  or 

pulsatile

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

17

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

18

(cid:129) Microelectromechanical  systems  (MEMS)  in  or  more

2.3. Regenerative Medicine

likely on the skin 

(cid:129) Temporal/sequential release of multiple drugs
(cid:129) Gels, patches, sensor-pump systems, e.g. integrated
glucose sensor and insulin release for diabetics 

(cid:129) Implantable biochips/microfluidics
(cid:129) Nanosized devices or components on devices e.g. pill

on a chip type technology 

(cid:129) Carriers for therapeutic agents, in particular advanced
polymeric  carriers.  These  have  to  contain  sufficient
amounts  of  the  agent  for  a  therapeutically  useful
effect; biocompatibility and solubility must be good. 
(cid:129) Smart  carriers,  such  as  polymersomes  or  liposomes
that release drugs, induced by pH, temperature, light,
local metabolite/analytes, enzyme action

(cid:129) Physical stimuli, e.g. electric or ultrasonic, by external
or implantable nanodevices to specific sites in organs
to increase transiently the penetration of the released
drugs into the intracellular compartment

(cid:129) Nanodevices possessing a sensor for a specific meta -
bolite/entity with a feedback action for drug release,
e.g. glucose sensor and insulin release.

8

i

.
g
F
©

Manufacturing Improvements
The  scale  up  and  nanofabrication  of  nanomedicines,
especially with respect to reducing healthcare costs for
patients in Europe and the rest of the world is of central
importance.  Increased  complexity  often  leads  to
increased  costs  and  it  is  hoped  that  researchers  will
address this from the outset. Whilst extra complexity will
add  to  overall  cost  of  goods,  it  is  hoped  that  higher
potencies  and  targeting  will  counter-balance  this
increase. Reducing the cost of targeting entities is also
important as discussed earlier.

The  feasibility  of  manufacturing  should  be  considered
and explored from the outset in parallel with considera-
tion of the specification, characterisation of the product
and control of the process.

2.3.1. Introduction 
Perhaps uniquely this area has the capability to radically
change  the  way  some  diseases  are  managed  in  the
future, as this is a new therapeutic modality in its infancy.
The last decade has seen the rise of biological drugs and
the  start  of  nanomedicines  coming  onto  the  market.
Regenerative medicine is a far reaching technology, and
for  the  area  to  be  commercialised,  real  and  steady
progress has to be seen. This section prioritises what is
a large field with the need to take the technology to the
patients as soon as possible. 

By leveraging novel cell culture techniques and the design
of bio-resorbable polymers, tissue engineering strategies
have recently emerged as the most advanced therapeutic
option presently available in regenerative medicine. 

Tissue  engineering  encompasses  the  use  of  cells  and
their  molecules  in  artificial  constructs  that  compensate
for  lost  or  impaired  body  functions.  It  is  based  upon
scaffold-guided  tissue  regeneration  and  involves  the
seeding  of  porous,  biodegradable  scaffolds  with  donor
cells,  which  differentiate  and  mimic  naturally  occurring
tissues.  These  tissue-engineered  constructs  are  then
implanted into the patient to replace diseased or damaged
tissues.  With  time,  the  scaffolds  are  resorbed  and
replaced by host tissues that include viable blood supplies
and  nerves.  Current  clinical  applications  of  tissue-
engineered  constructs  include  engineering  of  skin, 
cartilage and bone for autologous implantation. Recent
advancement  in  therapeutic  strategies  involves  tissue
engineering and includes the use of adult stem cells as a
source of regenerative cells, and the use of cell-signalling
molecules  as  a  source  of  molecular  regeneration 
messengers.

The  clinical  availability  of  therapies  based  on  tissue
engineering  represents  a  tremendous  step  forward  in
regenerative  medicine.  By  building  on  the  pioneering
achievements of tissue engineering, advanced therapies
in  regenerative  medicine  can  address  even  more 
challenging  objectives  –  to  initiate  and  control  the
regeneration of pathological tissue, and to treat, modify
and  prevent  disabling  chronic  disorders  such  as
osteoarthritis,  diseases  of  the  cardiovascular  and 
central nervous system. Given the dynamics of Europe's
societal growth and the need to provide advanced and cost-
effective therapies for an ageing population, it is a further
challenge for regenerative medicine to deliver the disease

 
 
 
modifying  benefits  of  tissue-engineered  products  to  a
wide patient population. Thus, the vision for nano-assisted
regenerative medicine is the development of cost-effec-
tive disease-modifying therapies for in situ tissue regen-
eration. The implementation of this approach involves not
only a deeper understanding of the basic biology of tissue
regeneration  –  wound  healing,  in  its  widest sense  –  but
also the development of effective strategies and tools to
initiate and control the regenerative process.

immediate environment and to stimulate specific cellular
responses at the molecular level. Molecular modifications
of resorbable polymer systems elicit specific interactions
with cells and direct cell proliferation, differentiation and
extracellular  matrix  production  and  organisation.  For
example,  new  generations  of  synthetic  polymers  are
being  developed  which  can  change  their  molecular 
conformation  in  response  to  changes  in  temperature,
pH, electrical, physical stimuli or energetic status.

In the field of biomaterials and biotechnology, the term
“biomimesis”  has  been  established  to  describe  the
process  of  simulating  what  occurs  in  nature.  The  bio-
mimetic  philosophy  can  be  condensed  into  three  basic
elements:  intelligent  biomaterials,  bioactive  signalling
molecules and cells. 

2.3.2. Intelligent Biomaterials and Smart

Implants

Artificial  biomaterial  scaffolds  designed  to  support  cell
and tissue growth have traditionally aimed, at a macro-
scopic level, to match the properties of the organs they
are to replace without recreating the intricate and essen-
tial nanoscale detail observed in real organs. In the body,
the nanoscale structure of the extra-cellular matrix pro-
vides  a  natural  web  of  intricate  nanofibers  to  support
cells and present an instructive background to guide their
behaviour.  Unwinding  the  fibers  of  the  extra-cellular
matrix  reveals  a  level  of  detail  unmatched  outside  the
biological world. Each hides clues that pave the way for
cells to form tissue as complex as bone, liver, heart, and
kidney. The ability to engineer materials to a similar level
of complexity is fast becoming a reality. 

Engineering  extra-cellular  matrix  ligands,  such  as  the
RGD-sequence, into artificial surfaces enhances functio-
nality in terms of cell behaviour. 

Thus,  intricate  nanoscale  engineering  will  enable  the 
creation  of  more  biomimetic  cellular  environments.
Nanoscale  alterations  in  topography  elicit  diverse  cell
behaviour,  ranging  from  changes  in  cell  adhesion,  cell
orientation,  cell  motility,  surface  antigen  display,
cytoskeletal condensation, activation of tyrosine kinases,
and modulation of intracellular signalling pathways that
regulate  transcriptional  activity  and  gene  expression.
Third-generation  biomaterials  that  involve  tailoring  of
resorbable polymers at the molecular level to elicit specific
cellular  responses  show  great  promise  as  scaffolds  or
matrices  in  tissue  regeneration.  These  “intelligent” 
biomaterials  are  designed  to  react  to  changes  in  the

Access to nanotechnology has offered a completely new
perspective to the material scientist to mimic the different
types  of  extra-cellular  matrices  present  in  tissues.
Techniques are now available which can produce macro-
molecular structures of nanometer size, with finely con-
trolled  composition  and  architecture.  Conventional
polymer chemistry, combined with novel methodologies
such  as  electrospinning,  phase  separation,  direct 
patterning and self-assembly, have been used to manu-
facture a range of structures, such as nanofibers of dif-
ferent  and  well  defined  diameters  and  surface
morphologies,  nanofibrous  and  porous  scaffolds,
nanowires  and  nanocues,  nanospheres,  nano-“trees”
(e.g.  dendrimers),  nano-composites  and  other  macro-
molecular structures.  Nanofibrous  scaffolds  can  be
developed  allowing  for  integrated  manufacturing  of  3D
nanofibre-matrices with high porosity, high special inter-
connectivity, and controlled alignment of fibres to direct
cell orientation and migration.

Given the diversity of tissue-specific orientation of fibrils
(parallel  and  aligned  in  tendon,  concentric  weaves 
in bone, orthogonal lattices in cornea, and mesh-like in
skin),  this  latter  feature  is  yet  to  be  fully  exploited. 
In  addition,  it  is  also  possible  to  build  mimics  of  cell
membranes,  which  can  imitate  certain  features  of  cell
surfaces.  The  “biological”  fine-tuning  of  these  scaffolds
toward particular cell types is of growing interest. Once
challenges in materials design and solvent compatibility
have been overcome, bioactive composite and core-shell
fibres  may  be  engineered  to  deliver  growth  factors, 
peptides, enzymes, drugs, and even DNA.

Nanotechnology  also  allows  for  improvement  of  non-
resorbable  biomaterials  and  effective  manipulation  of
biological interactions at the nanometer level, which will
dramatically  increase  the  functionality  and  longevity  of
implanted  materials.  By  applying  bioactive  nanoparticle
coatings on the surface of implants, it will be possible to
bond the implant more naturally to the adjoining tissue
and  significantly  prolong  the  implant  lifetime.  Similarly, 

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

19

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

20

it  may  be  possible  to  surround  implanted  tissue  with  a
nanofabricated  barrier  that  would  prevent  activation  of
the rejection mechanisms of the host, allowing a wider
utilisation  of  donated  organs.  Nanomaterials  and/or
nanocomposites  with  enhanced  mechanical  properties
could replace the materials that undergo fatigue failure
due to crack initiation and propagation during physiological
loading conditions. Nanomaterials with enhanced electrical
properties  that  remain  functional  for  the  duration  of
implantation  could  replace  the  conventional  materials
utilised for neural prostheses, whose performance dete-
riorates over time. Third-generation bioactive glasses and
macroporous foams can be designed to activate genes
that  stimulate  regeneration  of  living  tissues.  Nano  and
micro  engineered  biocompatible  membranes  may  be
used e.g. for cell seeding, cell growth or cell encapsulation.
By  understanding  the  fundamental  contractile  and
propulsive  properties  of  tissues,  biomaterials  can  be 
fabricated that will have nanometer-scale patterns repre-
senting  the  imprinted  features  of  specific  proteins.
Biomimetic membranes can provide cell specific adhesion
sites (integrins) for cells and incorporation of membrane-
bound, cell signalling molecules can potentially be stimuli
for specific proliferation of adhered cells. Finally, nano-
technology has enabled the development of a new gen-
eration of so-called nanowire sensors functionalised with
specific receptor layers, capable of monitoring the presence
of  e.g.  small  organic  molecules,  proteins,  cancer  cells,
viruses, etc. - the advantage of these sensors is that they
offer direct, real time measurement of captured ligands
and are therefore well suited for use as a sensor device
inside a small implant. 

9

i

.
g
F
©

In conclusion, nanotechnology can assist in the develop-
ment  of  biomimetic,  intelligent  biomaterials,  which  are
designed  to  positively  react  to  changes  in  their  imme-
diate  environment  and  stimulate  specific  regenerative
events at the molecular level. Advances in the areas of

fundamental  matrix  biology,  nanofabrication,  synthetic
molecular self-assembly, recombinant DNA technologies,
and  printing  technologies  will  enable  the  generation  of
materials that can provide enhanced 3D tissue context
maps of molecular and structural information. 

2.3.3. Bioactive Signalling Molecules
Bioactive signalling molecules are defined as those mole-
cules,  which  are  naturally  present  in  cells  (cytokines,
growth factors, receptors, second messengers) and trigger
regenerative events at the cellular level. Recently avail-
able therapies based on signalling molecules involve the
uncontrolled delivery of a single growth factor. This is an
obvious  oversimplification,  in  light  of  the  complexities
associated  with  the  healing  cascades  of  living  tissues,
especially in chronic pathologies. Sequential signalling is
obligatory  in  the  fabrication  and  repair  of  tissues.
Therefore,  the  development  of  technologies  for  the
sequential  delivery  of  proteins,  peptides  and  genes  is
crucial. 

The  provision  of  the  correct  bioactive  signalling  mole-
cules  to  initiate  and  direct  the  regenerative  process  is
being pursued, by designing bioactive materials containing
biological signals able to trigger biological events. The pri-
mary goal is to develop extracellular, matrix-like materials,
by either combining natural polymers or developing struc-
tures  starting  from  synthetic  molecules  combined  with
matricellular  cues.  By  immobilising  specific  proteins,
peptides  and  other  biomolecules  onto  a  material,  it  is
possible  to  mimic  the  extracellular  matrix  environment
and provide a multifunctional cell-adhesive surface. Cell-
specific recognition factors can be incorporated into the
resorbable polymer surface, including the adhesive pro-
teins, fibronectin or functional domains of extra-cellular
matrix  components.  Polymer  surfaces  can  be  tailored
with  proteins  that  influence  interactions  with  endothe-
lium,  synaptic  development  and  neurite  stimulation.
These  surfaces  would  also  create  reservoirs  absorbing
and releasing cytokines produced by cells in the neigh-
bourhood,  mimicking  one  of  the  roles  of  various 
glycostructures within the extra-cellular matrix.

To  achieve  any  advance  it  is  essential  to  understand
those  molecular  interactions  that  lead  to  regenerative
pathways  and  the  development  of  technologies  for  the
sequential  delivery  of  proteins,  peptides  and  genes  to
mimic  the  signalling  cascade.  The  use  of  nanotechno-
logies  is  advocated  in  assisting  in  the  development  of
therapies  involving  the  activation  and  spatio-temporal
control of in vivo tissue regeneration. 

 
 
 
Bioactive  molecules  as  therapeutic  agents  could  be
incorporated  in  the  degradable  tailored  scaffolds  to  be
delivered  in  a  controlled  manner.  In  addition,  bioactive
signalling may also be effected by biomimetics capable
of modulating body systems through the interaction with
specific  cells  and  receptors.  Such  biomimetics  are
designed to induce physiological mechanisms, for example
they may activate either immune stimulatory or immune
regulatory cascades.

Finally,  drug  and  gene  delivery  methodologies  could  be
coupled to provide in a temporal and spatial manner the
physiological  concentrations  of  signalling  molecules
required  for  tissue  regeneration.  Incorporation  of  such
systems into the biomaterial scaffold, whether permanent
or biodegradable, will be essential for clinical success.  

In conclusion, nano-assisted technologies will enable the
development  of  bioactive  materials  which  release 
signalling  molecules  at  controlled  rates  by  diffusion  or
network breakdown that in turn activate the cells in contact
with the stimuli. The cells then produce additional growth
factors that will stimulate multiple generations of growing
cells to self-assemble into the required tissues in situ.

2.3.4. Cell Based Therapies
Cellular differentiation occurs in mammals as part of the
embryological development and continues in adult life as
part of the normal cell turnover or repair following injury.
Growth,  from  the  cellular  aspect,  means  a  continuous
process  of  cellular  turnover  that  is  dependent  on  the
presence of self-renewing tissue stem cells that give rise
to progenitor and mature cells. Cellular turnover is known
to  be  fast  in  certain  tissues,  such  as  intestinal  epithe-
lium, blood and epidermis, and slow in others, such as
bone and cartilage, while it has been considered limited
or  non-existent  in  tissues  such  as  the  brain  and  the
heart.  However,  scientific  results  in  recent  years  have
radically  changed  the  view  of  the  ability  of  even  these 
tissues to regenerate after ischemic injury. This paradigm
shift  has  refocused  research  into  the  understanding  of
mechanisms for stem cell recruitment, activation, control
and homing.

The major goal of ongoing and future efforts in regene-
rative medicine will be to effectively exploit the enormous
newly  discovered  self-repair  potential  that  has  been
observed  in  adult  stem  cells.  Given  the  logistical  com-
plexities  and  the  costs  associated  with  today's  tissue
engineering  therapies,  which  are  based  on  the  auto-
logous reimplantation of culture-expanded differentiated

cells, next generation therapies will need to build on the
progress made with tissue engineering in understanding
the huge potential for cell-based therapies which involve
undifferentiated cells. Nanotechnology will aid in pursu-
ing two main objectives: 1. identifying signalling systems
in  order  to  leverage  the  self-healing  potential  of  endo-
genous  adult  stem  cells,  and  2.  developing  efficient
targeting systems for adult stem cell therapies. 

One possible application for future regenerative medicine
strategies  is  to  avoid  having  to  pre-seed  a  nanostruc-
tured biomaterial scaffold or matrix with the patient's own
cells,  but  rather  to  have  the  biomaterials  loaded  with
essential signalling molecules targeting adult progenitor
cells  in  the  implant  site.  Thus,  how  adult  human  stem
cells react to such nanostructures depending on the site
of tissue regeneration will be a conditio sine qua non for
specific applications.

The  fulfilment  of  these  visions  will  require  better  know-
ledge  of  the  localisation  and  identity  of  adult  stem  cell
niches for each specific tissue. This includes knowledge
of cell isolation and culture techniques, the identification
of critical signalling mechanisms suitable for drug targets
as  well  as  the  identification  of  critical  surface  markers
that could be potential targets for loaded nanoparticles
or particles aimed for local stem cell niche imaging.  

In conclusion, cell-based therapies should be aimed at
the efficient harvesting of adult stem cells, to allow for a
brief pre-implantation, cultivation stage, or, preferably, for
immediate intra-operative administration using an intelli-
gent biomaterial as a bio-interactive delivery vehicle. Of
huge impact would also be the ability to implant cell-free,
intelligent,  bioactive  materials  that  would  effectively 
provide signalling to leverage the self-healing potential of
the patient's own stem cells.

2.3.5. Strategic Research Priorities
The  available  scientific  knowledge  and  technological 
platform offer a unique opportunity to create regenerative
medicine products and procedures capable of dramati-
cally improving patients' mortality and morbidity caused
by major diseases.

Careful  analysis  of  regenerative  medicine  leads  to  the
conclusion that much basic and applied research must
be  undertaken,  not  only  in  developmental  biology  and
stem cell research, but also in the field of biomaterials.
As  numerous  European  groups  are  amongst  the  world
leaders in biomaterials and cell therapies, there are great

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

21

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

22

opportunities here for European small and middle-sized
enterprises, in particular. This is an emerging market sec-
tor where the European Research Area can gain prestige
and an early share of the world market in the develop-
ment, production and marketing of such “intelligent” bio-
materials. 

Thanks to nanotechnology, a cellular and molecular basis
has  been  established  for  the  development  of  third-
generation  biomaterials  that  will  provide  the  scientific
foundation  for  the  design  of  scaffolds  for  tissue  engi-
neering,  and  for  in  situ  tissue  regeneration  and  repair,
needing  only  minimally-invasive  surgery.  It  is  strongly 
recommended that future planning policy, attention and
resources  should  be  focused  on  developing  these  bio-
materials. 

Projects  will  also  need  to  be  highly  focused  towards
clearly identified clinical applications, not being confined
to basic research on the optimisation of generic cell/arti-
ficial matrix constructs. They must be rooted in the spe-
cific characteristics of the tissue to be regenerated, and
in the economic advantage of one approach over another.

Emphasis should be given to projects designed with the
objective of developing disease-modifying, cost-effective
treatments for chronic disabilities that mostly affect the
elderly, such as osteoarthritis, cardiovascular and central
nervous system degenerative disorders.

The following is a list of recommended research topics in
nano-assisted regenerative medicine:

Intelligent Biomaterials and Smart Implants
(cid:129) Design,  production  and  characterisation  of  intelligent
biomaterials  with  topographically  and  chemically 
patterned bioactive surfaces which are biodegradable
with adjustable degradation rates

(cid:129) Design,  production  and  characterisation  of  a  new 
generation of gene-activating biomaterials tailored for
specific patients and disease states

(cid:129) Design, production and characterisation of intelligent,
multi-functional,  and  time-programmed  biomaterials.
These  smart  biomaterials  should  guide  cellular  and 
tissue growth, deliver morphogenic factors or cells and
provide  the  temporary  or  permanent  mechanical 
support of a damaged tissue or organ

(cid:129) Control  of  the  topographic  and  chemical  structure  of
materials at the micro – and nanoscale – mandatory in
the design of intelligent scaffolds for ex vivo and in situ
tissue  engineering.  This  will  also  require  research  in
the  fields  of  micro-  and  nanofabrication  for  the 
creation  of  structures  that  differentially  control  cell
adhesion,  and  orientation,  proliferation  and  function.
Research on modalities to promote and control angio-
genesis will also be relevant 

(cid:129) Design and production of intelligent biomaterials that
have the ability to attract stem cells in situ, followed 
by their differentiation to the desired tissue type 
(cid:129) Biomimetic  membranes  with  built-in  functionality,
which  can  mimic  real  cell  membranes  for  (stem) 
cell  attachment  and/or  stimulation  (proliferation, 
differentiation)

(cid:129) Technologies for the development of new generations
of synthetic polymers that can change their molecular
conformation  in  response  to  changes  in  external 
stimuli (mechanical, temperature, pH, electric field or
energetic status)

(cid:129) Technologies  for  the  development  of  bioactive 

nano-structured coatings

(cid:129) Projects which include electronic and/or communication
components  in  forms  of  nanowires  and  nanopores 
(or their equivalents) for the stimulation and biosensing
of cells within an artificial matrix

(cid:129) Sensor technology for the assessment of the interface
activity  and  the  progress  of  implant  integration  and
functional state 

(cid:129) Sensors  for  precise  gene  activation  and  control 

during cell and tissue growth

(cid:129) Development  of  appropriate  sensor  technologies 

to be developed for in vitro and in vivo use

(cid:129) Development  of  regenerative  medicine  strategies  to
target the central nervous system and cardiac tissues
under conditions of transient or chronic, emerging or
lasting oxygen deficiency

(cid:129) Control of donor-receptor-incompatibilities and implant
rejection-development  of  immunomodulatory  techno-
logies

(cid:129) Control of implant associated infection
(cid:129) Nano-assembling  biomaterials  capable  of  forming  in
situ  a  micro-architecture  and  biochemistry  similar  to
the extracellular matrix of several tissues

(cid:129) Induction  of  dedifferentiation  and  differentiation
processes  in  situ  by  biomaterial,  “helper  cells”,  and
intelligent implants.

Bioactive Signalling Molecules 
(cid:129) Design, synthesis and characterisation of extracellular-

matrix analogues

(cid:129) Identification,  design,  synthesis  and  characterisation

of bioactive signalling factors

(cid:129) Identification,  design,  synthesis  and  characterisation
of small molecules triggering stem cell recruitment and
activation

(cid:129) Novel  technologies  that  enable  the  development  of
biomaterials  for  the  sequential  delivery  of  actives
and/or chemo-attractants for the triggering of endoge-
nous self-repair mechanisms

(cid:129) Research aiming to generate knowledge and products
centred on the nanoscale interactions between different
types of cells and their immediate environment

(cid:129) Monitoring tissue regeneration
(cid:129) Study  and  construction  of  biological  niches  for  stem
and/or precursor cells to be propagated and later on 
differentiated 

(cid:129) Study of the life cycle of newly designed bioengineered
specimen with their short-term and long-term effects
in the biological environment (in vitro and in vivo)
(cid:129) Human adult progenitor cells and their gene control on

nanostructured biomaterials

(cid:129) Technologies  for  controlled  release  of  stem  cell 

(cid:129) Identification and characterisation of stem cell niches

signalling factors

in different tissues

(cid:129) In  vitro  and  in  vivo  toxicity  testing  of  engineered

nanoparticles 

(cid:129) Stem cell homing and migration
(cid:129) Stem  cell  phenotype  i.e.  surface  markers,  to  allow

(cid:129) Application  of  nanotechnologies  to  promote  rapid 

specific gene expression

vascularisation in targeted tissues 

(cid:129) Methods  for  isolation  and  enrichment  of  stem  cell 

(cid:129) Incorporation  of  drug  and  gene  delivery  systems  into

populations 

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

biomaterial scaffolds

(cid:129) Methods for culturing stem cells while maintaining the

(cid:129) Biodegradable biomaterials where the by-products are

pluripotent state

23

bioactive agents

(cid:129) Alternative  bioactive  molecules  (e.g.  plant  bioactive
principles)  which  can  replace  the  use  of  expensive
growth  factors  and  drugs  in  tissue  engineering 
constructs

(cid:129) Matrices for integrating cells in tissue and developing

macroscopic functionality

(cid:129) Combination of drugs and delivery technologies, using

e.g. vesicles or micelles, with cell therapies

(cid:129) Induction and control of differentiation processes (time

and space resolved)

(cid:129) Methods of stem cell delivery in biomaterial scaffolds
overcoming 
the  problems  of  cell  survival.
Rationalised  database  providing  information  to  the
scientific community about cell adhesion, proliferation
and  differentiation  pathways  as  well  as  on  cell  and
tissue biochemistry

(cid:129) Minimally  invasive  methods  for  identification  and 

(cid:129) Matrices resorbing and releasing cytokines passively or

isolation of progenitor cells

actively.

Cell-Based Therapies
(cid:129) Stem  cell  research,  aimed  at  understanding  the

potential and plasticity of adult stem cells

(cid:129) The  development  of  technologies  for  minimally-

invasive, site-specific cell therapy

0
1

i

.
g
F
©

(cid:129) Environment  for  storing  and  maintaining  few  or  even

single cells

(cid:129) Cell reactors for dedifferentiation and differentiation of
cells, including matrices, cytokine releasing structures
and contact induction/inhibition of cells

(cid:129) Cell  reactors  for  dedifferentiation  and  differentiation
of cells, including mechanical, electrical and physical
stimuli

(cid:129) Analytical tools for controlling status of cell development,
evolution of gene, protein and metabolite network (link
to systems biology)

(cid:129) Genetic engineering of individual cells
(cid:129) In vivo animal models of neurodegenerative diseases
and  ex  vivo  manipulation  aimed  at  understanding
potential and functionality of stem cells

(cid:129) Stem  cells  as  in  vitro  systems  for  drug  testing 

and toxicity assays.

 
 
I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

24

3. Providing the Environment
to Facilitate Nanomedicine 

3.1. Ethical and Social Aspects 

of Nanomedicine

The  potential  impact  that  nanotechnology  will  have  on
diagnostics, regenerative medicine, and targeted delivery
raises  the  question,  which  ethical,  legal,  and  social
aspects have to be addressed to create an environment
for the socially acceptable and economically successful
development of nanomedical applications. The enabling
character  of  nanotechnology  generates  familiar  bio-
medical  ethics  like  the  gap  between  diagnostics  and
therapy or sensitivity of genetic information. This means
we build on a familiar pool of ethical and social discus-
sions,  from  principles  of  human  dignity  to  generic 
questions of science ethics. 

Nanotechnology may also add a new dimension to the bio
(human) and non-bio (machine) interface such as retina
implants  due  to  improved  biocompatibility,  or  nanoelec-
tronics.  This  latter  example  shows  that  new  inventions
might  add  new  horizons  to  ethical,  legal,  and  social 
considerations. For example “where do we draw the line
between medical treatment and enhancement” or “when
do we call a person ill” (genetic disposition to get a dis-
ease, detection of a single cancer cell vs. tumour, etc.)?

Regardless  of  the  question,  whether  new  normative
issues  arise  or  known  aspects  have  to  be  adapted,  an
ethical  analysis  of  new  nanomedical  applications  is 
necessary. Of special interest are:

(cid:129) Privacy: The ethical principal of not invading a person's

right to privacy

(cid:129) Non-discrimination:  People  deserve  equal  treatment,
unless there are reasons that justify any differences in
treatment 

(cid:129) Informed  consent:  The  ethical  principal  that  patients
are not exposed to treatment or research without their
free and informed consent

(cid:129) Autonomy (for instance regarding brain implants)
(cid:129) Right not to know: Patients have to be able to decide,
which information they want to get when, for example
in  case  of  diagnosis  of  predisposition  for  a  disease
without an existing therapy 

(cid:129) Non-instrumentalisation:  The  ethical  requirement  of
never  defining  individuals  merely  as  a  means  but
always as an end of their own

(cid:129) Enhancement:  The  improvement  of  body  functions

without a medical indication

(cid:129) Human  dignity  and  integrity:  Nanomedicine  should

respect human dignity and integrity

(cid:129) Precautionary principle: The moral duty of continuous
risk  assessment  with  regard  to  the  non-foreseeable
impact of new technologies, as for example in the case
of novel implants in the human body.

Besides  the  effect  on  ethical  issues,  nanomedicine 
will also have a large impact on social issues such as:
(cid:129) Reduced healthcare expenses due to earlier and more
sensitive diagnostics together with improved therapy
(cid:129) Increased  costs  of  social  security  systems  due 

to ageing of population 

(cid:129) Unequal access to nanomedicine (nationally and inter-

nationally)

(cid:129) Shift  of  responsibility  for  example  from  physician 

to patient due to point of care diagnostics

(cid:129) Impact  on  health  care  systems  with  an  expected 
shift from current acute therapies in central hospitals 
to future earlier diagnosis by general practitioners. 

1
1

i

.
g
F
©

 
 
These  issues  call  for  a  proactive  round  table  approach
involving  scientists,  experts  in  ethical,  legal,  and  social
aspects,  patient  groups,  regulatory  agencies,  health
insurances, national healthcare systems representatives,
policy makers and company representatives to forecast
the  impact  on  healthcare  and  social  security  systems.
This round table will help that new nanomedical innova-
tions will meet the requirements of the health insurance
systems and regulatory frameworks, which will be essen-
tial for introducing new nanomedical innovations into the
market.

The  broad  scope  and  the  speed  of  nanotechnological
innovations in the medical sector make it extremely diffi-
cult  for  experts  in  ethical,  legal,  and  social  aspects  to
understand the technological background and impact of
these  innovations.  To  overcome  this  problem  it  is 
suggested:  
(cid:129) To involve experts in ethical, legal, and social aspects
in prospective studies and technology assessments
(cid:129) To involve experts in ethical, legal, and social aspects
in  research  projects  where  it  is  appropriate,  to  get
advice on possible emerging issues

(cid:129) To  develop  tutorials  for  experts  in  ethical,  legal, 
and  social  aspects  on  nanotechnologies  in  medical
applications to build up expertise for informed moni-
toring of  research  projects  and  for  basic  academic 
discussions  and  evaluation  of  the  ethical,  legal,  and
social aspects of nanomedicine.

A close collaboration between technology developers and
ethics and social specialists will support the socially and
ethically acceptable development of innovative tools and
devices in nanomedicine. 

3.2. Public Acceptance 

of Nanomedicine

Another  important  building  block  for  an  environment  in
favour of nanomedicine is the public acceptance of this
novel  technology.  So  far  European  public  opinion  as
expressed  by  the  media  and  focus  groups  is  largely 
positive  because  nanotechnology  promises  great  bene-
fits for the health and everyday life of people in addition
to economic success. However, one has to be cautious
not to fuel the hype about the technology, which in this
regulated  sector  will  have  to  mature  over  a  prolonged
period of time.

The fascination about nanotechnology is largely based on
technical  achievements  like  self-cleaning  windows,
scratch  resistant  paintings  or  coffee  repellent  cloths,
which are not directly related to the human body, food or
the  environment.  The  importance  of  the  latter  three
areas  for  the  public  acceptance  of  nanotechnology  is
demonstrated  by  the  emerging  debate  on  the  possible
risks related to certain nanoparticles, although in reality
some  nanoparticles  have  been  in  many  products  for  a
decade.  To  prevent  an  overflow  of  this  partly  over-
negative  opinion  to  nanomedicine,  an  open  and 
transparent dialogue with the public, based on facts and
supported  by  communication  experts  is  necessary.
Special needs are:
(cid:129) Media training of scientists, to teach them to work with

the public and especially with journalists 

(cid:129) Workshops  with  journalists,  scientists  and  company
representatives  to  discuss  nanomedical  topics  and
developments

(cid:129) To  speak  from  the  perspective  of  nanomedicine
(instead of nanotechnology in general), as it seems to
be important for this field to have a specific profile of
its own in the public opinion

(cid:129) To use experts in ethical, legal, and social aspects as

neutral mediators

(cid:129) Tutorials for groups like patient organisations, who are
well trusted by the public and can act as multiplicators or
mediators

(cid:129) Public  engagement  such  as  public  consultations, 
consensus conferences, citizen's juries to get feedback
about public opinion and degree of information

(cid:129) Lectures  on  ethical,  legal,  and  social  aspects  at 

scientific conferences 

(cid:129) Material for teaching, both at schools and universities
(cid:129) Other creative forms of outreach, such as exhibitions,

science centres, TV programmes, etc.

(cid:129) To  encourage  industry  to  answer  questions  about 
societal  and  environmental  impacts  whilst  products
are still under development.

(cid:129) To facilitate communication between the industrial and

academic sectors.

The goal of all these activities has to be a public, which
is well informed about the benefits of nanomedicine and
is  willing  to  accept  the  normal  risks  associated  with 
medical  advances.  Furthermore  to  foster  a  scientific
community which cares for the general public's expecta-
tions and concerns. The regulatory system should reduce
the  inherent  risk  associated  with  any  new  medical 
product and should allow any side effects to be further
quantified. 

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

25

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

26

3.3. Risk Assessment

In  the  three  areas  of  nanomedicine  (nanotechnology-
based  diagnostics,  including  imaging,  targeted  delivery
and  release,  and  regenerative  medicine)  possible  side
effects have to be considered. Although there is no reason
from  our  present  perspective  to  think  that  a  nano-
structured  surface  on  say  an  implant  should  represent
any increase in risk compared with a non-nanostructured
surface,  the  unknown  properties  of  certain  nanostruc-
tures  call  for  careful  attention  regarding  their  reliability
and potential side effects. 

For medical applications based on free nanostructures as
with  any  new  medicine  the  following  safety  issues  are
important:
1. Systemic  distribution:  kinetics,  variation  depending

on route of administration

2. Accumulation  phenomena:  dose-response,  tissue/

organs involved

3. Ability to disturb cellular metabolism
4. Ability to cause protein conformational change 
5. Ability to promote tumour formation.

Coupled with these questions there are various basic 
scientific questions which arise:
1. How do cells interact with nanoparticles and is this
similar to or different from the reaction to micro -
particles?
- Mechanisms of cellular uptake
- Is there sub-cellular compartmentalisation?
- What  determines  intracellular  accumulation?
- Relative  importance  of  size,  shape  and  chemistry

of nanoparticles. 

2
1

i

.
g
F
©

2. What are the mechanisms for transcellular trans por -
ta tion? This  is  an  essential  question,  as  in  imaging
and  targeted  delivery  it  is  of  great  significance
whether  the  nanoparticles  stay  within  a  biological 
barrier or are able to cross it (e.g. blood-brain barrier,
air-blood barrier in the lung, skin, etc.).

Such scientific considerations lead on to specific research:
1. Development  of  suitable  in  vitro  models  to  study
nanobiology,  e.g.  how  nanoparticles  interact  with
cells, especially of human origin.

2. Search  for  suitable  cell  and  molecular  biological
parameters, which could indicate deleterious effects
of nanoparticles in different cell and tissue systems.
3. Which  animal  models  are  suitable  to  study  nano -
biology and how can they be reduced to a minimum?

4. Comparison of in vivo and in vitro models.

3.4. Regulatory Framework

The possibility to work at the nano level is not totally new
and nanotechnology has already found several applica-
tions  in  medicine  both  in  the  medicinal  products  and
medical devices area.

For some time there has been a debate on the appropri-
ateness  and  adequacy  of  the  current  legislative  frame-
work  to  cope  with  the  challenges  that  the  possible
presence of nanoparticles in the body or the use of tech-
nology at nano level may bring about.

First of all it is important to underline that nanomedicine
is not a new category of healthcare products, but rather
a new enabling technology used in the design and pro-
duction of medical devices and pharmaceuticals. For this
reason, the first check to be made is whether a medical
device  that  is  CE  marked  in  conformity  to  directive
93/42/EEC is safe when it has been designed using or
incorporating  nanotechnology  or  whether  a  medicinal
product,  approved 
in  conformity  with  Directive
2001/83/EC is safe when it has been designed using or
incorporating nanotechnology.

Medical  Devices: Directive  93/42/EEC  does  not  give
prescriptive  requirements,  but  requires  that  the  manu-
facturer of a medical device takes responsibility for the
performance  and  related  safety  of  its  products  on  the
basis of an appropriately conducted and systematic risk

 
 
management  procedure.  In  conducting  the  analysis  of
the risks related to the product, the manufacturer has to
take into account all relevant information he can gather
on the technology and on the product at stake. This task
is  facilitated  by  the  reference  to  harmonised  standards
for current and well-established technologies. For inno-
vative technologies, the manufacturer has to be aware of
the  latest  scientific  data.  Further  products  classified  in
class III, IIb or IIa shall be examined by an independent
third  party  (Notified  Body),  which,  under  the  control  of
the authorities of the Member State in which it is located,
will  confirm  or  challenge  the  conclusions  of  the  manu-
facturer. The structure of the system seems to be appro-
priate  to  cope  with  any  new  emerging  technologies
incorporated  into  or  applied  to  medical  devices.  This
assessment has recently been recognised by an ad-hoc
Working  Group  hosted  by  the  European  Commission,
which has clearly indicated that the medical devices reg-
ulatory system is an appropriate framework to deal with
nanotech-based  medical  devices.  Nevertheless,  the
Commission  is  analysing  if  there  is  a  need  for  specific
guidance or supporting instruments, particularly concerning
the classification of medical devices, for new technolo-
gies including products based on nanotechnology. 

Medicinal  Products: The  legislative  framework  for
medicinal products can be prescriptive both in terms of
technical  requirements  and  in  terms  of  manufacturing,
but  flexibility  is  embedded  provided  that  the  applicant
has  scientifically  sound  justifications.  The  system  is
based on evaluation of the quality, safety and efficacy of
the  product,  leading  to  a  risk/benefit  assessment  and
related risks minimization and management. Risk man-
agement may also be required in the post authorisation
phase. Whenever a new technology is applied, the regu-
latory framework follows science by making new guide-
lines  and  where  necessary,  legal  amendments  to  lay
down appropriate requirements. In the absence of guide-
lines,  applicants  can  seek  scientific  advice  from  the
European Medicines Agency (EMEA) for issues relating to
the development of their individual products that are not
yet fully covered by existing guidance.
While  the  overall  framework  could  be  quickly  comple-
mented  by  new  guidelines  specific  to  nanotechnology
(developed by EMEA or the Commission), the process for
developing specific legal requirements for new technolo-
gies takes more time.

Conclusion: The  assessment  procedures  for  medical

devices and medicinal products both appear suitable for
coping with the challenges of this new technology. While
the medical devices system is likely to be able to cope
with  it  effectively  with  relatively  few  amendments  in  a
short  time,  the  system  for  pharmaceutical  products
might require more extensive work. However, this should
not delay patients' access to innovative medicines since
there are procedures in place for guiding the applicants
from  the  early  stages  of  the  development  of  their  pro -
ducts even in absence of specific guidelines. A need for
improved  collaboration  between  regulators  responsible
for  Medical  Devices  and  Medicinal  Products  is  strongly
perceived,  as  integration  of  competences  might  be
required for complex nanotechnology based products.

Imaging  Agents: Imaging  agents  for  system  use  are
pharmaceuticals  under  the  MPD  (Medicinal  Products
Directives and Regulations), whereas scanners are treated
under  the  MDD  (Medical  Device  Directive).  Due  to  the
potential  risks  associated  with  pharmaceuticals,  which
are  administered  and  used  systemically  in  humans,  the
necessary  series  of  laboratory,  animal  and  clinical  tests
with  different  phases  take  longer  time  for  market
approval  than  the  tests  of  medical  devices.  However,
material that is “intended for research and development
trials” (MPD Article 3.3) is not covered by the rules of
the MPD.

In  the  USA,  where  the  responsibility  for  approval  and
oversight of clinical trials is centralised at the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), change has been introduced
to  speed  up  the  development  of  diagnostic  imaging
agents.  Recently  the  FDA  has  taken  action  to  speed
first-in-man  assessments  of  imaging  agents  under  the
exploratory  Investigational  New  Drug  program.  The  FDA
also developed new Guidance for Industry on Developing
Medical Imaging Drug and Biological Products, which is
intended  to  modernise  the  agency's  approach  for  the
approval of these types of agents recognising their rela-
tive safety as compared to therapeutic drug products.

In view of this, and in the light of the benefits of molec-
ular imaging it is the intention to form a working group,
which will gain more insight on the risk level of imaging
agents.  As  an  accompanying  action  it  is  suggested  to
analyse the large amount of data that is available about
the application of radiotracers in nuclear medicine and of
magnetic resonance imaging-contrast agents in radiology
over decades with hundreds of thousands of patients.

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

27

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

28

3.5. Intellectual Property Rights

Within the general rules on intellectual property for the
Seventh Framework Programme, an intellectual property
model  will  be  developed  by  the  European  Technology
Platform on NanoMedicine.

This  model  aims  to  achieve  a  large  participation  in  the
initiative and a fair allocation of rights on generated intel-
lectual property. The basic principle of the ownership and
exploitation of intellectual property will include:
(cid:129) The foreground will be owned by the party that is the
employer of the inventor(s). The employer will ensure,
that  it  claims  all  rights  to  the  invention.  In  case  of
remuneration obligations, the employer will be respon-
sible  for  remuneration.  Where  several  participants
have  jointly  carried  out  work  generating  foreground
and where their respective share of the work cannot
be ascertained, they shall agree among themselves on
the allocation and the terms of exercising the owner-
ship  of  the  joint  foreground  in  accordance  with  the
provisions  of  the  Seventh  Framework  Programme 
regulations. Parties will try to reach a common agree-
ment  on  ideally  “one  applicant  per  patent”  case  to
reduce administrative burden. In case joint owners do
not  come  to  agreement  on  territorial  scope,  each
owner will be allowed to file in all countries the other
owners are not interested in. He shall then be the sole
owner  in  such  country  and  shall  bear  all  costs.  The
other  co-owners  of  an  invention  retain  a  royalty  free
right  to  use  the  same  also  in  such  country  for  their
own purposes.

(cid:129) Use  of  foreground  rights  for  research  purposes,
including clinical trials will be royalty free for at least
the project members of the related specific project of
the European Technology Platform on NanoMedicine.
Further access rights for other parties and conditions
of these access rights are under discussion.

(cid:129) Use  of  foreground  rights  for  commercial  purposes:
-  Free  or  favourable  conditions  for  anybody  who  has
participated  in  the  specific  project  in  which  the
respective rights have been generated. The final intel-
lectual  property policy  will  contain  further  details
regarding sublicensing and use by affiliates.

-  Participation  is  defined  by  financial  investment  of  a 
certain  level  or  provision  of  certain  data  and/or
tools/materials  or  undertakings  determined/defined
by the funding organisations.

(cid:129) The  access  rights  to  background  IP  are  still  under 

discussion.

A  working  group  composed  of  representatives  from
industry, academia, and public administration has been
established  to  further  elaborate  the  principles  of  the
intellectual  property  policy  of  the  European  Technology
Platform on NanoMedicine. 

3.6. Required Research
Infrastructure

Nanomedicine is a very special area of nanotechnology,
because:
(cid:129) It is an extremely large field ranging from in vivo and
in  vitro  diagnostics  to  therapy  including  targeted
delivery and regenerative medicine.

(cid:129) It  has  to  interface  nanomaterials  (surfaces,  particles,
etc.)  or  analytical  instruments  with  “living”  human
material (cells, tissue, body fluids). 

(cid:129) It  creates  new  tools  and  methods  that  impact 

significantly existing conservative practices. 

In  the  near  future,  the  second  and  the  third  points 
represent  the  biggest  challenge  for  developing
nanomedical  tools  and  devices,  because  due  to  the
novelty of the field no infrastructures of European scale
have  evolved  yet,  which  create  the  necessary  close
proximity  between  experts  and  facilities  of  different
areas. This is essential for innovations in this field, and
to  create  the  condition  of  the  fast  translation  of
research results to the clinic for patients. To overcome
this problem a distributed infrastructure of specialised

3
1

i

.
g
F
©

 
 
European poles of excellence of complementary expertise
is  a  necessary  first  step  like  “nanotechnologies  in 
cancer”.  Each  centre  or  node  should  already  have:
excellence  in  one  area  of  nano-technology  (surfaces,
particles, analytics, integrated systems, etc.), a biolog-
ical  and/or  medical  research  centre  and  hospital,  and
(most  importantly)  companies,  which  have  access  to
and  knowledge  of  the  relevant  markets.  The  missing
expertise  should  be  quickly  and  very  easily  accessible
within  this  network  of  distributed  infrastructures  and
experts  pools.  Dedicated  clinics  or  hospital  units
developing  and  testing  nanotechnology  based  tools, 
devices  and  protocols  should  be  supported  in 
the  key  places  across  Europe.  In  fact,  a  few  techno-
logical/clinical  centres  will  have  to  specialise  on  the
transfer of nanomedical systems from the bench to the
patient's bed – the “clinicalisation” of the nanomedical
devices – to take into account its specificities. Testing
patient's  bio-samples  on  nanobio-analytical  systems,
implanting an in vivo nanobio device or injecting a na no -
tech based drug carrier require a specific environment
in dedicated clinics as close as possible to na no tech no -
l o gy centres, which is not currently found in the usual
university hospitals. These places will also be key sup-
port  facilities  for  joint  training  of  medical  doctors  and
technology developers.

A  European  infrastructure  based  on  such  places  with
complementary nanotechnological and biomedical excel-
lences  will  have  the  capacity  to  build  up  scientific  and
technical expertise at the interface between “nano” and
“bio” to speed up the development of tools and devices
for  the  market.  Upgrading  and  combining  these  places
therefore is crucial for effective market oriented develop-
ments in nanobiotechnology, because speed is the most
critical  key  factor  of  success  for  bringing  nanomedical
devices  or  methods  to  the  market  in  a  competitive 
situation. 

3.7. Education and Training Needs

Due to its novelty, no dedicated education programme
in nanomedicine exists in Europe at present, with the

exception of a few regional initiatives. There is a growing
need for qualified personnel with training in at least two
or  three  major  disciplines  related  to  nanomedicine.
Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  synchronise  and  further
develop regional education schemes in order to establish
comprehensive education programmes so that a student
can get credits in the most competent universities over
Europe  in  the  framework  of  a  coherent  and  compre-
hensive curriculum. The education programmes should
first  concentrate  on  graduate  students,  who  have  a
degree  in  one  of  the  basic  disciplines  like  biology,
chemistry, physics, material or medical science. In the
long run programmes at all levels should be developed,
e.g.  by  exchange  of  experience  and  agreements  on
common standards for European certificates. In terms
of  dissemination  and  distant  learning,  especially
towards the new Member States of the European Union
one  important  tool  at  the  European  level  could  be  an 
E-learning programme, jointly created by the members
of European nanomedicine clusters.

Besides  education  of  students,  training  of  industry  and
clinical personnel is needed at all levels from the nurse
to the physicians or the surgeons. Tutorial courses and
practical  training  are  essential  to  enable  penetration  of
nanotechnology  into  medical  applications.  For  these 
purpose physicians, pharmacists, and biologists have to
be  trained  in  nanomedicine  related  technological
research  whereas  physicists,  nanotechnologists,  and
engineers have to be trained in biological/clinical methods.
Training of medical personnel in technological units is a
good  way  to  facilitate  the  adoption  of  technology  in 
routine operation in hospitals and clinics.

The education and training efforts have to be supported
by a mobility programme, because the expertise in the
different areas of nanomedicine is spread across many
centres in Europe. The access of personnel to expertise
in the best centres in Europe will be essential to ensure
the fast and sustainable development of nanomedicine
in  Europe.  A  special  emphasis  has  to  be  given  to  the
mobility of PhD and postdocs who are much more mobile
than senior scientists and who represent the European
networks of tomorrow.

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

29

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

30

4. Making it Happen

The  European  Technology  Platform  on  NanoMedicine
addresses ambitious, responsible research, development
and  innovation  in  nanotechnology  for  health  to
strengthen the  competitive  scientific  and  industrial 
position  of  Europe  in  the  area  of  nanomedicine  and
improve the quality of life and healthcare of its citizens.

The  European  Technology  Platform  on  NanoMedicine
identifies the most important socio-economic challenges
facing  Europe  in  this  area,  focusing  on  some  major 
diseases with main economic impact. It aims to improve
the  standard  of  healthcare  across  the  population,
enhancing quality of life, and focusing on breakthrough
therapies, in a cost effective framework.

As  well  as  dissemination  of  knowledge,  regulatory  and
intellectual  property  issues,  the  European  Technology
Platform in general addresses ethical, environmental and
toxicological aspects as well as public perception.

Research  on  nanomedicine  is  unusually  spread  across
industrial, clinical and academic sectors. For real clinical
progress  improved  communication  is  required  between
all three parties; as ultimately only those teams able to
manage clinical studies through phases 1-3, regulatory 
submissions  and  marketing  will  be  able  to  provide 
benefits  for  patients.  Depending  on  the  stage  of  the
research, it will be advisable for proposals to show that
collaborators are really capable of transitioning their work

4
1

i

.
g
F
©

through  the  clinic.  Researchers  should  note  that 
ultimately this is a regulated sector and that the quality
of scientific evidence required and proof of viability will be
higher than that required for academic publication.

Due  to  the  major  importance  of  future  healthcare,  this
issue  is  covered  by  various  other  European  Technology
Platforms. Besides the European Technology Platform on
NanoMedicine,  three  other  European  Technology
Platforms  are  addressing  different  facets  of  medical
applications: 
The scope of most European Technology Platforms is to
identify and describe core trends in the healthcare sector
that benefit the citizen in the light of emerging challenges
such  as  an  ageing  population  and  personalised  health
care  as  well  as  to  focus  upon  technology  trends  that
impact industry.

European Technology Platform on
Innovative Medicines
The overall policy objective of the Technology Platform on
Innovative  Medicines  is  to  enhance  and  accelerate  the
development process of medicines so as to ensure the
most  rapid  application  of  scientific  breakthroughs  into
approved new medicines. This will be achieved by stimu -
lating  integrated  forms  of  cooperation  in  research  and
development,  in  particular  through  reinforced  public-
private  partnerships,  with  a  view  to  providing  the
European  population  with  early  access  to  new,  more 
targeted medicines, while at the same time, strength-
ening  the  European  science  base  and  fostering  eco-
nomic growth in the pharma/biotechnology industry.
http://europa.eu.int/comm/research/fp6/index_en.cfm?
p=1_innomed

European Technology Platform on Smart
System Integration (EpoSS) 
The recommended research priorities of EPoSS address
requirements and R&D needs related to smart systems
contributing to emerging challenges like the ageing pop-
ulation and personalised health care as well as related to
the  integration  of  these  smart  systems  into  medical
technology products. The long term market developments
and  technology  requirements  are  taken  into  account

 
 
with  a  time  horizon  on  developments  beyond  existing
product  roadmaps.  http://www.smart-systems-integra-
tion.org/public

European Technology Platform on
Photonics (Photonics 21) 
This European Technology Platform is paving the way for
Europe's  scientific,  technological  and  economic  leader-
ship in photonics. Life science and healthcare are areas
where  photonic  technologies  are  expected  to  bring
benefits. www.photonics21.org

The European Technology Platform on NanoMedicine will
be connected with its three “sister” European Technology
Platforms  to  prevent  duplication,  double  funding  of 
projects  and  ensure  better  use  of  knowledge.  For
instance,  generic  development  in  photonics  under

Photonics  21  can  be  then  exploited  by  the  European
Technology  Platform  for  NanoMedicine  for  a  specific
device  or  application.  The  same  principle  can  be
envisaged with  the  two  other  European  Technology
Platforms.

The  European  Technology  Platform  on  NanoMedicine
has  developed  the  following  Strategic  Research
Priorities. They are addressed to the Member States of
the  European  Union,  its  Candidate  Countries  and
Associated  States  to  the  EU  Framework  Programmes
for research and technological development, as well as
the  European  Commission.  They  should  serve  as  a
basis  for  and  encourage  the  launching  of  innovative
nanomedical  research  programmes  at  European,
national and regional level, and should strengthen the
cooperation of multisectorial consortia.

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

31

Strategic Research Priorities

DIAGNOSTICS

Activities should start in:

1-2 years

3-5 years

more than 5 years

Cardiovascular
Diseases

Cancer

Musculoskeletal 
& Inflammatory 
Diseases

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

32

Neurodegenerative
Diseases

Diabetes

Infectious Diseases

Intracorporal robotics for heart diag-
nostic and therapy

Telemedicine for heart monitoring
using smart maintenance-free
implantable devices

Nanostructured surfaces as specific in
vivo and in vitro biosensors for cancer
related molecular markers

Minimal invasive endoscope/catheder
for diagnostics and therapy

Implantable mobile systems for detec-
tion of cancer cells and localised
delivery of optimal therapeutic agents.
These systems should also enable
communication with other implanted
devices and external 
systems

Imaging of labelled white cells

In vivo drug delivery probes coupled to
sensors in autonomous systems

Biosensors for faster and earlier differ-
ential diagnosis at the point of care

Image guided implatantation of
advanced neurostimulators

Minimally invasive, combined glucose
sensor/insulin delivery systems for
daily home-care

Monitoring of labelled islet transplan-
tation 

Non- and minimal invasive dynamic
functional 3D imaging techniques (i.e.
tissue elasticity, blood flow) 
in the cardiovascular system

Surface nanostructured bioelectrical
sensors for continuous monitoring

3-in-1 smart in vivo nanodiagnostics
system for combined diagnostics,
therapy and therapy monitoring

Smart probes with reduced toxicity for
drug targeting, contrast carrier for
imaging, local activation and con-
trolled activity

Integrated nanotechnology devices for
cancer related proteomic, metabolomic
and epigenomic molecular serum 
pattern detection

Identification of biomarkers or 
patterns for predisposition and early
screening in body fluids

Intelligent blood filtration devices
detecting/removing inflammation 
related molecules (e.g. interleukines)

Identification of biomarkers or pat-
terns for predisposition and early
screening

Probes than can cross blood-brain
barrier for imaging (like amyloid
plaque in vivo), and delivering therapy

Imaging/spectroscopy strategies for
rapid identification of protein aggre-
gates relevant for neurodegenerative
disease

Dynamic optical imaging tools for 3D
neurotissue engineering

Non- and minimal-invasive diagnostic
tools to measure glycemia

In vivo characterisation of glucose
metabolism 

Whole-body imaging of fat distribution
and fat characterisation

Integrated diagnostic test (incl. sample
preparation) for rapid and early 
diagnosis of viral or bacterial infection

Identification of diagnostics markers
and early screening of changes in
RNA expression in infected cells

Enabling
Technologies

Integrated systems for detection by
cell, protein, transcript and/or genetic
analysis

Image guided therapy with multimodal
molecular and functional as well as
intraoperative imaging

Management of heterogeneous data
from various analytical sources and
devices

Identification of early diagnostic/prog-
nostic marker biomolecules

Probes that can cross cytosol-nucleus
barrier for imaging and delivering 
therapy

Biocompatible dynamic surfaces for
coating of implantable devices to
enable controlled drug release and
provide optimal cell adhesion

Therapy response prediction by appro-
priate markers

Diagnostics devices for telemedecine

TARGETED DELIVERY

Activities should start in:

1-2 years

3-5 years

more than 5 years

Cardiovascular
Diseases

Identification of markers on plaque 
or infarcted area 

Research into theranostics for CVD
especially cerebrovascular disease

Clinical trials for theranostics

Cancer

Musculoskeletal 
& Inflammatory 
Diseases

Neurodegenerative
Diseases

Diabetes

Clinical trials for Cancer nanomedicines

Exploring easier routes of administration,
e.g. not with a conventional needle

Expansion of disease foci into other 
less common cancer indications

Theranostic programme for cardiovas-
cular diseases, especially ischaemic
heart disease  

Critically evaluating existing nano -
medicines in a pre-clinical context
prior to validation in the clinic. 
Of particular importance is under-
standing the science behind the 
pharmaceutics of these complex 
and multi-tasking entities 

Researching new and low cost targeting
agents. Multi-target approaches  

Research into novel Nanomedicines
to critically explore their potential in a
non-clinical context. The interaction of
nanoparticles with biological systems
requires much more critical and in
depth studies 

Research into new types of lower cost
targeting agents to reduce the cost 
of goods for such nanomedicines
Rheumatoid Arthritis and Crohn's 
disease should be a therapeutic focus

Nanomedicines to facilitate bone
regeneration or the treatment of
Osteoporosis. Perhaps including
aspects of regenerative medicine. 

Programme aimed at prostate 
hypertrophy and inflammatory
processes 

Semi-invasive programmable 
nano-devices to deliver drugs with
Parkinson's as the target disease 

Treatment of diabetes by insulin 
delivery by a responsive nano-enabled
device (e.g. capable of detecting 
glucose levels)

Design and synthesis of nanomedi-
cines capable of crossing the blood
brain barrier with Alzheimer's
Disease/Parkinson's as the longer
term targets

Treatment of vascular inflammatory
processes in diabetes types 1 and 2,
diet related nephropathy and auto-
immune disease induced vascular
inflammation

Development of inhalable forms of
insulin or other drugs capable of 
modifying blood glucose levels. 
High bioavailability is a priority

Infectious Diseases

Nano-vaccines

Enabling
Technologies

Crossing the blood-brain barrier

Manufacturing and lowering the cost
of goods

Predicting immunogenicity. Synthetic
immune systems (real or virtual)

Understanding aggregation phenome-
na including that involving proteins 

Understanding how nanomedicines
interact with the body and its compo-
nents. Transport through membranes
and tissues. In Vitro models

Understanding the drug metabolism
and pharmaco-kinetics of nanomedi-
cines in order to achieve appropriate
therapeutic cover 

Easier routes of administration such
as transdermal, oral and pulmonary
delivery. Nano-delivery devices.
Enhancing bio-availability 

Novel types of targeting entities

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

33

REGENERATIVE MEDICINE

Activities should start in:

1-2 years

3-5 years

more than 5 years

Cardiovascular
Diseases

Cell based therapies for treatment of
cardiovascular diseases

Bioactive signalling factors triggering
regenerative events in the heart

Advanced biomaterials for site specific
cell therapy

Advanced biomaterials for site specific
delivery of bioactive signalling factors

Biomimetic biomaterials for vascular
replacement

Advanced – biomaterials as targets for
stem cell therapies

Cancer

Cell based therapies for management
of cancer related immunodeficiencies

Technologies for mass production of
immune cells

Advanced biomaterials for site specific
delivery of bioactive signalling factor

Musculoskeletal 
& Inflammatory 
Diseases

Cell based therapies for treatment of
osteoarthritis

Identification of bioactive signalling
factors stimulating bone remodelling 

Bioactive coatings of orthopaedic
implants for cell attraction,
Nanostructures stimulating bone 
deposition

Advanced biomaterials for treatment
of spinal disorders

Advanced bioactive biomaterials
designed for disease-modifying 
treatments of osteoarthritis

Neurodegenerative
Diseases

Advanced nanomaterials as neural
prostheses

Cell based therapies for disorders of
the central nervous system

Methodologies for cell therapies in 
tissues of the adult central nervous
system

Bioactive signalling factors triggering
regenerative events in the central
nervous system

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

34

Diabetes

Bioengineered pancreatic cells in 
the management of diabetes

Biomimetic biomaterials for site-
specific cell therapy

Development of glucose sensitive
devices for controlled delivery of
insulin/insulin analogues

Advanced biomaterials for delivery 
bioengineered pancreatic cells 

Advanced biomaterials for site specific
delivery of bioactive signalling factors
in healing of diabetic wounds

Intelligent bioactive materials 
promoting and controlling 
regenerative events in the heart

Strategies for stem cell mobilization
and homing at the site of injury

Advanced biomaterials for in vivo 
activation of hematopoieitic stem 
cell production

Intelligent biomaterials promoting and
controlling regenerative events in
bone and cartilage

Strategies for stem cell mobilization
and homing at the site of injury

Intelligent biomaterials, responsive to
changes in the microenvironment of
the central nervous system, promoting
and controlling regenerative events in
the central nervous system 

Technologies for site-specific delivery
of neuro-active molecules

Strategies for development of artificial
pancreas

Enabling
Technologies

Identification of mechanisms for 
activation and control of tissue-
specific progenitor cells

Identification of signalling systems for
leveraging regenerative potential of
progenitor cells

Identification and synthesis of bio-
active signalling molecules and extra-
cellular matrix analogues

Associations of biomaterial and bio-
active signalling molecules for biomi-
metic therapies

Design and control of biomaterial
structure at nano-level

Biomimetic biomaterials which can
react with the microenvironment

Strategies for progenitor cell mobiliza-
tion and homing, Biomaterials able to
trigger and control progenitor cell
recruitment at site of injury

Technologies for targeted, sequential
delivery of bioactive signalling 
molecules

Strategic Research Agenda
of the ETP NanoMedicine: 
Members & Contributors

CHAIRS

VAN AMERONGEN, Aart, Wageningen UR, 

KARVINEN, Jouko A., President and CEO, Philips Medical

The Netherlands

Systems, The Netherlands

VON BALLY, Gert, Universitätsklinikum Münster, Germany

SMIT, Paul, Vice-Chair, Philips Medical Systems, 

The Netherlands

REINHARDT, Erich R., Member of the Managing Board

WORKING GROUP TARGETED DELIVERY
Chair and Main Section Author:

Siemens AG, CEO and President Medical Solutions, Germany

EATON, Mike, UCB, UK

SCHMITT, Karl-Jürgen, Vice-Chair, Siemens Medical Solutions, 

Members and Contributors:

Public Relations & Health Policy, Germany

ALONSO, María José, University of Santiago de Compostela,

Spain

WORKING GROUP NANODIAGNOSTICS
Chair and Main Section Author:

ALTOMARE, Luigi, University of Bologna, Italy

BORRÓS, Salvador, Universidad Ramon Llull, Spain

BOISSEAU, Patrick, CEA-Léti, France

Members and Contributors:

CHESTER, Kerry, Royal Free and University College, Medical

School, UCL, UK

BENNINGHOVEN, Alfred, ION-TOF, Germany

DE GROOT, Vincent (F.M.H.), Syntarga B.V., The Netherlands

BRIEL, Andreas, Schering, Germany

CLEUZIAT, Philippe, BioMérieux, France

DEACON, Julie, MNT Network, DTI, UK

DEBBAGE, Paul, Innsbruck Medical University, Austria

DEVOISELLE, Jean-Marie, University of Montpellier, France

DUNCAN, Ruth, Cardiff University, UK

DECKERS, Sjaak, Philips Medical Systems,

FEIJEN, Jan, University of Twente, The Netherlands

The Netherlands        

GRAMATICA, Furio, Fondazione Don Gnocchi ONLUS, Italy

DI FABRIZIO, Enzo, Università “Magna Grecia”, Italy

HOGSET, Anders, PCI Biotech AS, Norway

FUCHS, Harald, University of Münster, Germany

KIPARISSIDES, Costas, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,

GALVIN, Paul, Tyndall National Institute, University College

Greece

Cork, Ireland

KORENSTEIN, Rafi, Marian Gertner Institute for Medical

GRAMATICA, Furio, Fondazione Don Gnocchi ONLUS, Italy

Nanosystems, Israel

GRANGEAT, Pierre, CEA-Léti, France

KOSTARELOS, Kostas, The School of Pharmacy, University 

GRÜLL, Holger, Philips Research, The Netherlands

of London, UK

KASEMO, Bengt, Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden

MOLEMA, Grietje, University Medical Center Groningen, 

LE BER, Pierre, CEA-Léti, France

LEVY, Laurent, Nanbiotix, France

The Netherlands

RENIER, Davide, Development & Quality, Fidia Farmaceutici

MANARESI, Nicolo, Silicon Biosystem, Italy

Spa, Italy

MONTEVECCHI, Franco Maria, Politecnico di Torino, Italy

ROBILLARD, Marc S., Philips Research, The Netherlands

NAGELHUS HERNES, Toril, SINTEF, Norway

SCHMID, Ruth, SINTEF Materials and Chemistry, Norway

NGUYEN-DINH, Andreas, Vermon SA, France

SCHREDER, Sven, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co.

NIKOLAJEFF, Frederik, Uppsala University, Sweden

KG, Germany

PALOC, Céline, VICOMTech – Visual Interaction and

SCHWARTZ JR., Simo, Institut de Recerca Hospital Universitari

Communication Technologies Center, Spain

RIESE, Hans H., Neuropharma S.A, Spain

Vall d'Hebron, Spain

VELDHUIS, Gert, Nanomi, The Netherlands

RINALDI, Ross, National Nanotechnology Laboratory, University

of Lecce, Italy

RUGGIERO, Carmelina, DIST-University Genoa, Italy

SCHAEFFTER, Tobias, King's College London, UK

WORKING GROUP REGENERATIVE
MEDICINE
Chair and Main Section Author:

SCHNEKENBURGER, Jürgen, University of Münster, Germany

PAVESIO, Alessandra, Fidia Advanced Biopolymers, Italy

SIEBOLD, Horst, Siemens Medical Solutions, Germany

Members and Contributors:

SUBRAMANIAM, Vinod, University of Twente / MESA+

ALTOMARE, Luigi, University of Bologna, Italy

Research Institute, The Netherlands

AMBROSIO, Luigi, IMCB-CNR, Naples, Italy

TARTAGNI, Marco, University of Bologna, Italy

BROWN, Robert A., Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital, UK

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

35

CHIELLINI, Emo, University of Pisa, Italy

CUISINIER, Frédéric, UFR Odontologie, France

DE BRUIJN, Joost D., Progentix BV, The Netherlands

GAMA, Miguel, DEB-UM, Portugal

GUENTHER, Rolf, Altonabiotec, Germany

WORKING GROUP ETHICAL, LEGAL, 
AND SOCIAL ASPECTS
Chair and Main Section Author:

WELTRING, Klaus-Michael, bioanalytik-muenster, Germany

Members and Contributors:

HARALDSETH, Olav, Faculty of Medicine – NTNU, Norway

ACH, Johann, University of Münster, Germany

HULMES, David, Institut de Biologie et Chimie des Protéines,

ALTOMARE, Luigi, University of Bologna, Italy

CNRS UMR 5086, France

BENNETT, David J., Cambridge Biomedical Consultants Ltd.,

KASEMO, Bengt, Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden

The Netherlands

KIRKPATRICK, C. James, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität,

BRUCE, Donald, Church of Scotland, UK

Germany

FORSBERG NILSSON, Karine, Vetenskapsrådet (Swedish

KNIPPER, Andreas, TIGENIX, Belgium

Research Coucil), Sweden

KOSTARELOS, Kostas, The School of Pharmacy, University of

GEVERS, Sjef, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands

London, UK

GRUNWALD, Armin, Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe GmbH,

LINDHAL, Anders, CellMatrix AB, Sweden

Germany

MARCHE, Patrice, CEA – Grenoble/DRDC/ICH, INSERM U548,

HAKER, Hille, Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe-Universität, Germany

France

KIRKPATRICK, C. James, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität,

MEISEL, Hans-Jörg, BG-Clinic Bergmannstrost, Germany

Germany

MIGLIARESI, Claudio, University of Trento, Italy

KREYLING, Wolfgang G., GSF-National Research Center for

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

36

MONTEVECCHI, Franco Maria, Politecnico di Torino, Italy

Environment and Health, Germany

MOORE, Richard, Eucomed, Belgium

NORDMANN, Alfred, Technische Universität Darmstadt,

NIKOLAJEFF, Fredrik, Uppsala University, Sweden

Germany

RADAELLI, Alberto, Politecnico di Milano, Italy

RIP, Arie, University Twente, The Netherlands

SAMITIER, Josep, Barcelona Science Park, PCB, Spain

SAKELLARIS, Georgios, National Hellenic Research

SEMINO, Carlos, Universidad Ramon Llull, Spain

Foundation, Greece

SJODIN, Staffan, Biolin AB, Sweden

SIEP, Ludwig, University of Münster, Germany

SWIESZKOWSKI, Wojciech, Warsaw University of Technology,

TÜRK, Volker, Wuppertal Institute, Germany

Poland

THORSTEINSSON, Freygardur, Ossur, Iceland

VAN BLITTERSWIJK, Clemens, University of Twente, 

The Netherlands

WORKING GROUP INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY AND REGULATORY ASPECTS
Chair and Main Section Author:

VAN RIJN, Cees J.M., Aquamarijn Micro Filtration BV, 

VAN VELZEN, Maaike, Philips Intellectual Property 

The Netherlands

VERICAT, Joan-Albert, Neuropharma, Spain

& Standards, The Netherlands

Members and Contributors:

VOSKERICIAN, Gabriela, R&D Proxy Biomedical Limited, Ireland

ABRAHAM-FUCHS, Klaus, Siemens Medical Solutions, Germany

WILLIAMS, David F., University of Liverpool, UK

GUENTHER, Rolf, Altonabiotec, Germany

WUISMAN, Paul I.J.M., “Vrije Universiteit” Medical Center, 

HOEREN, Thomas, University of Münster, Germany

The Netherlands

LE COURTOIS, Patrick, European Medicines Agency – EMEA

PINTSCH, Tanjy, Corporate Patents - Schering AG, Germany

SCHMIDT, Heinz, Siemens AG Corporate Intellectual Property,

Germany

THOMPSON, John, UCB, UK

TSAMOURAS, Dimitrios, Help-Forward Network / FORTH,

Greece

OTHER CONTRIBUTING ETP MEMBERS

KUHN, Michael H., Philips, The Netherlands

AMEDEE, Joëlle, DR2 INSERM, INSERM U 577, Université

MANSO SILVÁN, Miguel, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid,

Victor Segalen Bordeaux 2, France

Spain

ARTALEJO, Beatriz, Novartis Farmacéutica, S.A., Spain

MARGARETO SÁNCHEZ, Javier, Fundación Leia, C.D.T., Spain

BARBOSA, Mário, INEB-Instituto de Engenharia Biomédica,

MOQUIN-PATTEY, Carole, European Science Foundation,

Portugal

France

BAUER, Günter, Evotec Technologies, Germany

MOTHES, Helmut, Bayer Technology Services, Germany

BLANCO, Jerónimo, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau,

MUÑOZ FERNÁNDEZ, Angeles, Hospital Gregorio Marañon,

Spain

Spain

BOECK, Georg, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG,

OCHOA, Gorka, Progenika Biopharma S.A., Spain

Germany

PERIS, José Luis, Institute of Biomechanics of Valencia (IBV),

BORGHESE, Camilla, Istituto biochimico Italiano Giovanni

Spain

Lorenzini SpA, Italy

BRÄUTIGAM, Matthias, Schering, Germany
BUDAK, Gürer G., Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Turkey

PERNE, Rainer, Bayer Technology Services, Germany

PIEBER, Thomas, Medical University of Graz, Austria

PIROVANO, Dario, Eucomed, Belgium

CALVO, Pilar, PharmaMar SA, Spain

PIULATS, Jaume, Merck Farma y Química, S.A., Spain

COCHE, Thierry, GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals R&D, Belgium

RUEDA RODRIGUEZ, Jesus, European Diagnostics

COHN, Daniel, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel

Manufacturers Association, Belgium

DASCALU, Dan, National Institute for Research and

SANTERO SANTURINO, Eduardo, Universidad Pablo de Olavide,

Development in Micro and Nanotechnologies (IMT-Bucharest),

Spain

Romania

DOBSON, Jon, Keele University, UK

SAXL, Ottilia, Institute of Nanotechnology, UK

SCHERFLER, Heinrich, SANDOZ, Austria

EIJKEL, Kees, University of Twente / Mesa+, The Netherlands

SCHILD, Christoph, Bayer Technology Services, Germany

ERITJA, Ramon, IBMB, CSIC, Spain

SCHMIDT, Sebastian, Siemens Medical Solutions, Germany

FLORES, María, INGENIATRICS TECNOLOGÍAS, S.L., Spain

SINNER, Frank, JOANNEUM RESEARCH, Austria

FREITAS, Paulo, INESC Microsystems and Nanotechnologies,

THERETZ, Alain, BioMérieux, France

Portugal

VANDEPUTTE, Aurélie, EuropaBio, Belgium

FUHR, Günter Rolf, Fraunhofer Gesellschaft, IBMT, Germany

VEINTEMILLAS-VERDAGUER, S., Instituto de Ciencia de

GARAGORRI, Nerea, Fundación Inasmet, Spain

Materiales de Madrid, Spain

GAUGLITZ, Guenter, University of Tübingen, Germany

VENTURINI, Peter, National Institute of Chemistry Slovenia,

GONZÁLEZ FERNÁNDEZ, África, University of Vigo, Spain

Slovenia

GOOSSENS, Johannes, Bayer Technology Services, Germany

VON RICHTER, Andreas, GE - Global Research, Germany

HOFMEISTER, Anton, STMicroelectronics, Italy

WEY, Karin, VDI Technologiezentrum GmbH, Germany

IBARRA, M. Ricardo, Institute of Nanoscience of Aragon, Spain

ZIVIN, Marko, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

37

Key References

- Cheng, M. M.-C., Cuda, G. et al. (2006) “Nano -

- Brigger, I. et al. (2002) “Nanoparticles in Cancer

technologies for biomolecular detection and medical
diagnostics” 
Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 10 (1), 11-19

Therapy and Diagnosis”
Advanced Drug Discovery Reviews 1, 631-651

- Yager, P., Edwards, T. et al. (2006) “Microfluidic 
diagnostic technologies for global public health” 
Nature 442 (7101), 412-418

- Brentani, R. R., Carraro, D. M. et al. (2005) “Gene
expression arrays in cancer research: methods and
applications” 
Critical Reviews in Oncology/Hematology 54, 95-105

- Petricoin, E., Wulfkuhle, J. et al. (2004) “Clinical
Proteomics: Revolutionizing Disease Detection 
and Patient Tailoring Therapy” 
Journal of Proteome Research 3 (2), 209 -217

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

38

- Weston, A. D., Hood, L. (2004) “Systems Biology,
Proteomics, and the Future of Health Care: Toward
Predictive, Preventative, and Personalized Medicine”
Journal of Proteome Research 3 (2), 179 -196

- Weissleder, R. (2006) “Molecular imaging in cancer”

Science 312 (5777), 1168-1171 

- Lang, P., Yeow, K. et al. (2006) “Cellular imaging 

in drug discovery” 
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 5 (4), 343-356

- Duncan, R. (2006) “Polymer conjugates 

as anticancer Nanomedicines” 
Nature Reviews – Cancer, Advance Online Publication

- Nasseri, B.A., Ogawa, K., Vacanti, J.P. (2001) 

“Tissue-Engineering: An Evolving 21st-Century Science
to provide Biologic Replacement for Reconstruction 
and Transplantation” 
Surgery 130, 781-784

- Caplan, A.I. (2000) “Tissue Engineering Designs 

for the Future: New Logics, Old Molecules” 
Tissue Engineering 6, 17-33

- Hench, L.L., Polak, J.M. (2002) “Third-Generation

Biomedical Materials” 
Science 295, 917-1180

- Korbling, M., Estrov, Z. (2003) “Adult Stem Cells 
for Tissue Repair – a New Therapeutic Concept?” 
New England Journal of Medicine 349, 570-582

- Leach, J.K., Mooney, D.J. (2004) “Bone engineering
by controlled delivery of osteoinductive molecules 
and cells” 
Expert Opinion Biol. Ther. 4 (7), 1015-1027

- Ntziachristos, V., Ripoll, J. et al. (2005) “Looking 
and listening to light: The evolution of whole-body
photonic imaging” 
Nature Biotechnology 23, 313-320

- European Research Council (2005) “ESF Forward 

Look on Nanomedicine” 
An ESF - European Medical Research Councils
(EMRC) Forward Look report

- Duncan, R. (2003) “The Dawning Era of Polymer 

- Ach, J., Siep, L. (eds.) (2006) “Nano-Bio-Ethics,

therapeutics” 
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 2, 347-360

Ethical dimensions of Nanobiotechnology” 
LIT Verlag, Berlin

- Vasir, J.K. et al. (2005) “Nanosystems in Drug

- Bruce, D. (2006) “Ethical and Social Issues 

Targeting: Opportunities and Challenges” 
Current Nanoscience 1, 47-64

in Nanobiotechnologies” 
EMBO Reports 7 (8), 754 - 758 

Images

- Page 3:  Patches of vertically aligned carbon nanotubes on

silicon © B. Kleinsorge, University of Cambridge

- Page 4, fig. 1:  Scanning Force Micrograph of a red blood

cell © nanoAnalytics GmbH, Germany 

- Page 5: Microneedles for drug delivery developed by means
of Deep X-Ray Lithography © Lilit Lab - Sincrotrone Trieste
and Don Gnocchi Foundation

- Page 17, Endothelial cells grown in vitro on a nanoporous
TiO2 coating. Fluorescence microscopy showing CD31
(green), F-actin cytoskeleton (red) and nuclei (blue). 
© K. Peters, C. J. Kirkpatrick, University of Mainz
Adhesion molecules targeted on endothelial cells © UCB
An adhesion protein targeted within a tumour cell © UCB

- Page 18, fig. 8 Porous calcium phosphate scaffold

- Page 6, fig. 2: Confocal Fluorescence Microscopy: multi-

© Progentix BV

stained human cancer cells. The red marker consists of a 
fluorescent nanoparticle which provides improved stability
and better signal compared to conventional markers © G. M.
J. Segers-Nolten, V. Subramaniam, University of Twente

- Page 7: Confocal Fluorescence Microscopy: multi-stained

human cancer cells © G. M. J. Segers-Nolten,
V. Subramaniam, University of Twente
Fig. 3: 3-Dimensional scanning force micrograph of epithelial
cells during mitosis (Madin-Darby Canine Kidney).
© T. Altenkämper, H. Schillers, Institute of Physiology II,
University of Münster

- Page 8, fig. 4: Confocal Fluorescence Microscopy: 

multi-stained human cancer cells © G. M. J. Segers-
Nolten, V. Subramaniam, University of Twente

- Page 9: Magnetic nanoparticles and an automated image

analysis software delineate malign from benign lymphnodes
in a cancer patient © M. Harisinghani, MGH, Boston
Scanning Force Microscopy of collagen. The fiber's helical
structure with a period of only 67 nm is clearly visible. © K.
O. van der Werf, V. Subramaniam, University of Twente
Scanning Force Micrograph of a red blood cell 
© nanoAnalytics GmbH, Germany

- Page 11: Contrast agents based on polymer capsules for
ultrasound imaging and ultrasound induced drug delivery. 
© Philips Research
Structures on a polymer-chip for microfluidics-based analysis.
© S. Thorslund, the Angstrom Laboratory, Uppsala University

- Page 12, fig. 5: Single stranded DNA being threaded

through cyclodextrin © Laboratory of Biophysics and Surface
Analysis, School of Pharmacy, The University of Nottingham,
and The University of Arizona

- Page 19: Porous calcium phosphate scaffold coated with a
layer of expanded mesenchymal stem cells at 7 days of 
culture; Magnification © Progentix BV
Endothelial progenitor cells from human blood, differentiated
into an endothelial monolayer in vitro (VE-cadherin-green,
nuclei-blue) © S. Fuchs, C. J. Kirkpatrick, University of Mainz

- Page 20, fig. 9: Sciatic nerve regenerating through a poly-
imide microelectrode © Fraunhofer Institute for Biomedical
Engineering (IBMT), Germany 

- Page 21: Scanning Electron Micrograph showing mesenchy-
mal stem cells attaching to a biphasic calcium phosphate
scaffold after 2 hours of seeding © Progentix BV
Nanostructured surfaces to model platelet adhesion on 
surfaces for blood-contacting medical devices © INEB 2006
Part of a nanoengineered implantable cell chamber 
© Aquamarijn BV

- Page 23, fig. 10: Hands on course in a clean room 

© Foundation for Research in Microtechnology (FSRM)
Schematic molecular model based upon a raft of alpha-
helices © Laboratory of Biophysics and Surface Analysis,
School of Pharmacy, The University of Nottingham
Single stranded DNA being threaded through cyclodextrin 
© Laboratory of Biophysics and Surface Analysis, School of
Pharmacy, The University of Nottingham, and The University
of Arizona
Representation of an alpha-helical peptide traversing a mem-
brane © Laboratory of Biophysics and Surface Analysis,
School of Pharmacy, The University of Nottingham

- Page 24, fig. 11 & Page 26, fig. 12: Isolated stem cells,

magnification © Fidia Advanced Biopolymers

- Page 25: Vertically aligned carbon nanotubes on silicon

- Page 13: Peapod-nanotube, simulated Scanning-Tunneling-

© B. Kleinsorge, University of Cambridge

Micrograph; Beta-sheet barrel structure of Green-Fluorescent
Protein; Green-Fluorescent Protein, highest occupied, lowest
unoccupied orbital  © A. Rubio, Universidad del Pais Vasco,
San Sebastian

- Page 14, fig. 6:  E-selectin (a surface adhesion molecule,
typically expressed on response to inflammation) imaged
within endothelial cells © UCB

- Page 15: Liposomes (stained red) are penetrating a complex
breast tumour mass, targeting cancer cells © K. Kostarelos,
The School of Pharmacy, University of London
An adhesion protein targeted within a tumour cell © UCB
Nanoparticles for targeted gene delivery to the peripheral
nervous system © INEB 2006

- Page 16, fig. 7: E-selectin (a surface adhesion molecule,
typically expressed on response to inflammation) imaged
within a Chinese Hamster Ovary cell © UCB

- Page 27: © MESA+, Institute for Nanotechnology 

© CNRS Photothèque - H. Raguet
© Fidia Advanced Biopolymers

- Page 28, fig. 13: © Parc Científic de Barcelona (PCB)
- Page 29: © Parc Científic de Barcelona (PCB)

© MESA+, Institute for Nanotechnology

- Page 30, fig. 14: The heart of a Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion
Mass Spectrometer used to spatial map surface molecular
composition of surfaces at the sub-micron level 
© Laboratory of Biophysics and Surface Analysis, 
School of Pharmacy, The University of Nottingham 

- Page 31: Structures on a polymer-chip; coated with heparin,
the structures are utilized for achieving capillary flow in open
microchannels for blood analysis © Thorslund, the Angstrom
Laboratory, Uppsala University

I

I

E
N
C
D
E
M
O
N
A
N

39

For further information on nanomedicine, please contact:

European Commission

Research DG

Renzo Tomellini
Uta Faure
Oliver Panzer

E-mail: rtd-nanotech@ec.europa.eu
http://cordis.europa.eu/nanotechnology/nanomedicine.htm

European Technology Platform on NanoMedicine 
Nanotechnology for Health – Strategic Research Agenda

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities

2006 – 39 pp. – 21.0 x 29.7 cm

ISBN 92-79-02203-2

Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number(*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers or these calls may be billed.

SALES AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

Publications for sale produced by the Office for Official Publications of the European Communities 
are available from our sales agents throughout the world.

You can find the list of sales agents on the Publications Office website (http://publications.eu.int) 
or you can apply for it by fax (352) 29 29-42758.

Contact the sales agent of your choice and place your order.

The Commission accepts no responsibility or liability whatsoever with regard 
to the information presented in this document.

This brochure has been produced thanks to the efforts of the stakeholders group 
of the European Technology Platform on NanoMedicine.

A great deal of additional information on the European Union is available on the internet.
It can be accessed through the Europa server (http://ec.europa.eu).

Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Photo cover: © G. von Bally, Laboratory of Biophysics, Medical Centre
University of Münster / Other pictures: © B. Kleinsorge, University of Cambridge
© SINTEF Materials and Chemistry 2005, © Tyndall National Institute “Lee Maltings”
University College, Cork

Printed in Belgium

PRINTED ON WHITE CHLORINE-FREE PAPER

K
I
-
7
6
-
0
6
-
0
8
1
-
E
N
-
C

Nanomedicine
N a n o t e c h n o l o g y   f o r   H e a l t h

m
r

o

f

t

a

l

P

y

g

o

l

o

n

h

c

e
T

n

a

e

p

o

r

u

E

e

n

i

c

i

d

e
m
o

n

a
N

r

o

f

a

d

n

e

g

A

h

c

r

a

e

s

e
R

c

i

g

e

t

a

r

t
S

N o v e m b e r   2 0 0 6

 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix V:  

Addendum requested by Professor Krzysztof Marczewski, 

EGE Member: 

"Having  regard  to  insufficient  risk  evaluation,  before  this  lack  of  knowledge 
will  be  overcome, 
the  medical  and  health  related  application  of 
nanotechnologies  (e.g.  cosmetics)  should  primarily  be  concentrated  in  to 
solving  the  problems  in  which  a  generally  accepted    traditionally  alternative 
not exist". 

163 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
164 

 
 
