The European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies
to the European Commission

ISSN 1725-5562

EUROPEAN
COMMISSION

A newsletter providing information
on the activities of the  ational  thics  ommittees
compiled by the Secretariat of the European Group 
on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 
to the European Commission

n

c

e

issue

11

December 2008

ph811289Couv.indd   1

13/01/09   15:18:20

 
The European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies 
to the European Commission 

Ethically Speaking 

Issue No 11 
December 2008 

Chief Editor 
Maurizio SALVI 

EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

 
 
 
Europe Direct is a service to help you fi nd answers 
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11

(*)  Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers or these calls may 

be billed.

More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu).

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication.

Luxembourg: Offi  ce for Offi  cial Publications of the European Communities, 2009
ISSN 1725-5562

© European Communities, 2009
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Printed in Belgium

PRINTED ON WHITE CHLORINE-FREE PAPER

ph811289Int.indd   2

13/01/09   16:06:44

CONTENTS

Editorial

Maurizio Salvi, Head of the EGE Secretariat  ....................................................................................  3

Contributions from members of the EGE

Francesco Busnelli and Eleonora Sirsi — ‘Technological innovation in agriculture 
and legal choices (from disparity to diversity)’ ................................................................................... 9

EU national and regional ethics committees

Belgium: the Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics ..................................................................15

Cyprus: the Cyprus National Bioethics Committee ...........................................................................17

Denmark: the Danish Council of Ethics .............................................................................................21

France: the National Consultative Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (CCNE) ...........23

Germany: the German Ethics Council ................................................................................................27

Greece: the Hellenic National Bioethics Commission .......................................................................29

United Kingdom: the Nuf(cid:2) eld Council on Bioethics .........................................................................31

Non-EU national and regional ethics committees

Argentina: the National Committee on Ethics in Science and Technology .......................................35

Australia: the Australian Health Ethics Committee ...........................................................................39

Canada: the Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) .............................................................................43

Mexico: the National Commission of Bioethics .................................................................................47

Philippines: the Philippine Health Research Ethics Board .................................................................51

Zambia: University of Zambia Biomedical Research Ethics Committee ...........................................55

International ethics committees

The Council of Europe’s Bioethics Division ......................................................................................61

Unesco ................................................................................................................................................63

1

ph811289Int.indd   1

13/01/09   16:06:44

ph811289Int.indd   2

13/01/09   16:06:44

Editorial

Maurizio Salvi

1. Fundamental values in EU policy design

On 12 December 2007, the European Charter of Fundamental Rights was proclaimed by the 
Presidents of the European Commission, the European Parliament and the European Council. 
The European Charter establishes a set of European values, such as human dignity, freedom, 
democracy,  protection  of  human  rights,  pluralism,  non-discrimination,  tolerance,  justice, 
solidarity and gender equality. This key political agreement has added to the relevance of these 
fundamental values to EU policy design. 

The relevance of European values in the eyes of EU citizens was also monitored in a recent 
public  perception  survey  (spring  standard  Eurobarometer  693  (1)),  published  in  July  2008, 
which asked a series of questions concerning values. The aim was to explore if there was a 
base set of common values shared across the European Union and, if so, to identify them. The 
Eurobarometer  survey  showed  that,  when  asked  which  values  were  most  important  to  them 
personally, Europeans put peace (45 %), human rights (42 %) and respect for human life (41 %) 
(cid:2) rst. These three were followed by democracy (27 %), rule of law (21 %), personal freedoms 
(21 %), equality (19 %) and tolerance (16 %). When asked which values represent the European 
Union best, the respondents chose human rights (37 %), peace (35 %) and democracy (34 %). 

Leaving aside the related issue of the relevance of speci(cid:2) c values in different regions of the 
EU and the link between western and EU values, these data show that the idea of Europe as a 
community of values is not ‘only’ a policy design of the EU but also a conception shared by 
the general public in Europe. The questions now are: ‘How can this value-oriented approach 
of EU policy design be transposed in speci(cid:2) c sectors of science and technology?’ and ‘Is this a 
practical instrument for regulating various policy sectors better in the EU?’.

2.  Embedding  fundamental  values  and  societal  concerns  in  EU  policy  design: 

animal cloning for food supply

One recent example of how fundamental values and ethics have taken on speci(cid:2) c relevance 
to  EU  policy  design  is  the  current  interinstitutional  discussion  on  animal  cloning  for  food 
purposes. 

In  February  2007,  after  the  US  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  announced  possible 
authorisation to place on the market food products derived from cloned cattle, pigs and goats, 

(1)  http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/index_en.htm

3

ph811289Int.indd   3

13/01/09   16:06:44

Commission  President  Barroso  asked  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New 
Technologies (EGE) to draft an opinion on the ethical implications of cloning animals for food. 
In parallel, the Commission asked the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) to provide a 
scienti(cid:2) c opinion on food safety, animal health and welfare, and the environmental impact of 
animals derived from cloning and their offspring. 

After  several  months  of  expert  hearings,  a  public  consultation  on  the  Europa  website  (800 
contributions received), a consultation with the forum of EU-27 national ethics councils and 
a  round  table  with  stakeholders  from  academia,  industry,  NGOs,  civil  society,  international 
organisations  and  industry  (2),  on  23  January  2008  the  EGE  delivered  its  opinion  on  the 
ethical aspects of animal cloning for food supply (3) to President Barroso. In its opinion, the 
group stated that animal welfare and health are affected by animal cloning for food supply, in 
particular surrogate dams and the (cid:2) rst generation of clones. The group expressed doubts about 
whether  the  current  situation  as  regards  the  welfare  and  health  of  animal  clones  is  ethically 
justi(cid:2) ed by the existing arguments in support of cloning for food and advocated that, in the 
absence of proper data, this consideration cannot be extended to clones’ offspring. Under these 
conditions, the EGE did not see good enough reasons to endorse production of food from clones 
and their offspring at present. On the other hand, the group did not see any categorical reason to 
propose a ban. The EGE also asked the Commission, amongst other things, to launch a thematic 
Eurobarometer survey on animal cloning for food supply and to promote public discussion on 
this speci(cid:2) c use of animal biotechnology.

On  24  July  2008,  the  EFSA’s  parallel  (cid:2) nal  opinion  was  released.  The  EFSA  acknowledged 
uncertainties in risk assessment because of the limited evidence base and concluded that, in 
relation to food safety, there is no indication that differences exist between meat and milk from 
clones and their progeny and from conventionally bred animals. The EFSA opinion recognises 
that there are signi(cid:2) cant animal health and welfare issues that can be more frequent and severe 
for clones than for conventionally bred animals.  

In  response  to  the  EGE’s  request,  in  July  2008  the  Commission  launched  a  Eurobarometer 
survey on EU consumers’ attitudes to cloning for food production. The results were published 
in October 2008 (4). They found that EU citizens were not willing to accept animal cloning for 
food production purposes: the majority of respondents (58 %) said that such cloning should 
never be justi(cid:2) ed. The main reasons for rejection of cloning by the vast majority of EU citizens 
were: the long-term effects of animal cloning on nature are unknown (84 %); animal cloning 
is morally wrong (61 %); and animal cloning might decrease genetic diversity within livestock 
populations (63 %). According to the Eurobarometer survey, 84 % of EU citizens said that their 
greatest concern was that not enough is known about the potential long-term health and safety 
effects of using cloned animals for food and three quarters agreed that there could be ethical 
grounds for rejecting animal cloning. Almost 4 out of every 10 respondents (38 %) answered 
that none of the potential bene(cid:2) ts suggested to them (health or economic) would justify breeding 
cloned animals for food production. On the other hand, around 60 % answered that cloning 
would be acceptable for speci(cid:2) c purposes (e.g. preservation of rare species or breeds).

(2)  http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/activities/index_en.htm
(3)  http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/activities/docs/opinion23_en.pdf
(4)  http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/(cid:3) ash/(cid:3) _238_en.pdf

4

ph811289Int.indd   4

13/01/09   16:06:44

Following publication of the EGE and EFSA opinions, in February 2008 the Chairman of the 
European Parliament’s Agriculture Committee, supported by several members of the European 
Parliament’s  Intergroup  on  Animal  Welfare,  tabled  a  motion  for  a  resolution  calling  on  the 
European Commission to ban all food from cloned animals in the European Union, along with 
imports of food derived from cloned animals and their offspring. This motion was adopted in 
September 2008, with 622 votes in favour, 32 against and 25 abstentions. 

The Council’s and the Commission’s positions concerning legislation covering cloning are now 
expected by the end of 2008.

3. Conclusion

This  example  shows  that  fundamental  values,  such  as  protection  of  human  health,  animal 
welfare, consumers’ freedom of choice or respect of biodiversity, all factors inextricably linked 
to  ethical  assessment  of  science  and  technology,  have  acquired  a  central  role  in  discussions 
on sensitive policy issues like animal cloning for food purposes. These values per se certainly 
do not provide unequivocal responses to such a complex issue as animal cloning for food and 
global trade in food products, but certainly contribute to responsible positioning of the EU as 
a  political  body  and  as  a  complex  multicultural  democracy.  Fundamental  values,  ethics  and 
societal considerations may therefore be conducive to better policy design in the EU. Adoption 
of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and of the Lisbon Treaty (if the rati(cid:2) cation process is 
successful) will also provide additional tools for promoting the responsible use of science and 
technology in the EU and beyond.

Further information

Maurizio Salvi, PhD 
Head of the EGE Secretariat 
Member of the Bureau of European Policy Advisors (BEPA) 
European Commission 
Rue de la Loi 200 (BERL 8/146)
B-1049 Brussels
E-mail: maurizio.salvi@ec.europa.eu 
EGE website: http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm

5

ph811289Int.indd   5

13/01/09   16:06:44

ph811289Int.indd   6

13/01/09   16:06:44

Contributions from members 
Contributions from members 
of the EGE
of the EGE

ph811289Int.indd   7

13/01/09   16:06:44

ph811289Int.indd   8

13/01/09   16:06:44

Technological innovation in agriculture and 
legal choices (from disparity to diversity)

Francesco Busnelli and Eleonora Sirsi

A short account of the main phenomena occurring in this age and of the traits displayed by this 
primary activity, as it moves from pre-industrial to post-industrial agriculture, could make a 
useful contribution to the legal debate on technological innovation in agriculture; this should 
help shed light on what interests are to be protected and, therefore, help (cid:2) nd the ‘keyword’ that 
now de(cid:2) nes the ‘European model of agriculture’ and which, from the perspective of the Lisbon 
strategy and respecting the principles laid down by the Treaty, might boost the competitiveness 
of agriculture and reconcile all the interests involved in it. 

The scenario: the position of the primary activity within the agro-industrial 
system and globalisation 

The most signi(cid:2) cant contextual elements for any description of the current state of farming are 
the development of the agro-industrial and agri-food systems and globalisation. Both of these 
and the mutual relationship between them have had various impacts, both internal and external, 
on farming, which have given birth to a new need for protection and to unprecedented con(cid:3) icts 
of interest.

The changes that have occurred in food production (and in the conception of food itself) have 
led to agriculture playing the role of supplier of raw materials to the processing industry and 
distribution  sector,  that  directly  ful(cid:2) l  consumers’  needs  in  a  society  which  has  dramatically 
changed, both in lifestyle and in consumption patterns. The expansion and gradual deregulation 
of the markets have resulted in relaxation of protectionist policies and have had a deep impact 
on the ways rules are produced and on the institutional sphere. They have also created friction 
between  worldwide  rules  and  local  needs,  especially  in  agriculture,  which  —  despite  the 
standardisation dictated by industrialisation — is renowned for its highly diverse terrains and 
environments and for the multiple ways of managing agriculture.

The global development of the industrial system is to blame for the prevalence of large-scale 
monocultures,  the  reduction  in  agricultural  biodiversity  and  traditional  knowledge,  and  the 
signi(cid:2) cant impact on the environment and the landscape.

Governance of innovation in agriculture or the importance of a public 
policy to protect interests

Agriculture is dramatically different from other production industries: its dependence on the 
biological cycle of plants and animals, the deep in(cid:3) uence of weather conditions, the perishability 

9

ph811289Int.indd   9

13/01/09   16:06:44

of the produce and the often decisive strong role of the environment and terrain can only partly 
be  solved  by  technological  innovation.  The  established  social  role  of  agriculture  has  also 
undergone  substantial  changes;  from  its  original  role,  as  provider  of  means  of  subsistence, 
agriculture  has  progressively  taken  on  additional  tasks,  including  the  meaning  it  has  always 
had for the community, as the repository of traditions and skills in an urbanised society. These 
speci(cid:2) c traits and roles have led to the establishment of a public policy and speci(cid:2) c rules to 
protect diverse, not always reconcilable, interests: the interest of farmers in autonomy in their 
own activity and in legal recognition of that activity’s speci(cid:2) c nature; the interest of consumers 
in safe food, adequate information and right of choice; and, (cid:2) nally, the interest of European 
citizens in adequate food production, in preservation of the environment and biodiversity, in 
access to information about technology and in participation in policy decisions.

Technological  innovation  in  agriculture  is  at  present  becoming  instrumental  in  the  race  for 
competitiveness that focused (cid:2) rst on process innovation by means of product standardisation 
and  low  prices,  then  on  product  innovation  and  quality.  The  Lisbon  strategy  acknowledged 
the role played by information and communication technology (ICT), which is an opportunity 
for  the  agricultural  world,  in  that  it  can  be  used  to  exchange  knowledge  and  build  a  better 
relationship with the market.

Depending  on  how  it  is  accomplished,  technological  innovation  in  agriculture  is  typically 
exogenous and formal and relies on external knowledge and resources, whereas endogenous 
and informal forms of innovation have been neglected. 

Technological innovation is now also the focus of many governance choices in many respects 
and  in  order  to  protect  various  interests.  The  most  signi(cid:2) cant  questions  which  politics  and 
law are called on to answer are: promotion and fair allocation of the bene(cid:2) ts (of innovation); 
guaranteed process and product safety; and how to take decisions about the technology to be 
introduced to respond to a need for transparent, democratic choices.

Regarding  the  (cid:2) rst  point,  the  reform  of  the  common  agricultural  policy  (CAP),  separating 
subsidies  from  production  and  increasing  the  resources  allocated  to  rural  development 
policies, was designed to bring farmers closer to the market, thus boosting product and process 
innovation. On the other hand, innovative processes in agriculture are different from those in 
other industries, because in agriculture innovations cannot be protected easily, which makes it 
hard to reap the bene(cid:2) ts, and because experimental activities in biology are uncertain due to the 
complexity. For this reason, public action — in the form of funds and technical assistance — 
could be appropriate, if not essential, to make up for the lack of private investment.

Turning to legal protection of plant variety innovation, in addition to plant patents, there is a 
need to pursue protection of traditional knowledge (informal innovation) which, in the words 
of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA), 
constitutes  one  of  the  ‘farmers’  rights’  that  makes  it  possible  to  make  ‘sustainable  use  of 
agricultural genetic resources’ with a view to protecting agricultural biodiversity and for the 
bene(cid:2) t  of  future  generations.  In  this  connection,  experience  with  participation  breeding  and 
tools similar to ‘creative common licences’ might become a benchmark for experimenting with 
new forms of innovation, albeit in restricted contexts. 

Regarding the second aspect — that is, process and product safety — the legal technique of 
ex ante examination is making its entry into the world of agriculture, with the appearance of 

10

ph811289Int.indd   10

13/01/09   16:06:45

environmental and food safety issues, and a large proportion of the EU legislation in this area 
is now warranted by the need to control technological innovation in the light of the hazards it 
involves and of the interests that are to be protected. In particular, a large number of measures 
have been taken that, by affecting the food industry or addressing food safety issues, concern 
agriculture which is the foremost contributor to food production, taking a consistent, integrated 
approach, as laid down by Regulation (EC) No 178/2002.

The  risk  analysis  method  (assessment/management/communication)  required  by  such 
legislation,  which  outlines  the  principles  of  food  legislation  in  order  to  protect  consumers’ 
right to safety and information and to guarantee free movement of food in the internal market, 
is the latest response to the need for safety. Nevertheless, it may turn out to be inadequate for 
the  agricultural  industry.  Each  component  —  assessment,  management  and  communication 
—  and  all  three  together  should  be  given  a  consistent  meaning  in  connection  with  the  new 
idea of ‘rational development’ that has dawned in the wake of Article 33 of the Treaty. The 
possibility that it could be made to coincide merely with increased production, lower costs and 
higher pro(cid:2) ts would certainly turn out to be an anti-historical interpretation, but it would also 
be inadequate to close the assessment and management process in the rule/exception relation 
set out by Articles 28 and 30 of the Treaty, under which the Member States can play a part in 
protecting the fundamental interests of their own citizens. In the case of agriculture, dwelling 
on  the  traditional  juxtaposition  between  protection  of  free  trade  in  goods  and  protection  of 
non-commercial interests, such as health, the environment and information, does not seem to 
be enough, because this would fail to take into account the speci(cid:2) c weaknesses of agriculture 
(biological  and  climatic  hazards),  its  economic  situation  and  varied  business  reality,  along 
with the multiple roles that this activity plays and that have been acknowledged by the rural 
development policy and by adoption of the idea of multifunctional agriculture.

In addition, the concern for food safety, as highlighted by the best European doctrine (Jannarelli), 
would blur the systematic removal of economic protection of a class of farmers whose protection 
would vie with consumer protection.

The third aspect concerns the levels and ways to take decisions on technology. The levels are 
related to a tendency to renationalise policies: the coexistence of transgenic and non-transgenic 
crops has shown that European countries have different sensitivities to technology applied to 
agriculture and has proved that there are several approaches to European agriculture. Turning 
to  the  ways,  as  has  been  shown  by  the  debates  on  the  most  controversial  technologies  such 
as  nuclear  energy  and  transgenic  technology,  the  need  to  involve  citizens  in  technological 
choices is related, as everyone knows, to the awareness that science is not neutral and that the 
choices concerning it have political value and to the increasingly obvious connection between 
technology and economic power.

Final considerations

The  debates  on  GMOs  might  make  a  signi(cid:2) cant  contribution  to  this  issue,  as  they  seem 
paradigmatic of the approaches to be taken into consideration. Development and application 
of GMO technology raised, among others, the problems of protecting farmers against the seed 
industry, of consumers’ rights to safety and of protection of information. 

11

ph811289Int.indd   11

13/01/09   16:06:45

The  debate  on  coexistence,  or  rather  the  issue  of  various  technologies  in  agriculture,  is 
particularly signi(cid:2) cant, both because of the classic disagreement on the decision level in the EU 
and because coexistence raises once again a topic inherent in agriculture, from the (cid:2) rst treaty 
to  enlargement  today:  a  topic  which  implies  food  quality  policy  linked  to  terrains  and  rural 
development policy, that is, diversity in agriculture as opposed to market homogeneity. 

One example is the tendency, also seen within the European institutions, to draw a distinction 
between marketing of products and growing of crops. Signi(cid:2) cantly, although unusually, the latest 
decision taken in this sphere by the European Commission (Decision 2008/495/EC), in which 
it adopted a position on maintaining the ban on selling and growing MON 810 maize which 
had been imposed under the safeguard clause, seems to have accepted the idea of separating 
the selling of products from the growing of transgenic crops, thereby somehow acknowledging 
the requests made for some time by some European countries for independence when taking 
decisions that affect their land and agriculture. Whether this decision may represent a different 
way  of  understanding  ‘coexistence’  (i.e.  the  Community  as  one  single  agricultural  space  in 
which different ways of doing agriculture may (cid:2) nd their place) remains to be seen. The idea 
that ‘diversity’ may become a trait of the ‘European model’, the point of arrival for a European 
policy  for  agriculture  that  was  originally  characterised  by  ‘disparity’,  is  a  proposition  that 
politics might well be advised to consider. 

Further information

Francesco Busnelli (EGE) 
Eleonora Sirsi, Associate Professor at the Department of Civil Law
University U. Natoli Pisa, Italy
Website: http://unimap.unipi.it/organizzazione/ente.php?d=300013@DIP 

12

ph811289Int.indd   12

13/01/09   16:06:45

EU national and regional 
EU national and regional 
ethics committees
ethics committees

ph811289Int.indd   13

13/01/09   16:06:45

ph811289Int.indd   14

13/01/09   16:06:45

The Belgian Advisory Committee 
on Bioethics

Belgium

The Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics is organising a study day for the general public 
in Brussels on Wednesday 25 March 2009.

This study day will be devoted to the increasingly sensitive problem of ‘the computerisation of 
medical data’.

After  a  morning  of  talks  by  four  national  and  international  experts  and  exchanges  between 
these experts and the public, four sub-topics will be presented and discussed in the afternoon 
by students concerned by this issue (students in the medical, legal, IT, sociology and political 
science sectors). 

For registration and information, see: www.health.fgov.be/bioeth

The two latest opinions by the Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics are: 

• 

• 

Opinion No 43 of 10 December 2007 concerning the problem of whether or not human body 
parts should be commercialised;

Opinion  No  44  of  23  June  2008  concerning  the  inhibition  of  growth  of  very  severely 
mentally handicapped children.

These opinions are available on the Internet site in both French and Dutch.

Further information

Monique Bosson
Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics
Rue de l’autonomie 4
B-1070 Brussels
Website: www.health.fgov.be/bioeth

15

ph811289Int.indd   15

13/01/09   16:06:45

ph811289Int.indd   16

13/01/09   16:06:45

The Cyprus National Bioethics Committee

Cyprus

The Committee

The  Cyprus  National  Bioethics  Committee  (CNBC)  was  established  in  2001  by  Law 
No  150(I)/2001.  Its  mandate  is  to  constantly  monitor,  survey,  systematically  analyse  and 
evaluate issues and problems associated with scienti(cid:2) c research, advances in and applications of 
biotechnology, biology, medicine, genetics and pharmaceutics, along with human intervention 
in biological processes and the human genotype, and to investigate their moral, deontological, 
social, humanistic and legal dimensions.

The CNBC is an independent body, not subject to administrative supervision by any ministry, 
agency, department or service and has the powers conferred on it by the current law and any 
future legislation.

The  CNBC  has  13  members,  including  the  chairperson.  The  members  represent  different 
professions and disciplines and are appointed by the Council of Ministers of the Republic of 
Cyprus for a four-year term. The law stipulates that at least four members must come from the 
humanities and social sciences, four from medical and biological sciences, and four members 
must be from any other science or profession or be distinguished for their contribution in any 
area of activity.

The  CNBC  adopted,  with  very  few  changes,  the  World  Health  Organisation’s  ‘Operational 
guidelines for ethics committees that review biomedical research’ as the basis of the guidelines 
for  ethics  committees  reviewing  biomedical  research  involving  human  subjects  in  Cyprus, 
which were enacted on 31 March 2005 (K.(cid:4).Π. 175/2005).

In accordance with these operational guidelines and with the authority conferred on it by Law 
No 150(I)/2001, the Committee set up three bioethics review committees to review protocols 
relating to:

• 
• 
• 

biomedical research on human beings and their biological substances; 
clinical trials on medicinal products for human use; 
medical devices applied to human beings.

The role of the bioethics review committees is to:

• 

• 

contribute to safeguarding the dignity, rights, safety and well-being of all actual or potential 
research participants;
provide  independent,  competent  and  timely  review  of  the  ethical  aspects  of  proposed 
studies;

17

ph811289Int.indd   17

13/01/09   16:06:45

• 

review research proposals before the research begins.

The  CNBC  monitors,  directs,  coordinates  and  reviews  the  work  performed  by  the  bioethics 
review committees, whose members are appointed for a period of two years.

Recent opinions

Genetically modi(cid:2) ed organisms

• 
The ethical implications of adopting GMOs were considered by the CNBC in an opinion issued 
on 3 April 2008.

This examines the potential (bene(cid:2) cial and harmful) effects of GMOs on consumer health, the 
environment and society.

The main conclusions drawn by the CNBC in this opinion are as follows.

(i) 

  Continuous safety/risk assessment is needed, as GMOs are directly linked to technology 
which is continuously evolving. This assessment could potentially minimise the risks of 
new harmful effects on consumer health, the environment and farmers.

(ii) 

  Ethical  considerations  demand  that  new  applications  of  GMO  technology  must  be 

introduced gradually and cautiously.

(iii) 

It is very important for the public to be informed about GMOs in a timely and accurate 
manner.

(iv) 

Consumers’ right of freedom of choice has to be respected and safeguarded. 

Palliative care

• 
Drawing on the knowledge obtained from the conference held on 12 January 2008, the CNBC 
issued an opinion on the subject of palliative care on 1 July 2008.

This opinion concentrates on the patient’s medical, (cid:2) nancial, social and psychological needs 
and religious beliefs. 

The CNBC believes that the higher the level of palliative care available to terminally ill and 
dying patients, the better the quality of their lives and, thus, the less any wish to terminate their 
lives.

Current work and forthcoming opinions

• 

Biobanks

Previous opinions

• 

• 
• 

Opinion  on  predictive  health  information  in  the  conclusion  of  health  and  life  insurance 
contracts
Opinion on prenuptial testing for thalassaemia before a civil wedding
Opinion on human organ donor registries

18

ph811289Int.indd   18

13/01/09   16:06:45

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Opinion on transplantation of biological substances of human origin
Opinion on PGD and sex selection of in-vitro procreated embryos
Opinion on use of pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD)
Opinion on cord blood banking
Opinion on medically assisted human procreation

Further information

Rena Vrahimi-Petridou
President
Cyprus National Bioethics Committee 
1 Apelli Street
1403 Nicosia
Cyprus
Website: www.bioethics.gov.cy 

19

ph811289Int.indd   19

13/01/09   16:06:45

ph811289Int.indd   20

13/01/09   16:06:46

The Danish Council of Ethics

Denmark

Involving young people in the ethical debate

Ulla Hybel, LLM, PhD, project leader with the Secretariat of the Danish Council of Ethics

The rapid progress in biotechnology has, in particular, led to an increasing need to address ethical 
dilemmas.  The  bioethical  debate  has  been  well  integrated  into  Danish  society.  But  the  next 
generation must be especially prepared to participate in public debates on ethical dilemmas.

The Danish Council of Ethics is taking various approaches to introduce young people to the 
bioethical debate — and to engage them to participate in it, by meeting young people eye to 
eye.

One approach the Danish Council has been working with in recent years, focusing on young 
people, is website-based information about new biotechnologies. For material targeted at 12- to 
14-year olds, click on www.etikoglivet.dk (in Danish) and for material aimed at 15- to 19-year 
olds,  click  on  www.etikoglivetsbyggeklodser.dk  (in  Danish).  In  2001,  the  Council  of  Ethics 
launched the Ethical Forum for Young People, an event which has taken place every second 
year with great success.

The Ethical Forum for Young People

The forum is a teaching and democracy project organised by the Danish Council of Ethics. The 
aim is to improve young people’s knowledge and awareness of bioethical topics and to coach 
them in the art of discussing fundamental values in a democratic manner. The Ethical Forum for 
Young People therefore has both an educational and a democratic purpose. It consists of three 
main components, as follows.

Teaching material — addressing ethical dilemmas

• 
The  (cid:2) rst  component  is  a  free  booklet  for  teaching  the  (cid:2) nal  year  of  lower  secondary  school. 
The booklet (teaching material) prepared by the Council of Ethics contains factual information 
about a speci(cid:2) c bioethical topic plus imaginative case-studies and suggestions for exercises and 
essays. 

As  mentioned  above,  the  Ethical  Forum  takes  place  every  second  year,  with  a  new  topic 
each time. In 2001, the topic was cloning of human beings. In 2003, the forum discussed the 
biotechnological  transformation  of  people.  In  2005,  the  theme  was  stem  cells  and  ethics;  in 
2007, euthanasia. 

21

ph811289Int.indd   21

13/01/09   16:06:46

The next forum, in early 2009, will focus on ethical problems raised by physical interventions 
which serve no medical purpose.

The booklet, entitled ‘Branded for life’ (Mærker for livet), will focus on three types of physical 
intervention: tattooing, piercing and circumcision of boys.

A key question is who should decide: should it be up to the youngsters themselves or should 
society take care of young people’s health? And how much control should parents exercise over 
their children’s marks for life?

Chapter 1 of the booklet contains a portrait interview of a young girl, who has several piercings. 
Chapter 2 reports on a circumcision of a newborn boy for religious reasons. Chapter 3 gives 
(cid:2) ctitious examples, which highlight the ethical dilemmas.

Each case is accompanied by related tasks. At the back of the booklet there is a mini-glossary 
of de(cid:2) nitions of concepts that are central to the discussion of physical intervention: integrity, 
self-determination, parental responsibility and parental authority.

Ethical Forum for Young People — wrestling with arguments

• 
The booklet can be ordered from the website of the Danish Council of Ethics and the material 
will be sent to the teacher. Once classes have worked through the material, they are encouraged 
to  nominate  one  classmate  to  participate  in  the  Ethical  Forum  for  Young  People.  From  the 
nominees,  the  Council  of  Ethics  will  select  17  pupils,  to  match  the  number  of  members  on 
the  Council.  These  17  young  people  will  meet  for  two  days  to  discuss  the  ethical  questions 
connected  with  the  theme.  Members  of  the  Council  of  Ethics  will  act  as  moderators  of  the 
discussions.

Statement from the Ethical Forum for Young People — shaping public opinion

• 
The  young  people  will  close  their  two-day  meeting  with  a  declaration  about  the  theme  in 
question. This declaration will then be printed and sent to all schools, to the Danish Parliament 
and to the media. It can also be read on the Council of Ethics website. 

The material has been well received and is a success. The booklet has been ordered by about 
40  %  of  classes  in  the  target  groups.  In  2009,  the  material  will  be  published  in  cooperation 
with the National Council for Children, which is a State body working for children’s rights to 
protection, in(cid:3) uence and care.

The Danish Parliament has taken action on the ethical and legal issues surrounding piercing of 
children and young people after the debate raised by the two Councils.

Further information

Thomas Laursen, MA, project leader 
or Ulla Hybel, LLM, PhD, project leader
The Danish Council of Ethics
Ravnsborggade 2–4, 4th (cid:3) oor
DK-2200 Copenhagen N 
E-mail: thomas.laursen@etiskraad.dk or ulla.hybel@etiskraad.dk
Website: www.etiskraad.dk 

22

ph811289Int.indd   22

13/01/09   16:06:46

The National Consultative Ethics Committee 
for Health and Life Sciences

France

Legal basis and mandate

The  National  Consultative  Ethics  Committee  for  Health  and  Life  Sciences  (CCNE)  was 
established by presidential decree on 23 February 1983 as an independent authority linked to 
the ministries of research and health. Set up according to the law of 29 July 1994, the CCNE 
now operates within the framework of the law of 6 August 2004.

Taking an ethical view of health and life sciences

The  CCNE’s  mission  is  to  ‘provide  opinions  on  the  ethical  problems  and  societal  questions 
raised by progress in the (cid:2) elds of biology, medicine and health, and to publish recommendations 
on these issues’ (5).

The CCNE at work

Decree No 2005-390 of 28 April 2005 established the Committee’s composition, organisation 
and operation, and speci(cid:2) ed how it can be tasked.

A purely consultative body, the CCNE receives requests submitted by presidents of parliamentary 
assemblies,  government  representatives,  higher  learning  establishments,  public  institutions 
and of(cid:2) cially recognised foundations working in research, technological development or the 
promotion and protection of health. The Committee may also address various issues raised by 
people other than those listed above.

The CCNE’s highest decision-making authority is the plenary committee, composed of all its 
members.

Cases  are  investigated  by  the  technical  section,  which  includes  12  members  chosen  by  the 
Committee  on  the  basis  of  nominations  by  the  CCNE  president.  Each  issue  is  handled  by  a 
working group made up of Committee members, who may request help from outside experts 
in  order  to  shed  new  light  on  a  subject.  The  technical  section  then  examines  the  case  and 
presents  it  to  the  plenary  committee.  Meetings  of  the  plenary  committee  and  the  technical 
session are closed to the public. After the case is examined, a (cid:2) nal report is published, including 
recommendations or opinions. 

(5)  Article 1412 of Law No 2004-800 of 6 August 2004.

23

ph811289Int.indd   23

13/01/09   16:06:46

Law No 2004-800 of 6 August 2004 lays down the Committee’s composition:

• 

• 

• 

• 

The CCNE president and two honorary presidents are designated by the President of the 
French Republic.
Five  key  (cid:2) gures  from  the  main  philosophies  and  religious  faiths  are  appointed  by  the 
President of the French Republic.
Nineteen members are chosen for their expertise and interest in ethical issues: 15 of them 
are designated by various ministers concerned with biology and health issues, the remaining 
four are named respectively by the presidents of France’s two parliamentary houses, the 
vice-president of the Conseil d’État (France’s highest administrative court) and the president 
of the Cour de Cassation (supreme court of appeal).
Fifteen representatives from the research sector are designated by their peers.

Composition of the Committee

President: Alain Grimfeld

Vice-President: Pierre Le Coz

Honorary Presidents: Didier Sicard, Jean-Pierre Changeux

Members:

Olivier Abel, Annick Alpérovitch, Jean-Claude Ameisen, Ali Benmakhlouf, Marie-Germaine 
Bousser,  Claude  Burlet,  André  Comte-Sponville,  Alain  Cordier,  Pascale  Cossart,  Bernard 
Debré, Chantal Deschamps, Anne-Marie Dickele, Frédérique Dreifuss-Netter, Georges Fauré, 
Alain  Fischer,  Patrick  Gaudray,  Françoise  Héritier,  Marie-Thérèse  Hermange,  Pierre  Joliot, 
Bernard Kanovitch, Haïm Korsia, Blandine Kriegel, Xavier Lacroix, Chantal Lebatard, Claire 
Legras, Pierre Le Neindre, Martine Loizeau, Jacqueline Mandelbaum, Lucien Neuwirth, Roger 
Pol  Droit,  Christian  de  Rouf(cid:2) gnac,  Philippe  Rouvillois,  Michel  Roux,  Maxime  Séligmann, 
Alain-Gérard Slama, Dominique Stoppa-Lyonnet, Claude Sureau, Philippe Waquet.

The National Consultative Ethics Committee on the international scene

The seventh Global Summit of National Bioethics Advisory Bodies took place in Paris on 1 and 
2 September 2008. The CCNE was responsible for the local organisation of this meeting which 
brought together 52 delegates and observers from 35 countries: Armenia, Australia, Austria, 
Azerbaijan, Belgium, Benin, Burkina Faso, Canada, China, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Ecuador, 
Estonia,  Finland,  France,  Gabon,  Germany,  Greece,  Iceland,  Japan,  Luxembourg,  Morocco, 
Mexico, the Netherlands, Portugal, Russia, Senegal, Singapore, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, 
Ukraine, the United Kingdom and the United States.

The 10th European Conference of National Ethics Committees (Cometh), held in Paris on 27 and 
28 November 2008, was organised by the CCNE in partnership with the Council of Europe and 
the European Commission.

Current work

• 

Re-examination of the laws on bioethics (29 July 1994 and 6 August 2004)

24

ph811289Int.indd   24

13/01/09   16:06:46

Recent publications

• 

• 

Opinion  No  103:  Ethics  and  childhood  deafness:  consideration  of  information  regarding 
systematic neonatal screening and the medical management of deaf children
Opinion No 104: The ‘personal medical record’ and computerisation of health-related data

Further information

Mrs Marie-Hélène Mouneyrat
Secretary-General
The National Consultative Committee for Health and Life Sciences
7, rue Saint-Georges
F-75009 Paris
Website: www.ccne-ethique.fr 

25

ph811289Int.indd   25

13/01/09   16:06:46

ph811289Int.indd   26

13/01/09   16:06:46

The German Ethics Council

Germany

The German Ethics Council starts its work

The German Ethics Council was inaugurated on 11 April 2008. Under the direction of Professor 
Norbert  Lammert,  President  of  the  German  Bundestag,  Professor  Edzard  Schmidt-Jortzig, 
University of Kiel, was elected chairman. Dr Christiane Woopen, lecturer at the University of 
Cologne, and Professor Eberhard Schockenhoff, University of Freiburg, are deputy chairs. 

The German Ethics Council is continuing the work of the National Ethics Council, which met for 
the last time on 11 September 2007. Under the Ethics Council Act of 16 July 2007, the German 
Ethics  Council  is  responsible  for  monitoring  questions  relating  to  ethics,  society,  science, 
medicine and law and the probable consequences for the individual and society stemming from 
research and development, in particular application of life sciences to humanity.

Its duties include but are not limited to: 

• 

• 
• 

informing  the  public  and  encouraging  discussion  in  society,  engaging  the  various  social 
groups; 
preparing opinions and recommendations for political and legislative action; 
cooperating with national ethics councils and comparable institutions of other States and 
international organisations. 

Every year, the German Ethics Council will hold at least one public event on questions concerning 
ethics, in particular in the (cid:2) eld of life sciences. In addition, it may hold further public events, 
hearings and public sessions. 

The  German  Ethics  Council  will  draft  opinions  as  it  sees  (cid:2) t.  The  Bundestag  or  the  federal 
government can also request statements on speci(cid:2) c issues from the German Ethics Council. At 
the end of each calendar year, the German Ethics Council will report in writing to the Bundestag 
and the federal government on its activities and the current state of the social debate. 

The German Ethics Council works independently and is bound only by the mandate given to 
it by the Ethics Council Act. Its members are required to exercise their of(cid:2) ce in person and 
independently. The deliberations of the German Ethics Council are usually public, but it may 
also meet in closed session and publish the results. 

The  German  Ethics  Council  is  made  up  of  26  members,  specialising  in  scienti(cid:2) c,  medical, 
theological, ethical, social, economic and legal matters. Its members include academics from 
these  disciplines,  along  with  persons  of  repute  who  are  particularly  familiar  with  ethical 
questions raised by life sciences. The German Ethics Council brings together representatives 

27

ph811289Int.indd   27

13/01/09   16:06:46

of  a  variety  of  ethical  approaches  and  a  pluralist  spectrum  of  opinion.  The  members  of  the 
German Ethics Council are appointed by the President of the Bundestag, half on a proposal 
from the Bundestag and half on a proposal from the federal government. They serve for a four-
year term, after which they may be reappointed once. The Council members may not belong to 
a legislative body of the federal republic or of a Land nor to the federal government or a Land 
government. 

The  costs  of  the  German  Ethics  Council  and  its  administrative  of(cid:2) ce  are  borne  by  the 
federation. 

At its meeting on 29 May 2008, the German Ethics Council discussed its work programme. The 
(cid:2) rst topics to be looked at by the Council will be: 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

anonymous birth/baby boxes;
research on genetic chimeras;
public health nutrition;
nursing services for old and disabled persons;
resource allocation in public health;
cosmetic surgery on minors;
practice of assisted reproduction in Germany;
pharmacogenomics;
neurosciences/neuroethics;
prohibition of commercial/organised assisted suicide in Germany. 

The theme for the (cid:2) rst public event in 2009 will be neurosciences.

Further information

Dr Joachim Vetter, Head of Of(cid:2) ce
or Ulrike Florian, Press and Public Relations Of(cid:2) cer
German Ethics Council
Jaegerstrasse 22/23
D-10117 Berlin
Website: www.ethikrat.org

28

ph811289Int.indd   28

13/01/09   16:06:46

The Hellenic National Bioethics Commission

Greece

Current leadership: Professor George Maniatis is acting Chairman.

Most recently issued opinion

This was the opinion on research ethics in biological sciences in June 2008. In this opinion, 
the  Bioethics  Commission  visited  a  subject  widely  debated  by  scientists  and  by  the  general 
public alike. Several cases of misconduct in science have been uncovered in the recent past. 
One of the root causes of the problem seems to be the way science is organised and conducted 
in large institutions and the dependence of research on external sponsors. In biological sciences 
in particular, improper conduct is more likely to produce an adverse impact on society, public 
health  and  the  environment.  In  this  opinion,  the  Bioethics  Commission  analyses  the  issues 
raised by ethics in biological sciences, recognising the need for freedom of research but also 
that  society  supports  science  and  expects  to  bene(cid:2) t  from  it.  Freedom  of  research  should  be 
protected but, at the same time, research should be self-regulated by ethics codes produced by 
the scienti(cid:2) c community. To this end, the Bioethics Commission took on the task of providing 
research institutions with guidelines for formulating their own ethics codes.

The English translation of the opinion is expected to be completed in October 2008.

The full text (in PDF format) of all opinions and reports issued by the Bioethics Commission, 
in English, can be found at: http://www.bioethics.gr/category.php?category_id=55 or requested 
from the secretariat at: secretariat@bioethics.gr

Current work

To follow up the opinion on research ethics in biological sciences, the Bioethics Commission has 
just completed guidelines for the production of ethics codes by individual research institutions. It 
is currently discussing the issue of environmental ethics. An opinion on this subject is expected 
to be published in January 2009. 

Seminars

The Bioethics Commission organised two seminars on ‘research ethics in FP7’ for researchers, 
one in February 2008 in Thessaloniki, the other in April 2008 in Athens. The seminars aimed 
at informing the scienti(cid:2) c community about research in the EU and about the Greek regulations 
regarding  research  ethics,  and  at  assisting  with  submission  of  research  proposals  under  the 
seventh framework programme (FP7). Beyond that, the discussions during these meetings gave 

29

ph811289Int.indd   29

13/01/09   16:06:47

the Bioethics Commission an opportunity to add to its understanding of the problems faced by 
the research community and to exchange views with the participants on various research ethics 
issues. 

Presentations 

Members  of  the  Bioethics  Commission  and  the  two  senior  scientists  regularly  participate  in 
meetings and workshops held in Athens and other cities in Greece, as speakers or experts, when 
bioethical issues are discussed. 

They also participated in the following international meetings between April and September 
2008.

Date

Conference/meeting

Title

Participant

16 June 2008

EGE round table debate, 
Brussels

19–21 June 2008

ESF exploratory 
workshop, European 
Science Foundation, 
University of Zurich

1 and 2 September 
2008

Seventh Global Summit 
of National Ethics 
Committees, Paris

Dr Ariadne 
Hager-
Theodorides, 
senior scientist 
of the Bioethics 
Commission

Dr Takis Vidalis, 
senior scientist 
of the Bioethics 
Commission

Professor 
George Maniatis, 
acting Chairman

Opinion on 
‘Ethical aspects 
of modern 
developments 
in agriculture 
technologies’ 

‘Advanced 
directives: towards 
a coordinated 
European 
perspective?’

• 

• 

• 

Respect for the 
person
Personal 
autonomy
Ethics 
committees and 
public debate

Further information

Mrs Marianna Dracopoulou
Head of Secretariat
Hellenic National Bioethics Commission
47 Evelpidon St.
GR-113 62 Athens
Website: www.bioethics.gr 

30

ph811289Int.indd   30

13/01/09   16:06:47

The Nuffi  eld Council on Bioethics

United Kingdom

Introduction

The  Nuf(cid:2) eld  Council  on  Bioethics  was  established  by  the  Nuf(cid:2) eld  Foundation  in  1991  to 
identify, examine and report on the ethical questions raised by recent advances in biological 
and medical research. Since 1994, it has been funded jointly by the Nuf(cid:2) eld Foundation, the 
Medical Research Council and the Wellcome Trust. The Council’s role is to respond to public 
concern  about  aspects  of  biomedicine  and  biotechnology,  to  provide  independent  advice  to 
policymakers and to stimulate debate in bioethics.

New working party on personalised healthcare

The Council has set up a new working party which will consider the ethical issues raised by 
new technologies that are making diagnostic and therapeutic healthcare services increasingly 
personalised. Such technologies include whole body scans, mapping the genome of individual 
patients, and ‘telehealthcare’ — the delivery of healthcare services over a distance. 

The working party is chaired by Christopher Hood, Professor of Government at the University 
of Oxford and Director of the Economic and Social Research Council’s public services research 
programme.  The  working  party  includes  members  with  expertise  in  medicine,  science,  law, 
philosophy  and  sociology.  The  group  will  hold  evidence-gathering  sessions  and  a  public 
consultation in spring 2009 to draw together wider views on the issues raised. A report with 
recommendations for policy and practice will be published in early 2010.

Consultation on dementia

The Council had a good response to its consultation on the ethical issues raised by dementia, 
with 200 people and organisations sending in evidence and views on the consultation questions. 
Respondents considered issues such as whether people with dementia should ever be restrained 
and how decisions about treatment and care should be made. In addition, 50 members of the 
public deliberated the issues at a workshop hosted by the Council in Birmingham in August. 
Drawing together the outcomes of the consultation process, the working party is now beginning 
to formulate recommendations for policy and practice. A report setting out the group’s (cid:2) ndings 
will be published in autumn 2009.

31

ph811289Int.indd   31

13/01/09   16:06:47

Consultation responses

The  Council  has  recently  submitted  the  following  responses  to  the  consultations  of  other 
organisations:

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 

the World Medical Association’s consultation on the Declaration of Helsinki;
the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies’ round table on ethical 
aspects of modern developments in agricultural technologies;
the Department of Health’s consultation on the future of tobacco control;
the Scottish government’s consultation on alcohol misuse;
the  Royal  Society’s  call  for  evidence  on  biological  approaches  to  enhance  food-crop 
production.

All  Council  policy  responses  can  be  downloaded  at:  www.nuf(cid:2) eldbioethics.org/go/aboutus/
externalactivitiespage_192.html

Further information

Hugh Whittall
Director, Nuf(cid:2) eld Council on Bioethics
28 Bedford Square
London WC1B 3JS
United Kingdom
E-mail: bioethics@nuf(cid:2) eldbioethics.org
Website: www. nuf(cid:2) eldbioethics.org

32

ph811289Int.indd   32

13/01/09   16:06:47

Non-EU national and regional 
Non-EU national and regional 
ethics committees
ethics committees

ph811289Int.indd   33

13/01/09   16:06:47

ph811289Int.indd   34

13/01/09   16:06:47

The National Committee on Ethics 
in Science and Technology of Argentina

Legal basis

The  National  Committee  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  Technology  of  Argentina  (CECTE)  was 
established by the Ministry of Education in 2001 and is currently under the recently founded 
Ministry of Science, Technology and Productive Innovation (MinCyT).

The members of the Committee are appointed by the MinCyT after consultations with scienti(cid:2) c 
societies  and  are  selected  on  the  basis  of  their  high  academic  and  personal  quali(cid:2) cations  in 
different areas of natural, exact and social sciences, humanities and law.

Introduction

Argentina has a very active, if relatively small, scienti(cid:2) c community that has produced three 
Nobel  Prize  winners.  In  the  second  half  of  the  20th  century,  the  country  suffered  from  a 
continuous drain of young researchers, triggered by political crises, military intervention and 
chronic economic dif(cid:2) culties. Nevertheless, Argentine research has managed to maintain high 
standards in some areas and close ties with international science. This aspect is gaining strength 
fast, as the scienti(cid:2) c situation has changed for the better in recent years.

In this context, CECTE has evolved into an independent multidisciplinary body that studies 
controversial  issues  related  to  research  ethics  and  the  ethical  implications  of  policies  and 
regulations involving all areas of scienti(cid:2) c research and new technologies. It identi(cid:2) es ethical 
questions raised by advances in science and technology and addresses topics connected with 
scienti(cid:2) c responsibility for broader social concerns.

How CECTE works

CECTE  drafts  recommendations  and  reports  based  on  critical  transdisciplinary  analysis  of 
the best available evidence and in the light of relevant ethical principles. For each case, the 
Committee appoints experts from different disciplines to produce discussion papers on the state 
of the art of the issues under study.

The Committee has been promoting cooperation with Brazil on research ethics and, since 2006, 
has  organised  four  bilateral  conferences  in  Argentina  and  participated  in  one  organised  by 
Brazil on questions of mutual interest.

Since 2002, it has received requests for studies and recommendations from different government 
bodies, from public and private institutions and from individuals.

35

ph811289Int.indd   35

13/01/09   16:06:47

The  Committee  signed  an  agreement  with  the  Science  and  Technology  Commission  of  the 
Argentine  Parliament  to  study  and  draft  non-binding  recommendations  on  bills  involving 
controversial ethical issues relating to science, technology and their impact on society and the 
environment. Accordingly, CECTE analysed bills on biosafety of GMOs in agriculture (2002), 
promotion of biotechnological industries (2003), assisted reproduction techniques (2003) and 
con(cid:2) dentiality of genetic data. On this last subject, CECTE also produced a report on the ethical 
and legal issues raised by the Unesco resolution on genetic privacy and non-discrimination for 
the National Institute against Racism, Discrimination and Xenophobia and other government 
agencies.

The Committee has produced studies and recommendations for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
In particular, CECTE produced two reports, one on human cloning (2004), the other on codes 
of conduct for scientists and institutions in the context of the convention on the prohibition of 
the development, production and stockpiling of bacteriological (biological) and toxin weapons 
and  on  their  destruction  (2005),  plus  reports  on  statements  and  declarations  proposed  by 
international organisations such as Unesco.

At  the  request  of  the  former  Secretary  of  Science,  Technology  and  Productive  Innovation, 
CECTE drafted several reports, including one on research conducted in national public scienti(cid:2) c 
institutions when (cid:2) nancing by foreign armed forces’ institutions is involved (2005).

CECTE made recommendations about integrity in scienti(cid:2) c community relations (2003) and 
partnership  of  scienti(cid:2) c  and  technological  institutions  and  other  organisations  for  granting 
awards (2004).

Research integrity

In 2005, the Committee began to work on cases relating to research integrity and misconduct, 
in  response  to  allegations  of  plagiarism  made  by  individual  researchers  and  a  request  from 
the national funding agency to study ways of avoiding con(cid:3) icts of interest. In this regard, the 
Committee recommended regulatory and organisational changes in the institutions concerned to 
prevent future cases and create the right conditions for investigating allegations of misconduct 
in research.

In 2009, CECTE will be organising a Latin American research integrity network.

Latest work

CECTE has analysed the expansion of the breadth, scope and term of intellectual property law 
over the last 30 years and the ethical and legal concerns which this raises about access to the 
bene(cid:2) ts of science and technology. This process affects the necessary balance between private 
and  public  interests  in  areas  crucial  for  cultural,  economic  and  social  development  and  has 
serious implications for the healthcare of vulnerable sectors in developing countries. After a two-
year study and two workshops, CECTE approved the (cid:2) nal report containing recommendations 
supporting access to scienti(cid:2) c knowledge in the public domain (2008).

CECTE  is  drafting  recommendations  on  the  ethics  of  research  involving  animals,  including 
guidelines and regulations on production and care of animals. It has commissioned a discussion 

36

ph811289Int.indd   36

13/01/09   16:06:47

paper on existing international regulations on the use and care of animals for scienti(cid:2) c research. 
It organised two small meetings and sponsored participation by Argentine experts in a conference 
held in Campinas (Brazil) to discuss the new Brazilian act on the use and care of animals for 
research, adopted in September 2008.

CECTE  organised  a  conference  on  the  code  of  conduct  for  responsible  nanoscience  and 
nanotechnology (N & N) research approved by the European Commission in February 2008. 
The conference was inaugurated by the Minister for Science and Technology and co-organised 
by the Argentine Foundation for Nanotechnology, the Argentine-Brazilian Centre of N & N, 
the Argentine-Brazilian programme of ethics in science and technology and the International 
Relations Division of the Ministry of Science and Technology. Pēteris Zilgalvis, Head of the 
Ethics and Governance Unit of the European Commission’s Directorate-General for Research, 
presented the code of conduct for responsible nanoscience and nanotechnology research and 
gave details of the action envisaged to implement it.

During the conference, representatives from academia, industry and government organisations 
had a very stimulating discussion about the possibility and expedience of adopting a similar 
code in the region. They agreed on the need for a code of conduct. CECTE is now in charge 
of conducting a survey among stakeholders to collect a wide range of views on the issues of 
concern, to produce recommendations about implementation of the code and risk assessment 
and to incorporate the principles of the code of conduct into scienti(cid:2) c and industrial practice.

In  December  2007,  CECTE  organised  a  workshop  on  neurosciences  and  society  to  analyse 
a  discussion  paper  on  the  molecular  bases  of  memory  formation,  retrieval,  persistence  and 
extinction written by three leading scientists in the (cid:2) eld. During the meeting, the committee 
concluded that the issue is linked to new developments in medicine and biology, in humanities 
and in cognitive and social sciences and raises signi(cid:2) cant and complex ethical questions and 
concerns that have far-reaching implications for society and the social responsibility of science 
and research policy.

The  Committee’s  work  programme  on  neuroethics  includes  an  international  conference  and 
drafting of a report in 2009.

Current members

Samuel Finkielman, MD, former Director of the Institute for Clinical Investigation, University 
of Buenos Aires (UBA), working on clinical research.

Stella González Cappa, PhD in medicine, full professor, working on immunoparasitology and 
microbiology research in the School of Medicine (UBA).

Alberto Kornblihtt, PhD in biochemistry, full professor and an international research scholar 
with  the  Howard  Hughes  Medical  Institute,  working  on  molecular  biology  in  the  School  of 
Sciences  (UBA).  His  project  is  studying  mechanisms  of  coupling  between  transcription  and 
alternative mRNA splicing in human cells.

Karen  Hallberg,  PhD  in  physics,  researcher  at  the  Atomic  Centre  Bariloche  and  Balseiro 
Institute, member of the Pugwash Conferences for Sciences.

37

ph811289Int.indd   37

13/01/09   16:06:47

Ivan  Izquierdo,  PhD  in  medicine,  Director  of  the  Memory  Research  Centre,  Pontifícia 
Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, member of the National Academies of 
Sciences of Argentina, Brazil, the USA and EU countries, working on the molecular mechanisms 
of formation, evocation, persistence and extinction of memory.

Noé  Jitrik,  professor  of  literature  and  critics  at  the  UBA,  UNAM  and  Colegio  de  Mexico 
(Mexico) and at US and EU universities, writer, Director of the Institute of Latin American 
Literature (UBA).

Aída Kemelmajer, PhD in law, State Supreme Court of Justice, full professor at the University 
of  Cuyo,  Mendoza,  and  at  several  universities  in  Argentina  and  the  EU  and  member  of  the 
National Academy of Law and Social Sciences.

Ernesto Maqueda, PhD in physics, researcher in theoretical physics at Tandar Laboratory and 
member of the National Commission on Nuclear Energy.

Armando  Parodi,  PhD  in  biochemistry,  Director  of  the  Leloir  Foundation,  member  of  the 
National Academy of Science of Argentina and of the USA and of other academies in Latin 
America and Europe and an international research scholar with the Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, studying the mechanisms by which proteins that follow the secretory pathway acquire 
their three-dimensional structures in the endoplasmic reticulum.

Carolina  Vera,  PhD  in  meteorology,  professor  and  Vice-Dean  of  the  School  of  Sciences 
(UBA), Chairperson of the American Meteorological Society/STAC Committee on Southern 
Hemisphere Meteorology and Oceanography, working on climate change at the Research Centre 
on Oceanography and Atmosphere in the School of Sciences (UBA).

Further information

Otilia Vainstok
Director
National Committee on Ethics in Science and Technology
Ministerio de Ciencia, Tecnología e Innovación Productiva
Ecuador 873, 4° piso
(C1214ACM) Buenos Aires
Argentina
E-mail: cecte@mincyt.gov.ar
Website: http://www.cecte.gov.ar

38

ph811289Int.indd   38

13/01/09   16:06:47

The Australian Health Ethics Committee

Australia

The  Australian  Health  Ethics  Committee  (AHEC)  is  a  principal  committee  of  the  National 
Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC), established under the NHMRC Act 1992. 

Functions 

The NHMRC Act 1992 establishes that the functions of the AHEC are:

• 
• 
• 

• 

to advise the Council on ethical issues relating to health;
to develop and give the Council human research guidelines;
any other functions conferred on the Committee in writing by the minister after consulting 
the CEO; 
any other functions conferred on the Committee by the NHMRC Act 1992
or any other law.

, the regulations 

The  AHEC  also  plays  a  role  in  supporting  the  system  of  ethical  review  of  human  research, 
which is undertaken by institutional human research ethics committees (HRECs) of which there 
are approximately 230 in Australia.

Terms of reference 

In addition to the above, in the current period (2006–09), AHEC has been asked to:

• 

• 
• 

• 

• 
• 

develop and give the Council guidelines for the conduct of health research involving humans, 
additional to those required for the second point above; 
promote ethical conduct in health and medical research involving humans; 
support and facilitate the work of institutions and of human research ethics committees in 
the oversight of health and medical research; 
foster community debate, and consult with relevant stakeholders on ethical issues in health, 
and health and medical research; 
provide advice to the Council on ethical issues in health research and medical research; 
monitor  international  developments  in  ethical  issues  relating  to  health  and  health  and 
medical research involving humans, and liaise with relevant international organisations and 
individuals. 

39

ph811289Int.indd   39

13/01/09   16:06:47

Composition of the Australian Health Ethics Committee

Members of the AHEC are appointed by the Minister for Health and Ageing for a period of 
three years. All Committee members are part-time appointees, and meet on several occasions 
each year. There are 14 different membership categories for AHEC members:

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

chair;
knowledge in the ethics of medical research;
expertise in law;
expertise in philosophy;
expertise in religion;
expertise in medical research;
expertise in public health research;
expertise in social science research;
expertise in clinical medical practice;
experience in nursing/allied health practices;
knowledge of regulation of medical profession;
understanding of health consumer issues;
understanding of the concerns of people with a disability;
expertise relevant to the functions of the Committee (two members),

Decision-making processes

The Committee proceeds through deliberation to consensus decisions, supported by experienced 
staff. Under the NHMRC Act 1992, the NHMRC is required to conduct public consultation 
before  releasing  guidelines.  Draft  guidelines  are  released  for  public  consultation  for  at  least 
30 days. All submissions received are considered before the AHEC decides on the (cid:2) nal form of 
guidelines or advice. Decisions of the AHEC take the form of recommendations to the Council, 
who make recommendations to the CEO, as to whether guidelines or advice should be issued.

Governance

Until July 2006, the NHMRC was part of the Australian Commonwealth Department of Health 
and Ageing. In July 2006, the NHMRC became an independent statutory agency, with the CEO 
reporting directly to the Minister for Health and Ageing. There is the equivalent of 230 full-time 
internal staff at the NHMRC. Nine staff concentrate exclusively on health and research ethics.  

Current projects

Commercialisation of human tissue — issues paper

• 
The purpose of this issues paper is to identify ethical issues in the commercialisation of human 
tissue including biobanks and products derived from human tissue.

National ethics application form (NEAF)

• 
NEAF is a dynamic, interactive, web-based tool for researchers of all disciplines to complete 
research ethics proposals for submission to the human research ethics committees (HRECs). 
The aim of the NEAF is to increase the ef(cid:2) ciency and quality of the ethical review process for 

40

ph811289Int.indd   40

13/01/09   16:06:48

both HRECs and researchers, by ensuring that HRECs are provided with consistent information 
to allow them to effectively assess applications for ethical review.  

Other projects

• 
AHEC is involved in the harmonisation of a national system where a single scienti(cid:2) c and ethical 
review  applies  to  research  carried  out  at  more  than  one  site.  The  AHEC  is  also  considering 
ethical issues involved in the treatment of addictions, ageing with chronic illness and revising 
current guidelines on the protection of privacy in health research.

Recent publications

National statement on ethical conduct in human research 2007

This is the primary document to guide researchers, human research ethics committees (HRECs) 
and research institutions.

Ethical guidelines for the care of people in post-coma unresponsiveness (vegetative state) or 
a minimally responsive state 2008 and accompanying Guide for families and carers of people 
with profound brain damage 2008.

These guidelines aim to contribute to the care of people in post-coma unresponsiveness or a 
minimally responsive state by addressing the ethical issues associated with this care, especially 
the complicated issues that have proved dif(cid:2) cult for families, health professionals, courts and 
tribunals.

Organ and tissue donation guidelines 2007

The  AHEC  has  developed  four  sets  of  guidelines  on  organ  donation  to  cover  donation  by 
living donors and donations after death, with separate guidelines for health professionals and 
consumers on each. 

Ethical  guidelines  on  the  use  of  assisted  reproductive  technology  in  clinical  practice  and 
research 2007

This  document  is  a  revision  of  the  2004  guidelines  to  take  into  consideration  amendments 
in  Australian  legislation.  The  guidelines  provide  ethical  advice  in  areas  such  as  human  egg 
donation, research on embryos that are unsuitable for implantation, research on embryos created 
by somatic cell nuclear transfer and ‘proper consent’ in relation to the donation of human eggs 
and embryos. 

Keeping research on track: a guide for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples about 
health research ethics 2006

This booklet is a resource document for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to refer to 
when making decisions about health research in their communities.

41

ph811289Int.indd   41

13/01/09   16:06:48

Further information

Director, Health and Research Ethics Section
Quality and Regulation Branch 
NHMRC
GPO Box 1421 
Canberra ACT 2601 
Australia
E-mail: ethics@nhmrc.gov.au

42

ph811289Int.indd   42

13/01/09   16:06:48

The Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)

Canada

CIHR’s mandate 

CIHR  is  Canada’s  premier  federal  agency  for  health  research.  Its  objective  is  to  excel,  in 
accordance with internationally accepted standards of scienti(cid:2) c excellence, in generating new 
knowledge and turning it into better health for Canadians, more effective health services and 
products and a strengthened healthcare system.

CIHR delivers on this through 13 virtual institutes and by working across four pillars (biomedical 
and clinical research; research relating to health systems and health services; research regarding 
health of populations; and environmental in(cid:3) uences on health and social and cultural dimensions 
of health).

In the area of ethics, the Canadian Parliament has given CIHR a mandate to:

• 
• 
• 
• 

• 

• 

promote, assist and undertake health research that meets the highest standards of ethics;
foster discussion of ethical issues and application of ethical principles to health research; 
monitor, analyse and evaluate ethical issues pertaining to health or health research; 
encourage interdisciplinary, innovative and integrative research on ethical issues pertaining 
to health; 
turn  the  results  of  that  research  into  better  health  for  Canadians,  more  effective  health 
services and a stronger healthcare system;
advise the Minister for Health on matters relating to health research or health policy.

CIHR seeks to achieve its mandate on ethics in three ways:

: developing and implementing policies and guidelines to ful(cid:2) l the ethical 

 building capacity in ethics, supporting development and coordination of 

• 

• 

• 

ethics of research
and legal responsibilities that CIHR holds as a research sponsor;
research in ethics:
strategic initiatives and funding research on ethics;
ethics  advice  on  public  policy
in(cid:3) uencing public policy and legislation in priority areas.

  regarding  health  and  health  research:  developing  or 

Ethics of research

The Ethics Of(cid:2) ce has developed several guidelines and best practice for ethics in research and 
for addressing non-compliance with ethics policies. In addition, it supports partnerships with 
key organisations in the broader research ethics community.

43

ph811289Int.indd   43

13/01/09   16:06:48

• 

• 

• 

Research  integrity  management:  the  Research  Integrity  Committee  (RIC)  considers 
allegations  of  non-compliance  with  CIHR  research  policies  and  recommends  action 
consistent  with  its  internal  procedure  for  addressing  allegations  of  non-compliance  with 
research policies. CIHR has no regulatory or quasi-judicial mandate. It does not investigate 
allegations  of  non-compliance  with  research  policies.  Instead,  it  refers  allegations  to  the 
institutions which it funds for investigation and requires the institutions to report back their 
(cid:2) ndings. 
Governing Council’s Stem Cell Oversight Committee (SCOC): this Committee, set up in 
2003,  reviews  all  human  pluripotent  stem  cell  research  conducted  under  the  auspices  of 
institutions receiving agency funding (CIHR, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research 
Council (NSERC) and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC)) to 
ensure conformity with its Guidelines for human pluripotent stem cell research.
Support  for  the  Canadian  Council  on  Animal  Care  (CCAC):  CCAC  is  responsible  for 
drafting guidelines on the ethical treatment of animals in Canadian research. It also develops 
and  administers  an  inspection  programme  to  oversee  implementation  of  these  guidelines 
(CCAC is funded jointly by CIHR and NSERC).  

Development and implementation of research ethics policies: Major achievements in this area 
include:

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

Pluripotent  stem  cell  research:  guidelines  for  CIHR-funded  research 

stem  cell  research: 
(2002, 2005);
institutional  con(cid:3) icts  of  interest  —  sponsorship  of  health  research  and  dissemination  of 
research results (2004);
privacy  and  con(cid:2) dentiality  in  health  research  — 
health research (2005);
national placebo initiative (jointly with Health Canada) (2002–07);
CIHR guidelines for health research involving aboriginal peoples
longitudinal cohort studies

 (2007);
 — ethical, legal and social issues (in progress).

Best  practice  for  protecting  privacy  in 

Research in ethics

CIHR  encourages  interdisciplinary,  innovative  and  integrative  research  on  ethical  issues 
pertaining to health and also fosters discussion of ethical issues to strengthen the research ethics 
and integrity culture in Canada. Research in ethics is supported by a special research fund of 
USD 1 million per year and often in collaboration with CIHR’s institutes. 

Ethics advice on public policy relating to health and health research

CIHR has made several signi(cid:2) cant contributions to national debates, supporting development 
of regulatory frameworks and policies in several critical areas.

Governance of ethics involving humans in research: In partnership with other key stakeholders, 
CIHR  has  been  at  the  forefront  of  forging  consensus  on  the  future  of  ethics  governance  in 
Canada, for example in the following ways:

• 

participation  in  the  national  sponsors  table  on  governance  of  research  involving  human 
subjects;

44

ph811289Int.indd   44

13/01/09   16:06:48

• 

• 

development  of  the  Assisted  Human  Reproduction  Act  and  associated  regulations  (lead 
department: Government of Canada’s Department of Health);
amendment to the Criminal Code of Canada: new provisions on cruelty to animals (via the 
Canadian Council on Animal Care). 

Stem cell research: In the absence of regulations governing stem cell research, CIHR established 
guidelines on the use of human embryonic stem cells in health research. The 2002 guidelines 
were incorporated by reference into the Assisted Human Reproduction Act that received royal 
assent on 29 March 2004. 

Privacy: In addition to development and publication of its Best practice for protecting privacy 
in health research, CIHR has led a number of initiatives in the area of privacy, including the 
following works:

• 

• 

• 

• 

compendium of Canadian legislation on protection of personal information in health research 
(April 2000);
Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act — questions and answers 
for health researchers (2001);
selected  international  legal  norms  on  the  protection  of  personal  information  in  health 
research (2001);
secondary use of personal information in health research: case-studies (2002). 

International involvement in ethics

• 

• 
• 
• 

Input into the Unesco Universal Declaration on Bioethics Norms and Human Rights (2005) 
— the Ethics Of(cid:2) ce participated in the federal interdepartmental working group on Canada’s 
input.
Participation in the global health research initiative.
Participation in the Global Forum on Bioethics in Research.
Support for the Canadian Coalition in Global Health Research and the Canadian Society for 
International Health.

Ethics bodies within CIHR 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Standing  Committee  on  Ethics  (SCE):  provides  the  governing  council  with  high-level 
strategic advice on major ethical issues and policies relevant to CIHR’s overall mandate.
Institute Advisory Board Ethics Designates (IABEDs): each Institute Advisory Board has 
an ethics designate, a person with expertise in ethics, to provide advice on ethical matters of 
relevance to the institutes.
Ethics Of(cid:2) ce: the key mechanism for achieving CIHR’s ethics objectives, providing support 
to the SCE, SCOC and IABEDs.
Health Ethics, Law and Humanities Peer Review Panel: awards grants to conduct systematic 
analyses  of  values  and  ethical  theory  as  applied  in  healthcare,  health  research  and  new 
health technologies.
Interagency Advisory Panel on Research Ethics:
 advises the major federal granting agencies 
(CIHR,  NSERC  and  SSHRC)  on  the  ongoing  development  of  the  Tri-Council  policy 
statement: ethical conduct for research involving humans (1998). 

45

ph811289Int.indd   45

13/01/09   16:06:48

Further information

Dr Geneviève Dubois-Flynn
Acting Director, Ethics Of(cid:2) ce
Canadian Institutes of Health Research
160 Elgin Street
Ottawa Ontario K1A 0W9 
Canada
E-mail: Genevieve.Dubois-Flynn@cihr-irsc.gc.ca

46

ph811289Int.indd   46

13/01/09   16:06:48

The National Commission of Bioethics 

Mexico

Implementig the bioethics culture in Mexico: the task of the National Commission 
of Bioethics

Dafna Feinholz Klip

The National Commission of Bioethics in Mexico has grown in importance and status over time. 
It was (cid:2) rst established in 1992 as a group of academics who wanted to discuss issues related to 
bioethics. In 2000, a presidential agreement declared it a permanent body, and, from 2005, it has 
been recognised by presidential decree as a more independent body. It is ‘deconcentrated’ from 
the Ministry of Health, which means it has technical and operational autonomy. Its budget still 
comes from the Ministry of Health, which appoints the president and members of the Council, 
who change every two years. However, the structure of the National Commission of Bioethics 
is built around permanent members, who are responsible for the operation of the Commission 
and for putting in place the policies and programmes approved by its Council. They are civil 
servants, appointed in response to a public advertisement followed by an independent selection 
process, and cannot be removed by political changes. 

The  objective  of  the  National  Commission  of  Bioethics  is  to  build  a  bioethics  culture  in 
Mexico. Its mandate focuses on activities directed towards formulating public policy, building 
infrastructure and creating public awareness. It is of(cid:2) cially responsible for de(cid:2) ning national 
policies on bioethics, for establishing public health policies related to bioethics and for acting 
as the national body to be consulted on speci(cid:2) c issues connected with bioethics.

Publishing reports is not its main task. In fact, it issues no reports as such. The aim is to bring 
together the bioethical issues of social concern. To this end, the National Commission sets out 
to provide society with relevant, sound and objective information and with the full range of 
founded ethical arguments on the topic debated. It wishes to promote and support a re(cid:3) ective 
attitude, i.e. the ability to deliberate in a respectful, informed, founded, multidisciplinary and 
pluralistic way.  

The National Commission employs diverse strategies to achieve this aim. It has a website on 
which  interesting  information  is  made  available  to  the  general  public  and  which  people  can 
contact if they have any questions and special needs. It is in the process of establishing a Centre 
of Bioethical Knowledge (CECOBE), which is more than a library and a newspaper archive; it 
is an intelligent service that will be able to identify potential users and send them information 
which could be useful for their activities. Already, the CECOBE has an extensive collection of 
electronic journals and books, offers free help to retrieve papers and gives the research ethics 

47

ph811289Int.indd   47

13/01/09   16:06:48

and clinical committees free access to the collections. There is also a library with printed books 
and journals and an inter-library exchange service.

Other  activities  oriented  towards  society  include  publication  of  Debate  Bioético  (Bioethical 
Debate). This is a journal on a particular issue (e.g. therapeutic cloning or the debate at the 
UN on cloning), which brings together the ethical arguments and diverging perspectives and is 
written by members of the National Commission or by an external author at its request. The (cid:2) rst 
issue is circulated among stakeholders, whose views and opinions are then included in a second 
edition, which is further circulated. 

The  National  Commission  has  organised  two  public  forums,  one  on  dying  with  dignity,  the 
other on the impact of homophobia on healthcare. The forums have been multidisciplinary and 
plural,  analysing  diverse  aspects  of  the  topics,  from  hard  evidence  to  social,  psychological, 
philosophical, medical and ethical perspectives. One outcome is a publication on each forum, 
containing all the papers. 

The last strategy which must be mentioned is publication in a widely read national newspaper 
of an overview of the ethical arguments on abortion at the height of the controversy over a new 
law.

Turning to advisory activities, the National Commission has issued opinions and recommendations 
to  the  legislative  bodies  on  initiatives  related  to  bioethics,  for  example  abortion,  assisted 
reproduction,  advance  directives,  palliative  care  and  cloning.  There  is  a  formal  channel  of 
communication between the legislature and the executive which the Commission uses to make 
recommendations.

Activities  regarding  public  policies  focus  on  priority-setting  in  the  social  protection  system. 
A  collaboration  agreement  has  been  concluded  between  Harvard  Medical  School  and  the 
Mexican  Ministry  of  Health.  Dr  Norman  Daniels  has  been  working  very  closely  with  the 
National Commission, which therefore uses the accountability for reasonableness model. The 
objective is to develop a priority-setting method based on justice and equity and to analyse the 
ethical  implications  of  priority-setting  for  high-cost  interventions  on  health.  One  important 
point to explore is whether inclusion of elective interventions helps to increase equity in access 
to health, whether real or potential, particularly for the poorest and more vulnerable. 

To  accomplish  the  goal  of  building  bioethics  infrastructure,  the  National  Commission  has 
a  mandate  to  promote  establishment  of  bioethics  commissions  in  every  federal  state  and  of 
research ethics committees and hospital (clinical) bioethics committees at public and private 
health institutions, to support training for its members and to produce and disseminate guidelines 
for research ethics committees and hospital (clinical) bioethics committees. Mexico is made up 
of 32 federal states and the health system is decentralised. The National Commission therefore 
coordinates and steers the process, respecting each state’s own needs and priorities, but setting 
the criteria for them to apply on speci(cid:2) c issues, such as for establishment of research ethics and 
clinical  committees.  In  2005,  nine  federal  states  had  bioethics  commissions  in  place.  Today 
there are 20.

To  date,  the  National  Commission  has  issued  the  National  guidelines  for  integration  and 
operation of research ethics committees. Similar guidelines for clinical committees will be ready 
soon. Permanent working groups have been established, one for the research ethics committees 

48

ph811289Int.indd   48

13/01/09   16:06:48

and another for the clinical committees. The Commission will start a national registry of both 
types of committee and will soon be opening discussion forums for each working group on its 
website. A database containing information on the protocols being reviewed by committees, 
their status and the reasons for rejection will be shared by the research ethics committees. A 
training course for 105 members of ethical committees has just (cid:2) nished. 

The National Commission has been endorsing and rewriting a draft law, now expected to be 
adopted, specifying the functions of and differences between research ethics committees and 
clinical committees. The text was discussed and approved with the health sector and can be 
summed up as follows.

Every public, private or social healthcare institution in the national health system will, depending 
on its complexity and resolution level, have:

• 

• 

a hospital bioethics committee, which will be responsible for analysis, discussion and support 
for decision-making related to bioethical dilemmas that emerge from healthcare delivery 
or  teaching,  for  promoting  drafting  of  institutional  guidelines/protocols  for  healthcare 
delivery and teaching, and for promoting continuous bioethics training for its members and 
institutional personnel;
a research ethics committee, which will be responsible for ethical evaluation of the research 
protocols on human beings, for drafting institutional guidelines for health research and for 
following up its recommendations.

The National Commission in Mexico has been playing a full part in the Unesco Intergovernmental 
Bioethics Committee and has participated in the discussions on and (cid:2) nal drafting of the Universal 
Declaration  on  Bioethics  and  Human  Rights.  It  has  also  been  attending  the  meetings  of  the 
Council of Europe Steering Committee on Bioethics (CDBI), where Mexico has been accepted 
as an observer State. The National Commission of Bioethics in Mexico is also participating in 
research projects funded by the European Commission on ethical issues connected with bene(cid:2) t 
sharing and genetic material in developing countries. 

Further information

Dr Dafna Feinholz 
National Commission of Bioethics in Mexico
Periférico Sur 4118, 1° Piso
Edi(cid:2) cio Za(cid:2) ro 1
Col. Jardines del Pedregal 
CP 01900. Delegación Álvaro Obregón
DF 52–55 Mexico
Website: http://cnb-mexico.salud.gob.mx

49

ph811289Int.indd   49

13/01/09   16:06:49

ph811289Int.indd   50

13/01/09   16:06:49

The Philippine Health Research Ethics Board

Philippines

Background

There  are  various  types  of  ethics  committees  operating  in  the  Philippines.  For  example, 
professional  groups  or  societies  have  ethics  boards  or  committees  which  set  standards  for 
practice and regulate professional conduct, such as the Commission on Ethics of the Philippine 
Medical Association. Most medical centres and hospitals have ethics committees that look into 
patient care and the professional conduct of health personnel. In addition, a special national 
ethics committee monitors the ethics of kidney donation under the auspices of the Department 
of Health.

Since the 1980s, institutional research ethics committees have been set up to protect the welfare 
and rights of human research participants and to promote the integrity of research data. 

Establishment of the Philippine health research system

In 2003, a memorandum of understanding between the Department of Science and Technology 
(DOST)  and  the  Department  of  Health  (DOH)  led  to  the  establishment  of  the  Philippine 
national health research system (PNHRS) that envisages a ‘vibrant, dynamic, and responsible 
health research community working for the attainment of national and global health goals’. The 
collaboration subsequently included the Commission on Higher Education and the University of 
the Philippines — National Institutes of Health. The PNHRS endeavours ‘to create and sustain an 
enabling environment for health research through evidence-informed health and health-related 
policies and actions’. Six technical working groups were organised to (cid:3) esh out the strategic 
plan over the next (cid:2) ve years. One of these was the Technical Working Group on Ethics, which 
emphasised  the  importance  of  ethics  in  promoting  a  robust  and  responsible  health  research 
system. The Technical Working Group on Ethics subsequently recommended the establishment 
of the Philippine Health Research Ethics Board (PHREB) in order to institutionalise its policies 
and plans.  

The Philippine Health Research Ethics Board (PHREB)

The organisational structure of the Philippine national health research system (PNHRS) shows 
the PHREB as one of its six working groups (see overleaf). 

51

ph811289Int.indd   51

13/01/09   16:06:49

The  PHREB  was  formally  constituted  on  17  March  2006  with  a  multidisciplinary  and 
multisectoral membership. Its mandate is ‘to ensure that all phases of health research adhere 
to universal ethical principles that value the protection and promotion of the dignity of health 
research  participants’.  It  is  the  standard-setting  and  policy-making  body  for  research  ethics 
review.  Under  its  supervision  are  the  National  Ethics  Committee  (NEC),  institutional  ethics 
review committees and cluster ethics review committees. 

The  NEC  reviews  community-based  research  projects  and  those  that  will  be  conducted  in 
institutions  without  an  institutional  ethics  committee.  At  present,  there  are  62  institutional 
ethics  review  committees  of(cid:2) cially  registered  in  the  PHREB  database,  which  was  started  in 
2007.  The  formation  of  cluster  ethics  review  committees  is  being  proposed  for  institutions 
where establishment of an IERC of their own is not sustainable. 

Activities and accomplishments

The PHREB endeavours to pursue the following objectives: 

• 
• 
• 
• 

to formulate policies and set directions in ethical health research;
to develop and strengthen the capacity of research institutions in human protection;
to help empower patients/participants and the community in health research;
to develop coordinative mechanisms with regulatory agencies for research ethics review.

The  PHREB,  in  collaboration  with  the  National  Ethics  Committee,  has  published  the  2006 
revision  of  the  national  ethical  guidelines  for  health  research.  Over  the  past  two  years,  the 
Committee has conducted several ethics review training sessions for researchers and members 
of  institutional  review  committees.  A  database  of  ethics  committees  has  been  set  up  that 
includes lists of committee members and their ethics training. The PHREB has also initiated 
a  programme  for  recognition  and  accreditation  of  ethics  review  committees  by  issuing  the 
appropriate  guidelines.  Most  importantly,  it  has  had  contacts  with  the  Bureau  of  Food  and 
Drugs with regard to a clinical trial registry and a pharmacovigilance project. 

52

ph811289Int.indd   52

13/01/09   16:06:49

Members (2006–09)

Marita V. T. Reyes 

Chair

Leonardo de Castro 

(Philosophy) Vice-Chair

Angeles Tan-Alora       

(Academe)

Cecilia V. Tomas         

(Medicine)

Albert Rebosa  

(Law)

Maria Arlissa Aguiluz  

(Allied medical professions)

Carmen Tolabing  

(Public health)

Romeo Intengan 

(Theology)

Elizabeth Ventura 

(Social science)

Abdulrahim Bagundang 

(Youth sector)

Gilbert Hoggang 

(Civil society) 

Jaime Montoya  

(Ex-Of(cid:2) cio Member, PCHRD)

Crispinita Valdez 

(Ex-Of(cid:2) cio Member, DOH)

Further information

Ms Mel Mutuc
Secretariat
Philippine Health Research Ethics Board 
PCHRD-DOST
3/F DOST Bldg., Gen Santos Ave.
Bicutan, Taguig City, Philippines
E-mail: mel@ehealth.ph 

53

ph811289Int.indd   53

13/01/09   16:06:50

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ph811289Int.indd   54

13/01/09   16:06:50

University of Zambia Biomedical Research 
Ethics Committee

Zambia

Highlighting successes and challenges in Zambia 

Dr Esther Munalula Nkandu

Zambia houses a number of research projects that involve human participants and vertebrate 
animals. The research is undertaken at various levels ranging from undergraduate/postgraduate 
to multi-centre studies. Most of the research is conducted amongst people who are ‘vulnerable’, 
not very literate or do not fully understand their rights pertaining to research. In a developing 
country  such  as  Zambia,  there  is  great  need  for  those  participating  in  such  research  to  be 
adequately  protected  from  physical  and  social  harm  and  from  any  violation  of  their  rights. 
It must be stated, though, that the level of knowledge about research is on the increase in the 
various communities, especially those that have been ‘over-studied’. 

The  University  of  Zambia  Research  Ethics  Committee,  Unzarec  (now  called  the  UNZA 
Biomedical Research Ethics Committee after the UNZA established two other committees) has 
for some time acted as a national research ethics committee. The Ministry of Health in Zambia 
has now established a National Research Ethics Committee (REC), which will deal with issues 
of  policy  and  accreditation  and  will  further  consolidate  the  legal  framework  for  conducting 
research  in  the  country.  The  REC  faces  a  number  of  challenges,  ranging  from  inadequate 
resources and personnel for inspection and monitoring of ongoing approved research activities 
to inadequate funding for other administrative REC functions. Other challenges are issues of 
exportation of samples (human tissue) for undisclosed future research — mainly DNA research 
and, in my opinion, inadequate capacity building. 

As regards research that is purported to be taking place in rural areas and in health institutions 
under the ‘pretext’ of it being therapy (therapeutic misconception), there is a need for more 
RECs to be established and for stiffer penalties to be put in place to deter would-be offenders. 
The  UNZA  Biomedical  REC  has  been  involved  in  a  number  of  activities  over  the  past  few 
years. To highlight but a few, the Committee has: 

• 

• 

• 

acted  as  a  resource  for  the  training  of  new  Research  Ethics  Committee  members  in  the 
newly established committees of the university; 
contributed  towards  the  development  of  terms  of  reference  and  standard  operational 
procedures (SOPs) for the National Research Ethics Committee; 
conducted training of undergraduate and postgraduate students in the school of medicine on 
the principles of research ethics;

55

ph811289Int.indd   55

13/01/09   16:06:50

• 

• 

• 

• 

undertaken training of community representatives in basic research ethics and on their roles 
as representatives of communities; 
presented papers at national and international conferences making researchers, clinicians 
and other health providers aware of ethical guidelines; 
established a database of all research that has been reviewed for monitoring purposes and 
for the purpose of informing stakeholders of ongoing research;
developed its own SOPs.

Despite  these  measures  that  have  been  put  in  place,  Petra  (2007)  claims  that  that  there  has 
been an increase in non-ethically reviewed research in Zambia. Unfortunately, the author does 
not  substantiate  her  claims.  In  a  similar  vein,  Ngandwe  (2005)  has  also  reported  that  some 
researchers in Zambia have been able to avoid ethical review. Ngandwe further reports that 
misconduct observed by the RECs in Zambia should result in (cid:2) nes or discontinuation of the 
project and that, if necessary, the researchers involved should be forbidden from conducting 
further research. Beyond this, there is a need for professional registration bodies like the Medical 
Council of Zambia to be kept informed, as unethical research could equate to malpractice or 
professional misconduct. Further, there is a need for researchers/research sites to work more 
closely with insurance companies to cover participants adequately and ensure that the burden 
of caring for participants who suffer serious adverse effects (SAEs) or reactions is not passed 
on to the Ministry of Health. Benatar (2007) reports a stand taken by chairpersons of RECs in 
South Africa (34 in total — Moodley and Myer (2007)) not to permit studies that do not provide 
insurance cover for research-related injuries. This is a very welcome stand (also enforced by the 
UNZA Biomedical REC), as it helps to reduce the cost of care on health institutions long after 
the researchers have left the country. Taking a lead from the REC chairpersons in South Africa, 
this is a stand that should be taken by all RECs in developing countries. 

The issues of consent in Zambia can be very mixed depending on what the issue at hand is that a 
person needs to give consent to (Nkandu, 2004). The process of giving consent to participating 
in research is no exception. This is often in(cid:3) uenced by factors such as culture, norms, values, 
traditions,  beliefs  and  practices.  Zambia  has  a  very  rich  culture,  and  so  many  factors  can 
in(cid:3) uence the consent process in research. These include respect for elders, caregivers, rulers 
(especially traditional rulers) and gender (which often has a bias towards men). 

Moodley  and  Myer  (2007)  conducted  a  study  into  the  composition,  operations  and  training 
needs of RECs in South Africa. The country is reported to house a number of multinational 
collaborative  research  units,  yet  the  ‘quality  and  consistency  of  ethical  review  ...  remains 
unclear’. The study also gives reasons why researchers prefer to conduct their research in Africa: 
it costs less; it involves lower risks of litigation; and there is less stringent ethical review. 

This is a paradox. While some researchers from developed countries continue to say that Africa 
should pull its socks up and abide by international regulations, others are willing to conduct 
research that is not ‘properly reviewed’ in order to save money. Countries and researchers that 
‘see shortcomings in Africa’ should consider investing in training and lead by example. 

Rubin  and  Sieber  (2006)  point  to  the  fact  that  some  RECs/IRBs  focus  more  on  enforcing 
regulations  governing  the  protection  of  human  participants  (mainly  paper  work)  than  on 
protecting the participants by effectively reviewing the research protocols. Some kind of balance 

56

ph811289Int.indd   56

13/01/09   16:06:50

needs to be struck whereby RECs address the administrative issues without compromising the 
quality of the review process. 

References

Benatar,  S.  (2007).  ‘Research  ethics  committees  in  Africa:  building  capacity’,  PLoS  Med 
4(3):e135. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0040135

Moodley, K. and Myer, L. (2007). ‘Health research ethics committees in South Africa 12 years 
into democracy’, BMC Medical Ethics, 8:1 doi:10.1186/1472-6939-8-1

Ngandwe, T. (2005). ‘Research ethics “watchdog” planned in Zambia’. Science and Development 
Network, http:www.scidev.net/news/index.cfm

Nkandu, E. M. (2004). ‘To what did they consent?’. An audit of the consent process as seen in a 
study conducted in Mazabuka Zambia. Practicum towards postgraduate diploma in international 
research ethics, University of Cape Town, South Africa.

Petra  Boyton  (2007).  ‘Research  in  the  developing  world’,  The  Research  Companion, 
http://www.researchmethodsarena.com/forum/forum_posts.asp

Rubin,  P.  and  Sieber,  J.  (2006).  Editorial.  ‘Empirical  research  on  IRBs  and  methodologies 
usually  associated  with  minimal  risk’,  Journal  of  Empirical  Research  on  Human  Research 
Ethics, 1(4):1–4.

Further information

Dr E. M. Nkandu
Chairperson
UNZA Biomedical Research Ethics Committee
PO Box 50110
Lusaka
Zambia
E-mail: unzarec@zamtel.zm or em_munalula@yahoo.com 

57

ph811289Int.indd   57

13/01/09   16:06:50

ph811289Int.indd   58

13/01/09   16:06:50

International ethics 
International ethics 
committees
committees

ph811289Int.indd   59

13/01/09   16:06:50

ph811289Int.indd   60

13/01/09   16:06:50

The Council of Europe’s Bioethics Division 

Normative activities

• 

Additional  Protocol  to  the  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine,  concerning 
Genetic Testing for Health Purposes

The draft Protocol concerning Genetic Testing for Health Purposes, approved by the Steering 
Committee on Bioethics (CDBI) in June 2007, was adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 
7 May 2008. It will be opened for signature on 27 November 2008. 

Genetic counselling, direct access to tests and genetic tests for the bene(cid:2) t of family members 
carried out on persons not able to consent are among the issues addressed in this Additional 
Protocol to the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine (Oviedo Convention). The text 
of  the  Protocol,  together  with  the  Explanatory  Report,  can  be  consulted  on  the  Council  of 
Europe website:

http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/EN/Treaties/Html/TestGen.htm

http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/EN/Reports/Html/TestGen.htm

• 

Genetic testing and insurance

The  Council  of  Europe  Steering  Committee  on  Bioethics  (CDBI)  is  currently  working  on 
the questions of predictivity, genetics tests and insurance with a view to drafting a new legal 
instrument.

A Working Party on Predictivity, Genetic Tests and Insurance has been set up and will meet for 
the (cid:2) rst time on 6 and 7 November 2008.

Last year, on 3 and 4 December 2007, the CDBI organised a seminar on ‘predictivity, genetic 
tests  and  insurance’  in  Strasbourg.  Videos  of  the  presentations  (in  French  and  English)  and 
other documents can be consulted on the Council of Europe website.

• 

Guide for research ethics committee members

The working party responsible for drawing up a guide for research ethics committee members 
is (cid:2) nalising a preliminary draft which will be submitted to the CDBI in December 2008. 

Further information

For more information on the above items, please consult the Council of Europe website:
http://www.coe.int/bioethics

61

ph811289Int.indd   61

13/01/09   16:06:50

ph811289Int.indd   62

13/01/09   16:06:50

Unesco

The  15th  session  of  the  International  Bioethics  Committee  of  Unesco:  Unesco 
headquarters, Paris, October 2008

The  15th  (ordinary)  session  of  the  International  Bioethics  Committee  (IBC)  will  be  held  at 
Unesco headquarters in Paris on 28 and 29 October 2008. It will be followed by a joint session 
of the IBC and the Intergovernmental Bioethics Committee (IGBC), convened by the Director-
General on 30 October and the morning of 31 October 2008 to foster exchanges between the 
two committees on the ongoing work.

The IBC was set up in 1993 and is a committee of 36 independent experts — appointed by 
the Director-General of Unesco in their personal capacity — that follows progress in the life 
sciences and applications thereof in order to ensure respect for human dignity and freedom.

The IGBC was set up in 1998 and is made up of 36 member countries elected by the General 
Conference of Unesco. It examines the work of the IBC and submits its opinions to the Director-
General of Unesco.

Two main topics will be discussed during these meetings: the principle of social responsibility 
and health, as enshrined in the Unesco Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights 
(2005), and the issue of human cloning and international governance.

Social responsibility and health

The  introduction  of  social  responsibility  as  a  founding  principle  of  bioethics  was  a  major 
contribution made by the Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights, adopted by 
acclamation by the General Conference in 2005. The topics dealt with under this theme are 
sensitive  ones,  at  the  crossroads  of  fundamental  political,  economic  and  social  issues.  This 
new  principle  re(cid:3) ects  the  need  to  make  bioethics  part  of  an  open-ended  social  and  political 
debate by taking a holistic approach to health. This approach, consistent with the millennium 
development goals, takes into account such vital concerns as access to quality healthcare and 
to adequate food and water, improvement of living conditions and the environment, action to 
combat marginalisation and reduction of poverty and illiteracy.

The IBC began considering this principle when a working group drew up a preliminary draft 
report,  which  was  examined  and  discussed  on  several  occasions  during  2006  and  2007.  As 
part of its work programme for 2008–09, the IBC is continuing its work on this principle. The 
previous  version  of  the  draft  report  mainly  included  descriptive  information  and  empirical 
health data, but now the Committee is concentrating on the ethical and legal dimensions of the 
principle of social responsibility and health and is working towards a more concise document 
focusing on the bioethical aspects.

The aim is not to duplicate the work or debates on public health policy issues already conducted 
in other international bodies, in particular the World Health Organisation. Instead, the idea is 
to determine the extent to which the international community and the United Nations system 

63

ph811289Int.indd   63

13/01/09   16:06:50

can  address  those  questions  from  a  bioethical  standpoint,  each  contributing  its  multifaceted 
experience and expertise.

The 15th session of the IBC and the joint session of the IBC and IGBC will allow an open and 
frank debate between specialists and constructive comparison of the universal ethical positions 
and values expressed and the practical approach taken by policymakers. This should lead to 
identi(cid:2) cation of appropriate ways and means of providing a framework that would stimulate the 
international community to address this issue adequately.

Based on the preliminary results discussed and examined in October, the IBC hopes it will be 
able to complete and (cid:2) nalise the draft report, with a view to approval of the (cid:2) nal report at its 
16th session in 2009.

Human cloning and international governance

The complex ethical questions arising from human cloning are as deep as the range of religious 
and cultural views on the issue around the world. The existing diversity of opinion is hardly 
surprising  considering  that  cloning  of  a  human  being,  whether  for  reproductive  or  research 
purposes, raises fundamental questions about the dignity of life, the beginning of life and the 
status of the embryo.

The issue of human cloning and the appropriate international governance system for it have 
stirred  profound  thinking  and  debate  within  the  United  Nations  and  in  the  international 
community at large. International discussion began in Unesco more than 10 years ago and led to 
the consensus between member countries on human reproductive cloning re(cid:3) ected in Article 11 
of the Universal Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights, adopted unanimously 
and by acclamation by the General Conference of Unesco in 1997. Article 11 states very clearly: 
‘Practices which are contrary to human dignity, such as reproductive cloning of human beings, 
shall not be permitted’.

After almost four years of discussion, the United Nations General Assembly adopted the UN 
Declaration on Human Cloning in 2005, with 84 countries supporting it, 34 voting against and 
37 abstaining. The wording of the document left room for very different interpretations, which 
re(cid:3) ected  in  part  the  dividing  lines  between  member  countries  on  this  issue.  The  main  bone 
of  contention  was  the  linking  of  reproductive  and  non-reproductive  cloning,  which  was  not 
acceptable to many countries, which abstained or voted against the declaration.

The  IBC’s  discussion  on  human  cloning  and  international  governance  is  based  on  the  2007 
report  by  the  United  Nations  University  Institute  of  Advanced  Studies  (UNU-IAS)  entitled 
Is  human  reproductive  cloning  inevitable?  Future  options  for  UN  governance.  This  report 
summarised the latest technical information on cloning, the associated ethical issues and the 
state  of  the  art  concerning  international  governance  of  this  area.  It  expressed  the  view  that 
further development of international governance was needed and set out several options along 
these lines. In the absence of a binding international regulatory framework, practices associated 
with  reproductive,  therapeutic  or  research  cloning  are  governed  by  national  law  and  policy, 
leaving many parts of the world defenceless against scientists who are determined to pursue 
research in this area.

64

ph811289Int.indd   64

13/01/09   16:06:50

Due to the pressing nature of the issue, the Director-General of Unesco expressed his wish that 
examination of the UNU report should be added to the IBC’s agenda as an item for discussion. 
Consequently,  it  has  been  included  in  the  IBC  work  programme  for  2008–09,  and  a  special 
working  group  under  the  chairmanship  of  Professor  Toivo  Maimets  (Estonia)  has  begun  to 
explore  whether  the  scienti(cid:2) c,  ethical,  social,  political  and  legal  developments  on  human 
cloning in recent years justify a new initiative at international level.

The  working  group  held  its  (cid:2) rst  meeting  at  Unesco  headquarters  in  Paris  from  30  June  to 
2 July 2008, one day of which was spent on a public hearing involving a broad-based group of 
experts in the (cid:2) eld.

At  its  15th  session,  the  IBC  will  also  bene(cid:2) t  from  a  second  round  of  public  hearings  with 
representatives  of  national  bioethics  committees  and  international  scienti(cid:2) c  organisations. 
Based  on  the  discussions  at  its  15th  session  and  the  exchanges  with  the  IGBC  at  the  joint 
session,  the  IBC  will  then  decide  whether  it  is  ready  to  present  its  opinion  to  the  Director-
General or whether it needs to continue its work on this issue.

Unesco, with its wide-based, multicultural platforms such as the IBC and IGBC, is in a unique 
position to lead this thinking and explore the ethical aspects of human cloning in a way that 
accommodates  the  multiple  views  on  the  issue.  The  International  Bioethics  Committee  and 
the  Intergovernmental  Bioethics  Committee,  as  advisory  bodies  of  this  organisation,  can 
play a pivotal role in the international bioethics system and the debate on human cloning and 
international  regulation  thereof  and  provide  member  countries  with  timely  suggestions  and 
possible pointers for more intense engagement in this (cid:2) eld in years to come.

The IBC report on consent

The  principles  set  out  in  the  Universal  Declaration  on  Bioethics  and  Human  Rights  and  the 
deliberations they are generating within the IBC are not about abstract concepts. They all have 
a tangible bearing on real and pressing ethical issues that shape our daily lives. One perfect 
example is the principle of consent, which, after extensive and in-depth discussions during the 
drafting of the declaration, became the subject of two full articles of the declaration (Articles 6 
and 7). The same principle became the focus of the IBC’s deliberations and the resulting report 
was (cid:2) nalised in May 2007.

The (cid:2) nalisation of the IBC report on consent in 2007 marked the start of publication of a new 
series of IBC reports intended to disseminate, effectively and broadly, the IBC’s thinking and 
deliberations concerning speci(cid:2) c principles enshrined in the declaration, thus fostering thinking 
and facilitating action by stakeholders.

The English version of the issue on consent is already freely available. The French version will 
be available in early 2009.

65

ph811289Int.indd   65

13/01/09   16:06:51

Further information

Mrs Sabina Colombo
Programme Specialist, Bioethics Section
Division of Ethics of Science and Technology
Human and Social Sciences Sector
Unesco
1, rue Miollis
F-75732 Paris Cedex 15
E-mail: ibc@unesco.org
Website: www.unesco.org/shs/bioethics

66

ph811289Int.indd   66

13/01/09   16:06:51

European Commission

Ethically speaking — Issue No 11

Luxembourg: Offi  ce for Offi  cial Publications of the European Communities

2009 — I – II, 66 pp. — 21 x 29.7 cm

ISSN 1725-5562

ph811289Int.indd   67

13/01/09   16:06:51

ph811289Int.indd   68

13/01/09   16:06:51

How to obtain EU publications

Publications for sale:
•  via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu);
•  from your bookseller by quoting the title, the publisher and/or ISBN number;
• 

 by contacting one of our sales agents directly. 
You can obtain their contact details by linking http://bookshop.europa.eu, 
or by sending a fax to (352) 29 29-42758

Free publications:
•  via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu);
• 

 at the European Commission’s representations or delegations. 
You can obtain their contact details by linking http://ec.europa.eu/ 
or by sending a fax to (352) 29 29-42758

ph811289Couv.indd   2

13/01/09   16:04:26

K
A
-
A
I
-
0
8
-
0
1
1
-
E
N
-
C

ph811289Couv.indd   1

13/01/09   15:18:20

