The European Group on Ethics in Science and New  
Technologies to the European Commission 

Ethical aspects of animal cloning for food supply 

- Opinion No 23 - 

-  16 January 2008  - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ABSTRACT 

I.  HAVING REGARD TO 

1. PREAMBLE 

2. SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND TO ANIMAL CLONING 

2.1. Definitions 

2.2. Historical background  

2.3. Somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) 

2.4. Dolly  

2.4.1. Biological implications 

2.5. Animal health and welfare problems related to cloning 

2.5.1 Animal health 

2.5.2. Animal welfare 

2.6 Potential applications of animal cloning for the food supply 

2.7 Long-term future applications of animal cloning 

2.8 Safety and risk assessment of cloning for food 

2.8.1 Report by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  

on the health of cloned animals and safety of their food products  

2.9 Biodiversity, epidemics 

2.10. Farm animal cloning at international level 

3. LEGAL ASPECTS  

3.1 EU Regulatory Framework 

3.1.1 EU food regulations 

3.1.2 Other existing relevant EU legislation:  

zootechnics, animal welfare, animal health  

3.2 National legislation in the EU Member States 

3.3 World Trade Organisation (WTO), GATT and SPS agreements 

3.4 WHO-FAO Codex Alimentarius 

3.5 Intellectual Property (IP) regulation  

  1 

  5 

  6 

  6 

  6

  8 

  9 

            10 

10 

11 

12 

12 

15 

15 

15 

17 

18 

20 

20 

21 

23 

26 

27 

28 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. ETHICAL ISSUES  

4.1 The moral status of animals  

4.2 Sustainability and animal farming  

4.3 Religious considerations  

4.4 Public perception and public acceptance 

4.5 The consumer's right to know, free choice and labelling 

5. OPINION 

5.1 Scope of the opinion 

5.2 Arguments on animal cloning for food 

5.3 Food safety  

5.4 Animal welfare and health 

5.5 Farm animal biodiversity and sustainability  

5.6 Societal aspects 

5.6.1 Public participation  

5.6.2 Public perception  

5.7 Traceability and labelling 

5.8 Intellectual property issues 

5.9 Global trade 

5.10 Conclusions 

5.11 The need for revision of this Opinion 

Appendix I 

Addendum requested from Professor Krzysztof Marczewski,  

EGE member 

Appendix II 

Secretariat EGE contact details 

32 

33 

34 

35 

35 

36 

38 

38 

39 

40 

40 

41 

42 

42 

42 

43 

43 

44 

45 

47 

50 

51

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 

Ethical aspects of animal cloning for food supply 

In  February  2007,  following  the  announcement  by  the  US  Food  and  Drug  Administration 

(FDA)  concerning  possible  authorisation  of  food  products  derived  from  cloned  cattle,  pigs 

and  goats  on  the  market,  President  Barroso  asked  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  of  science 

and new technologies (EGE) to issue an Opinion on ethical implications of cloning animals 

for food supply.  

At the same time, the European Food and Safety Agency (EFSA), was asked to produce an 

Opinion on food safety, animal health, and environmental implications of live cloned animals 

obtained  through  somatic  cell  nuclear  transfer  technique  (SCNT),  their  offspring  and  the 

products obtained from them.   

After  several  months  of  internal  working  meetings,  expert  hearings,  a  public  consultation 

launched  in  the  Europa  web  site  (800  contributions  received)  and  a  round  table  with 

representatives from academia, industry, NGOs, civil society, International organisations and 
industry1, on January 16, 2007, the EGE has adopted its latest Opinion on ethical aspects of 

animal cloning for food supply. The Group is aware of the EFSA draft Opinion and the FDA 

Report published the day before the adoption of the Opinion. 

Considering the current level of suffering and health problems of surrogate dams and animal 

clones,  the  EGE  has  doubts  as  to  whether  cloning  animals  for  food  supply  is  ethically 

justified. Whether this applies also to progeny is open to further scientific research. 

At present, the EGE does not see convincing arguments to justify the production of food from 
clones and their offspring2. If in the future food products derived from cloned animals were to 

be introduced to the European market, the EGE recommends that the following requirements 

are met: 

Food safety - The safety of food products for human consumption as a pre-condition for their marketing 

must be guaranteed and scientific updates and follow up research into progeny should be carried out. 

1 http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/activities/index_en.htm

2 The conclusion in this paragraph was dissented by K. Marczewski.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Animal welfare and health - In accordance with the Amsterdam Treaty (animals as sentient beings) and 

the Lisbon Treaty, additional requirements should be met in intensive animal breeding, with the aim of 

following  the  guidance  on  animal  welfare  provided  by  the  World  Organisation  for  Animal  Health 

(OIE),  e.g.  the  five  freedoms:  from  hunger,  thirst  and  malnutrition;    from  fear  and  distress;  from 

physical  and  thermal  discomfort;    from  pain,  injury  and  disease;  and  to  express  normal  patterns  of 

behaviour. 

Traceability - Current EU legislation on food regarding traceability of animals and their food products 

should  be  enforced.  It  should  be  ensured  that  EU  legislation  provides  for  the  ability  to  identify 

individual animals where necessary. 

Global trade - The import of cloned animals, their offspring and materials derived from cloned animals 

(e.g. semen and food products) should be conditional on proper documentation, in particular with regard 

to traceability provisions and animal welfare.  

In addition the EGE recommends that:  

Animal welfare - Further studies and analyses on long-term animal welfare and health implications for 

clones  and  their  offspring,  as  well  as  more  comparative  analyses  with  other  assisted  and  traditional 

reproductive technologies in animal farming, should be carried out for a proper assessment of this issue, 

in line with EFSA draft opinion. The Commission should take initiatives to prepare a Code of Conduct 

on responsible farm animal breeding, including animal cloning. 

Farm  animal  biodiversity  and  sustainability  –  The  Commission  should  take  proper  measures  to 

preserve  the  genetic  heritage  of  farm  animal  species,  for  example  by  funding  projects  that  aim  to 

preserve domesticated breeds in Europe and to promote sustainable agriculture. 

Public  participation  -  Public  debates  should  be  promoted  on  the  impact  of  farm  animal  cloning  on 

agriculture and environment, on societal impact of increasing meat consumption and rearing of bovines, 

as well as on the fair distribution of food resources. The Commission should take a pro-active role in 

promoting public discussion on the use of animal cloning, and its potential implications, by financing a 

number  of  ad  hoc  initiatives  aimed  at  promoting  public  debate  on  the  marketing  of  food  products 

derived from animal cloning.  

 Public perception - The Commission should launch a thematic Eurobarometer survey and qualitative 

studies on animal cloning for food supply, in order to collect indicators on public perception concerning 

the introduction of such products to the food market as is being done in other countries.  

Labelling  –  The  EGE  is  aware  of  the  technical  difficulties  of  labelling  products  from  offspring, 

nevertheless it recommends that the Commission takes the initiative to devise targeted procedures prior 

to the marketing of such food in the EU.   

Intellectual property issues – It should be clarified whether the exclusion clauses in Directive 98/44/EC 

(Art. 6d) on patentability of biological inventions and the EPO rules (23 d) to animal cloning for food 

apply. 

Global trade and consumer's freedom – The EGE is aware that import issues of food products derived 

from  cloned  animals,  including  compliance  with  World  Trade  Organisations  provisions,  may 

 
 
complicate the market situation, however, the EGE recommends that the Commission takes initiatives 

to ensure consumers' freedom and rights. 

Research - Further research is needed, in particular basic research on animal cloning, as well as impact 

on  human  health,  animal  welfare  for  farmed  species  other  than  those  covered  by  EFSA.  Similarly, 

further  ethical,  legal  and  social  implications  of  animal  cloning  for  food  supply  as  well  as  qualitative 

studies on public perception should be carried out.  

The  EGE  Opinion  has  been  issued  to  Commission  President  Barroso  on  16.01.2008,  the  Opinion  is 

accessible at http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS  

IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES  

TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

No 23   

         16.01.2008 

************************************************************************** 

ETHICAL ASPECTS OF ANIMAL CLONING FOR FOOD SUPPLY 

Reference: 

Request from President Barroso 

Rapporteurs: 

I. de Beaufort, P. Puigdomenech-Rosell,  J. Glasa 

************************************************************************* 

THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES (EGE), 

I.  

HAVING REGARD TO 

Having regard to the Treaty on European Union, and in particular Article F. 2 of the Common 

Provisions and the annexed Declaration n° 24 on the Protection of Animals, 

Having  regard  to  The  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  of  the  United  Nations  (FAO)  and 

the World Health Organization (WHO) Codex Alimentarius of 1963 as a reference document 

for consumers, food producers, manufacturers and national food control agencies, 

Having  regard  to  Council  Directive  77/504/EEC  of  25  July  1977  on  pure-bred  breeding 

animals of the bovine species, 

Having regard to Council Directive 86/609/EEC regarding the protection of animals used for 

experimental and other scientific purposes, 

Having  regard  to  the  European  Conventions  of  the  Council  of  Europe  for  the  protection  of 

animals  kept  for  farming  purposes  (1976-EST  87)  and  in  particular  the  Protocol  of 

Amendment  thereto,  and  for  the  protection  of  vertebrate  animals  used  for  experimental  or 

other scientific purposes (1986-EST 123), 

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Having  regard  to  Council  Directive  88/407/EEC,  laying  down  the  animal  health 

requirements applicable to intra-community trade in and imports of and imports of, deep-

frozen semen of domestic animals of the bovine species; amended by Council Directives 

90/120/EEC, 90/425/EEC, 93/60/EEC, Decision 95/1/EEC, 

Having regard to Council Directive 88/661/EEC of 19 December 1988 on the zootechnical 

standards applicable to breeding animals of the porcine species, 

Having  regard  to  Council  Directive  89/361/EEC  of  30  May  1989  concerning  pure-bred 

breeding sheep and goats, 

Having  regard  to  Council  Directive  89/556/EEC,  on  animal  health  conditions  governing 

intra-Community  trade  in  and  importation  from  third  countries  of  embryos  of  domestic 

animals of the bovine species,

Having  regard  to  Directive  90/219/EEC  of  23  April  1990  on  the  contained  use  of 

genetically  modified  microorganisms  (OJEC  L  117,  8  May  1990,  pp.  1  et  seq.,  as 

amended) and Directive 98/81/EC, which amended it, 

Having regard to Council Directive 90/220/EEC, regarding the deliberate release into the 

environment  of  genetically  modified  organisms,  and  Directive  2001/18/EC  on  the 

deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms,  

Having regard to Council Directive 90/427/EEC of 26 June 1990 on the zootechnical and 

genealogical conditions governing intra-Community trade in equidae, 

Having regard to Council Directive 91/629/EEC and 91/630/EEC, laying down minimum 

standards for the protection of calves and of pigs, 

Having regard to the United Nations Convention on Biodiversity of 6 June 1992, ratified 

by the European Union on 25 October 1993, 

Having  regard  to  Council  Directive  94/28/EEC,  Art.  4-7,  laying  down  the  principles 

relating to. the zootechnical and genealogical conditions applicable to imports from third 

2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
countries  of  animals,  semen,  ova  and  embryos  which  are  covered  by  European  Union 

Council Directives 77/504/EEC, 88/661/EEC, 89/361/EEC, 90/427/EEC and 91/174/EEC 

and by the European Community decisions implementing these Directives, 

Having  regard  to  the  Protocol  on  protection  and  welfare  of  animals,  annexed  to  the 
Amsterdam Treaty1, 

Having regard to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) Sanitary and Phyto-sanitary (SPS) 

agreements of 1995, in particular to Art. 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 on health risk assessments, 

Having  regard  to  Regulation  No  258/97/EC  concerning  novel  foods  and  novel  food 

ingredients,  

Having regard to Council Directive 98/44/EC on the patentability of biological inventions, 

specifically Article 6 thereof, 

Having  regard  to  Council  Directive  99/74/EEC,  laying  down  minimum  standards  for  the 

protection of laying hens, 

Having regard to Directive 2000/13/EC, on the approximation of the laws of the Member 

States relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs, 

Having regard to Directive 2001/18/EC of 12 March 2001 on the deliberate release into the 

environment  of  genetically  modified  organisms  and  repealing  Council  Directive 
90/220/EEC2, 

Having regard to the General Food Law, Regulation (EC) No 178/2002, for 'the protection 

of  human  life  and  health,  taking  account  of,  where  appropriate,  the  protection  of  animal 

health and welfare, plant health and the environment', 

Having  regard  to  Regulation  (EC)  No  1829/2003  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the 
Council of 22 September 2003 on genetically modified food and feed3,  

1 OJ C340, 10 November 1997 
2 OJEC L 106, 17 April 2001 

3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
Having  regard  to  Regulation  (EC)  No  1830/2003  of  22  September  2003  concerning  the 

traceability  and  labelling  of  genetically  modified  organisms  and  the  traceability  of  food 

and feed products produced from genetically modified organisms and amending Directive 
2001/18/EC4, 

Having  regard  to  Regulation  (EC)  No  1946/2003  of  15  July  2003  on  transboundary 
movements of genetically modified organisms5, 

Having regard to the Treaty of Lisbon, signed on 13 December 2007 and currently open 

for ratification, 

Having regard to Article 6 of the Seventh Framework Programme (FP7, 2007-2013): "All 

the  research  activities  carried  out  under  the  Seventh  Framework  Programme  shall  be 

carried out in compliance with fundamental ethical principles", 

Having  regard  to  the  EGE  Opinion  Nr.  9  "Ethical  Aspects  of  Cloning  Techniques", 

published on 28 May 1997, 

Having heard the rapporteurs I. de Beaufort, P. Puigdomenech-Rosell,  J. Glasa 

************ 

3 OJEU L 268, 18 October 2003 
4 OJEU L 268, 18 October 2003, pp. 24 et seq. 
5 OJEU L 287, 5 November 2003, pp. 1 et seq. 

4

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                    
 
Whereas: 

1. Preamble 

Given  that  the  issue  of  cloning  animals  for  food  supply  is  a  new  and  complex  topic,  the 

Commission is considering it carefully in the context of the existing legal framework, bearing 

in mind food safety, the desire of consumers for information, animal health and welfare, and 

other relevant factors such as ethical considerations. 

In  February  2007,  following  the  announcement  by  the  US  Food  and  Drug  Administration 

(FDA)  concerning  possible  authorisation  of  food  products  derived  from  cloned  cattle,  pigs 

and goats on the market, President Barroso asked the EGE to issue an Opinion on the ethical 

implications of cloning animals for food.  

At the same time, the European Food and Safety Agency (EFSA6), was asked to produce an 

Opinion on food safety, animal health, and environmental implications of live cloned animals 

obtained  through  somatic  cell  nuclear  transfer  technique  (SCNT),  their  offspring  and  the 
products obtained from them7.   

The EGE previously issued an Opinion on the ethics of animal cloning in 1997, but owing to 

the  state  of  the  art  of  the  technology  at  that  time,  it  did  not  address  the  ethics  of  animal 

cloning specifically for food supply. The present EGE Opinion complements and updates the 

previous  one  and  is  intended  to  be  complementary  to  that  of  the  EFSA.  The  ethical 

considerations  in  this  Opinion  will  therefore  refer  to  the  use  of  animal  cloning  in  breeding 

establishments in order to produce progeny that could enter the food chain.   

6  The  European  Food  Safety  Authority  (EFSA)  is  the  keystone  European  Union  Agency  on  risk  assessment 
regarding food and feed safety. EFSA provides independent scientific advice and communication on existing and 
emerging risks. http://www.efsa.eu.int

5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
2. Scientific background to animal cloning 

2.1. Definitions 
The term "cloning" is applied to different activities in life sciences8, but for the purposes of 

this Opinion the word “cloning” will refer to cloning by somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) 

that  allows  scientists  to  create  genetic  replicas  (clones)  from  adult  animals  that  “share  the 
same nuclear gene set” as another organism.9

Cloning: The word 'cloning' derives from the Greek word for 'twin' and was originally used in 

microbiology and in agriculture for the process of multiplying single organisms by means of 

asexual reproduction to create a population of identical individuals.  

Embryo  splitting  involves  the  division  of  embryos  at  an  early  stage  of  development  to 

produce  two  embryos,  and  usually  can  only  be  performed  once  or  twice,  achieving  a 

maximum of four genetically identical organisms. Experiments on embryo splitting date back 

to 1891 with sea urchins and later on with salamanders (1902). 

Cloning by somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) involves replacing an egg’s nucleus with the 

nucleus  of  an  adult  cell  (or  that  derived  from  an  embryo  or  foetus)  to  be  cloned,  and  then 

activating  the  egg’s  further  development  without  fertilisation.  The  egg  genetically  re-

programmes  the  transferred  nucleus,  enabling  it  to  develop  directly  into  a  whole  new 

organism.  

2.2. Historical background  

In  nature,  the  normal  reproductive  process  in  bacteria  and  in  the  simpler  animals  may  be 

considered a form of cloning. Amoebas are single-celled protozoa which reproduce by binary 

fission,  resulting  in  two  offspring  with  identical  genes.  In  more  complex  animals,  cloning 

occurs  when  a  fertilised  egg  splits  to  give  identical  twins.  In  the  case  of  humans  these  are 

7  Animal  species  covered:  Captive  large  ruminants  (cattle);  Captive  small  ruminants  (goats,  sheep);  Pigs; 
Oviparous animals (birds, chicken).  
8 For example, molecular cloning involves different techniques to multiply DNA sequences either in-vitro or in 
vivo, related to recombinant DNA techniques. Cellular cloning is the process of isolating single cells in culture 
and  propagating  them  in  order  to  obtain  a  cell  population.  It  is  the  basic  procedure  for  produceingclonal  cell 
lines, for example for the production of monoclonal antibodies. 
9  In  their  phenotype  there  seem  to  be  differences  due  epigenetic  effects  influencing  gene  expression. 
"Epigenetics"  aims  to  describe  the  inheritance  of  information  on  the  basis  of  gene  expression  in  contrast  to 
"Genetics", which aims to describe the inheritance of information on the basis of DNA sequence. 

6

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                         
 
homozygous twins. This natural phenomenon has been studied over a long period of time, and 

biologists  have  started  to  develop  techniques  to  induce  or  reproduce  the  cloning  of  living 

organisms. 

Examples of natural cloning 

Contrary to the general perception, cloning is not a new technology. The first experiments of 

nuclear  transfer  with  amphibians  (Rana  pipiens  and  Xenopus  laevis)  were  performed  in  the 

United States and Britain during the 1950s to study the irreversibility of the modification of 

genetic  material  of  differentiated  cells  from  adult  animals  (1952,  cloning  of  tadpoles). 

Cloning  experiments  were  then  performed  in  amphibians  in  the  1960s  (fish  were  cloned  in 

1963), in sheep in the 1980s, in monkeys in the 1990s, and in a range of animal species during 

the last 10 years (from primates, to cattle, to swine in the early 2000's).  

During the last decade (1997-2007) only non-primate mammals were reported to be cloned. 

Most  recently,  in  2007  a  US-based  research  group  reported  the  creation  of  several  embryos 
cloned from an adult rhesus monkey10.

Table 1. Domestic animal species cloned so far: 

Year of first cloning 
1963 
1996 
1998 
2000 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 

Species 
Carp 
Sheep 
Cow, Mouse 
Pig, Goat 
Rat, Rabbit 
Mule, Horse 
Cat 
Dog 
Ferret 

10 The Independent, 12 November 2007, http://news.independent.co.uk/sci_tech/article3152325.ece 

7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
2.3. Somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) 
At present, the most commonly used technique for animal cloning is Somatic Cell Nuclear 

Transfer (SCNT). SCNT can be achieved via three main steps:  

1)  enucleation of an oocyte, performed mechanically by fixing the oocyte and aspirating the nucleus 

by using a sharp glass pipette. 
transfer  of  the  nucleus  from  the  donor  cell11  into  the  fertilized  enucleated  oocyte12;  most 

2) 

commonly, the somatic cell's nucleus is injected under the zona pellucida of the egg cell by using a 

micro-manipulator  and  a  microscope.  To  induce  membrane  fusion  of  the  two  cells,  a  short 

electrical impulse is applied. 

3)  activation and  reprogramming of  the reconstructed  embryo. In  order  to  kick  start development, 

reprogramming  of  the  donor  nucleus  is  needed;  this  seems  to  happen  via  factors  present  in  the 

recipient's cytoplasm, but the exact mechanisms are still unknown. A necessary step in this process 
is to mimic the cellular conditions after physiological fertilisation13.  

When the cloned embryo resulting from SCNT starts to develop it is transferred to a surrogate 

mother,  which  carries  out  the  pregnancy.  The  transfer  to  the  surrogate  mother  is  species 

specific, both in terms of timing and procedure. In some species, like pigs, the transfer has to 

be done by surgical procedures, and it is usually carried out one day after the nuclear injection 

and  embryo  activation  (a  single  one-cell  stage).  In  other  species,  like  cattle,  transfer  can  be 

done  without  surgical  procedure,  and  embryos  are  usually  transferred  at  a  later  stage,  one 
week after embryo reconstruction14. So far, around a dozen animal species have been cloned 

via SCNT. Animal clones that are relevant for the food market include sheep, goats, bovines 

and pigs. 

As the commercial interest in cloning farm animals has grown, the cloning technique has been 

refined  and  success  rates  are  improving.  A  step  in  this  process  is  the  establishment  of 

alternative  and  simplified  procedures  for  the  production  of  cloned  animals.  For  example,  in 

11 Donor somatic cells can now be derived from a variety of different tissues. Interestingly, some tissues seem to 
be more suitable for SCNT than others, giving higher rates of pregnancy and live births, the reason thereof still 
being  unclear.  At  present,  cloned  offspring  has  been  born  from  a  dozen  of  differentiated  donor  cells,  out  of 
roughly 200 existing cell types. 
12  Recipient  oocytes  are  often  obtained  from  slaughterhouses  (as  for  cows,  pigs,  sometimes  sheep),  so  that 
material is abundant even if of lower quality, and extremely inexpensive. They are cultured in vitro and treated 
with hormones for a variable length of time before they can differentiate and be used for SCNT. 
13 Some of these conditions include: increase of the intra-cellular calcium, which usually follows the penetration 
of the spermatozoa, and subsequent decrease of the maturation promoting factor (MPF). Both conditions can be 
artificially  achieved  by  treating  the  reconstructed  embryo  after  SCNT  briefly  with  a  chemical  agent  to  block 
protein synthesis, or by applying a brief electrical shock. 

8

 
 
 
                                                 
 
order  to  reduce  the  need  for  expensive  equipment  such  as  micromanipulators  for  nuclear 
transfer,  scientists  have  recently  discovered  so  called  'handmade'  cloning15.  This  nuclear 

transfer  technology  might  also  make  the  techniques  available  to  less  developed  countries, 

where it would not otherwise be possible to implement it successfully.   

Figure 2 Scheme of the Cloning technique 

2.4. Dolly  

The attention of the general public was attracted when the birth of the first cloned mammal, 

Dolly, was announced in 1996. Its embryo was derived from cells that had been taken from 

the udder of a 6-year old Finn Dorset ewe and cultured for several weeks in the laboratory. 

These cells were then fused with unfertilised eggs from which the genetic material had been 
removed  and  then  successfully  implanted  in  a  surrogate  mother  sheep16.  Dolly’s  birth 
provided a revolutionary method of producing animals identical to an adult one17.  

14 In cattle, initially 1-4 embryos were transferred, but nowadays there is a tendency towards single transfer, to 
avoid problems with multiple pregnancies. 
15 Vajta G. "Handmade cloning: the future way of nuclear transfer? Trends Biotech, 25:250-253 (2007) 
16  Biologists  cultured  276  of  these  reconstructed  eggs  for  6  days  in  temporary  recipients.  Twenty-nine  of  the 
eggs  that  appeared  to  have  developed  normally  up  until  the  blastocyst  stage  were  implanted  into  surrogate 
Scottish Blackface ewes. 
17  The  innovatiove  feature  of  the  nuclear  transfer  technique  (NTT)  was  the  use  of  unfertilised  eggs  and  their 
fusion with a cell that contained the genetic endowment of only one organism. 

9

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                         
 
After the successful experiment that produced Dolly, several laboratories18 began to work on 

applications  of  animal  cloning  using  somatic  cell  nuclear  transfer.  Biologists  successively 

cloned other animals, such as goats and cattle (see Revel, 2000:43-59). In 1997, the cloning of 

a  transgenic  lamb  (Polly)  cloned  from  cells  engineered  with  a  marker  gene  and  a  human 
gene19 was announced. In this way, the genetic modification of a lamb was combined with the 

techniques of cloning, thereby generating animals that produce a new protein. 

2.4.1. Biological implications 

Contrary to the common perception, a number  of biological factors contradict to the claim 

that clones are carbon copies of their ancestors:  

1) The mitochondrial DNA comes from the egg and is therefore different from that in 

the cells of the donor of the nucleus;  

2)  Gene  expression  depends  not  only  on  the  sequence  of  naked  DNA,  but  also  on 

DNA  modifications,  chromatin  structure  and  the  presence  of  small  RNAs.  These 

mechanisms are the basis of epigenetic mechanisms and it is not known how they are 

reprogrammed in the cloned embryo; 

3)  The  whole  new  organism  develops  from  a  single  cell  that  multiplies  several 

million  times  giving  origin  to  multiple  organs  and  allowing  for  spontaneous  DNA 

mutations in single somatic cells and phenotypical differences;  

4) Several organs including the immune system and the brain are not fully developed 

at  the  embryonal  stage,  hence  clones  may  have  multiple  differences  from  their 

nucleus donor. 

2.5. Animal health and welfare problems related to cloning 

As already stated, cloning is not a new technology, but it still has relatively low efficiency and 

leads to high perinatal and postnatal disease and mortality of cloned organisms. Animal health 

18  “In  cloning  procedures  generally,  nuclei  are  extracted  from  cultured  cells  that  might  have  come  originally 
from  an  embryo,  a  foetus  or  an  adult  organism.  The  nuclei  are  inserted  into  egg  cells  which  have  had  their 
original  nucleus  removed,  a  process  called  nuclear  transfer.  In  the  initial  work  at  the  Roslin  Institute,  the  egg 
cells along with their transplanted nuclei were then implanted directly into a foster mother, where they developed 
and, 
offspring.” 
resulted 
(http://www.sciam.com/explorations/090297clone/beardsley.html).  

Dolly, 

viable 

case 

the 

of 

in 

in 

a 

19 Human clotting factor IX (see: http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/abstract/278/5346/2130) 

10

 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
and welfare issues are therefore extremely important when assessing the implications of this 

technology and its industrial use in terms of both efficacy and safety. 

2.5.1 Animal health 

The  mechanical  stress  exercised  on  the  donor  egg  cell  and  in  vitro  conditions  for  the 

embryonic  culture  are  critical  aspects  of  the  cloning  techniques.  A  high  degree  of  technical 

skill  and  quality  equipments  are  needed,  otherwise  the  ‘quality’  (viability,  health)  of  the 

clones, as well as the overall SCNT efficacy are compromised.  

In cattle, at day 50 post transfer, pregnancy rates can be as high as 65% (and therefore similar 

to other assisted reproduction technologies), but a continual loss is observed up  to delivery, 

leading  to  a  live  birth  efficiency  as  low  as  13%  (a  value,  which  is  highly  laboratory 

dependent).  After  birth,  around  20%  of  calves  don't  survive  the  first  24h,  and  an  additional 

15% die before weaning.  

Animal  cloning 

induces  several  complications  with  regard 

to 

the  pregnancy  and 

developmental anomalies appear at both in vitro and in vivo phases (Table 2). Those comprise 

for  example,  missing  embryo  development,  increased  foetal  loss,  placenta  inadequacy, 

abnormal placenta and foetus size, increase in the average abortion rate.  

For  the  cloned  animals,  following  abnormalities  are  observed  with  varying  frequencies:  an 

increased weight; malformations and reduced viability at birth; respiratory problems; enlarged 

foetal liver; epidermal haemorrhages; kidney abnormalities etc.  

Epigenetic changes in reprogramming of the donor’s nucleus in SCNT have been implicated 

in causing many of these anomalies. Much of the ongoing research in this rapidly expanding 

field  is  focused  on  gathering  and  understanding  data  in  prospective  observation  studies  in 

cloned animals during their lifetime.

The  mentioned  phenotypic  abnormalities  are  documented  in  the  first  generation  (F0)  of 

cloned  animals  (i.e.  in  the  clones  themselves),  while  their  offspring  (F1)  seems  to  be 

apparently  healthy.  The  available  data,  however,  are  still  limited  to  allow  at  present  any 

definitive conclusions. Due to the long life cycle of the most of the farm animals in question, 

11

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the data and information gathering in order to respond to the questions regarding the SCNT 

cloned animals’ health may require a longer period of time than the one analysed so far.  

The EFSA Opinion will provide a more detailed analysis of the animal health implications of 

SCNT based upon the actually available data.  

Short-term 
abnormalities
Other 
abnormalities

Large offspring 
syndrome20 
(LOS)

Post-natal 
Mortality

Table 2. Abnormalities correlated with SCNT 

These abnormalities include decreased rate of growth and chromosomal abnormalities. 
This usually leads to early embryonal death, within the first few weeks of gestation. 
Abnormalities  can  be  observed  later  during  gestation  or  even  after  birth.  The  major 
cause of such abnormalities is thought to be of epigenetic origin and can be correlated 
with inadequate reprogramming of the donor DNA. 
LOS  comprises  a  large  number  of  symptoms,  often  manifested  as  increased  birth 
weight  of  offspring,  due  to  foetal  overgrowth  and  prolonged  gestation.  Also  due  to 
LOS,  most  of  deliveries  in  cattle  are  performed  via  caesarean  section.  Following 
problems  are  related  to  LOS:  placental  abnormalities,  stillbirth,  malformations  of 
several  organs  (liver,  brain,  uro-genital  tract),  immune  dysfunction,  infections.  The 
pathological  picture  can  vary  considerably  from  case  to  case  and  among  different 
species. 
Postnatal mortality is observed in a biphasic modality: early neonatal mortality, usually 
within  one  week  after  birth,  or  later  in  life  up  to  6  months  of  age.  In  the  first  group, 
death is usually due to cardiovascular failure, whereas in the second group the majority 
of cases are related to immuno-deficiencies and / or liver failure. After six months of 
age,  if  the  animal  reaches  adulthood,  it  is  usually  as  healthy  as  control,  non-cloned 
animals 

2.5.2. Animal welfare 

The animal health problems related to SCNT cloning techniques (see 2.4.1. for details) pose 

multiple and questions from the point of view of the animal welfare. When considering those 

questions, the welfare of the clones themselves (F0 generation), of their “surrogate mothers”, 

as well as of the next generations of the clones’ progeny (F1, F2 and subsequent) should be 

taken into account, together with existing knowledge gaps in this area.       

The  EFSA  draft  Opinion  provides  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  animal  welfare  implications  of 

SCNT based on the actually available data.  

2.6 Potential applications of animal cloning for the food supply 

After  10  years  of  research  activity  the  main  planned  application  of  animal  cloning  for  food 

production today is the propagation of a desirable genotype: individuals of high genetic merit, 

improved traits such as an increase in productivity, animal health and/or the quality of food 

products.  In  this  sense,  cloning  is  seen  as  a  way  of  ensuring  a  continuum  supply  of  genetic 

material  from  elite  animals  to  be  used  in  breeding  programmes  for  farm  animals.  Thus,  the 

20 The term used to describe some of these developmental anomalies is ‘large offspring syndrome” (LOS). 

12

 
 
 
                                                 
 
animals to be cloned would be those having traits of interest for farming, such as resistance to 

diseases, or characteristics of interest for food production, such as quantity of milk, quality of 

meat or others. 

Animal  cloning  is  therefore  seen  as  representing  a  further  technological  process  for  animal 

breeding,  in  which  reproduction  occurs  in  an  asexual  manner  and  which  allows  the 

propagation of desired traits more quickly than through standard mating schemes. At present a 

range of breeding techniques is employed in animal farming, including: artificial insemination 

(AI), in vitro fertilization (IVF) and embryo splitting. SCNT may have an impact on classical 

farm  animal  breeding  because  it  would  be  possible  to  duplicate  animals  with  high  genetic 

value  to  increase  their  number  of  offspring  (e.g.  increasing  the  number  of  valid  males  for 

artificial insemination etc.).  

Table 3. Current Animal Breeding techniques 

Studies of AI for cattle breeding began as early as the 1900's. By the 1940's it had become 
a routine procedure. It allows mating between high quality livestock without the physical 
presence of the bull. The bull's semen is collected, frozen and shipped worldwide, where 
female animals are inseminated. Nowadays AI represents nearly 75% of all inseminations 
for  cattle  breeding  and  up  to  85%  for  swine  breeding.  Breeders keep  accurate  records in 
order to avoid inbreeding problems. 
IVF  is  employed  in  farm  animal  breeding  in  order  to  allow  embryo  selection  and  to 
increase productivity.  

Artificial 
insemination 
(AI)

In Vitro 
Fertilisation 
(IVF)  

Embryo 
splitting

Each good quality embryo can be dissected by means of a stereoscopic microscope and a 
fine glass needle (or a razor) to give rise to twins. Using this procedure a 1.5 fold increase 
in  productivity  can  be  achieved,  even  in  less  developed  countries,  as  the  technology 
involved is not particularly complex.  

Animal 
cloning 
breeding 
purpose

for 

The extremely high fidelity in reproducing a particular genotype achieved by cloning could 
lead  to  ‘tailor-made’  strains  of  livestock.  Biotechnology  companies  claim  that  the  major 
potential benefit of cloning is the possibility of building up a herd of animals for breeding 
that will create genetically determined populations. Cloning of animals for mating would 
make  it  possible  to  respond  more  quickly  than  in  traditional  mating  programmes  to  the 
needs of both animal breeding and the food industry. However, the relevance of SCNT to 
the long-term future applications for farm animal breeding and food production in Europe 
still needs to be explored.  

The  potential  of  cloning  for  animal  breeding  programmes  has  been  boosted  by  the 

improvement in the efficacy of the technology involved. In fact, when Dolly was created the 

success rate was around 2%; now it is 10-20% in cattle, although the data are highly species-

dependent. As for other ART used in animal breeding programmes, the post-natal success rate 

of cloning generally  remains  quite  low, regardless of the methodology used. In some cases, 

the low success rate - combined with the fact that cloned animals sometimes differ from the 

original  animal  due  to  epigenetic  effects,  plus  the  high  final  cost  of  the  technology  -  may 

13

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
make the possible applications of animal cloning in food and animal breeding industry a very 

complex issue, and cloning might become unattractive from an economic point of view. 

Frozen  semen  from  cattle  is  sold  widely  in  the  EU  for  artificial  insemination  purposes,  and 
some  companies  in  the  US  already  offer  semen  from  cloned  bulls21,  envisaging  a  rapid 

expansion of the market for cloned livestock from the US to the EU if this is commercialized. 

This would suggest that the cloned animals have a low probability of entering the food chain 

by themselves, and that only their progeny may be used for food production. Offspring from 

cloned cattle and pigs are currently used for research purposes only, but may be ready to enter 

the  food  chain  soon  if  this  technique  is  commercialized;  the  same  applies  to  food  products, 

such as milk, meat and derivatives, obtained from the offspring of clones. 

The  estimated  timeline  for  the  commercialization  of  food  products  derived  from  cloned 

animals has been indicated for the USA and foresees the commercialization of food products 

from cloned animals within a couple of years from now (see table 4 below).  

Table 4. Indicative timetable for the commercialization of food products derived from cloned animals22

2005 → 2010: 

2010 → 2015: 

Semen and offspring from cloned cattle, and milk, meat and derivatives from offspring of 
cloned cattle; Semen and offspring from cloned pigs, and pig meat and derivatives from 
offspring of cloned pigs. 
Cloned  cattle  and  milk,  beef  and  derivatives  from  cloned  cattle;  Cloned  pigs,  pig  meat 
and derivatives from cloned pigs. 

If authorised by the FDA (or EFSA in the EU), it may be hypothesised that it will take at least 

3-5 years before food from the offspring of clones becomes available to the consumer (earlier 

for swine, later for bovines). In the dairy industry, most clones will be breeding bulls used for 

semen collection.  

According to EU experts, no cloned animals have yet reached the food chain in Europe and no 

projects have yet been established to use bovine clones (or their products) for the food supply 

industry. However, an accurate forecast for the EU is still very difficult to make at present. 

The EFSA Opinion may provide some significant information on this question. 

21 http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/life_and_style/food_and_drink/article1264944.ece 
22  'Dolly  for  dinner?  Assessing  commercial  and  regulatory  trends  in  cloned  livestock.',  Suk  J.  et  al.,  Nature 
Biotechnology, 25(1), 2007.  

14

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
2.7 Long-term future applications of animal cloning 

In the long run, the cloning of farm animals could be combined with genetic modifications so 

as  to  have  livestock  with  specific  characteristics,  for  example,  genetic  resistance  to  specific 

diseases (bovine BSE, mastitis, brucellosis, tropical diseases etc.) or producing food products 

of higher value than natural ones, so-called "nutraceuticals", such as low-lactose milk, kappa 

casein  rich  milk,  better  beef  from  myostatin  TG  cattle  etc.  In  this  way,  cloning  -  in 
combination  with  transgenesis23  -  may  be  a  potentially  rich  source  of  edible  products  for 

biomedical  purposes  (e.g.  production  of  proteins,  such  as  milk  proteins,  to  be  used  for 

therapeutic  purposes  at  lower  cost,  or  providing  a  source  of  organs  or  tissue  for 

xenotransplantation).  

In Europe, the most promising application still appears to be cloning for biomedical purpose, 

such as the production of animal models for biomedical purposes (e.g. research in the field of 
Alzheimer’s  disease24,  models  to  improve  the  understanding  of  embryogenesis,  bioreactors 

etc.) or as sources of organs for transplantation. This use of animal cloning, however, entails 

completely  different  aspects  that  need  to  be  considered  from  the  legal  and  ethical  points  of 
view, and so it is not addressed in this Opinion (see EGE Opinion on Cloning25). 

2.8. Safety and risk assessment of cloning for food 

To date, there has been no comprehensive scientific risk assessment at EU level on the use of 

products  from  cloned  animals  or  their  offspring  (e.g.  meat  and  milk,  semen,  and  embryos). 

EFSA is to produce a risk assessment that will cover food safety, human and animal health, 

animal  welfare  and  the  environmental  implications  that  may  flow  from  this  use  of 

biotechnology. The EFSA Opinion, due to be published in early 2008, will cover both cloned 

animals and their offspring.  

2.8.1  Report  by  the  US  Food  and  Drug  Administration  (FDA)  on  the  health  of  cloned 

animals and safety of their food products 

23  As  transgenic  clones,  the  clones  are  derived  from  donor  cells  containing  exogenous  DNA  inserted  by 
molecular  biology  techniques,  they  are  subjected  to  risk  assessments  specific  to  the  inserted  construct,  its 
insertion site, and its subsequent expression.   
24  Vajta  lab,  Population  Genetics  and  Embryology,  Institute  of  Genetics  and  Biotechnology,  Faculty  of 
Agricultural Sciences, University of Aarhus, DK-8830 Tjele, Denmark; Institute of Human Genetics, University 
of Aarhus, DK-8000 Aarhus, Denmark. 
25 http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/docs/opinion9_en.pdf 

15

 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
The  US  agency  responsible  for  food  safety  (FDA)  carried  out  a  risk  assessment  of  cloned 
animals  (cattle,  swine,  sheep  and  goats),  their  offspring  and  their  food  products26.  The 

Opinion of the FDA has been adopted on January 15, 2008.  

The FDA attempted first of all to identify hazards and risks on the basis of the available data 

and  consideration  of  the  biological  processes  involved  in  cloning.  In  order  to  analyse  the 

potential risks associated with food derived from animal clones and their progeny, the FDA 

asked  whether  such  food  posed  any  additional  risk  relative  to  that  arising  from  sexually-
derived animals or other kinds of 'conventional' animals27.  

According to the FDA draft report, as cloning is a relatively new technology, available data 
are  still  limited28,29.  Data-set  size  will  therefore  increase  in  the  near  future,  making  risk 
assessment more and more significant30.  

Because  no  additional  genes  are  inserted,  the  FDA  has  concluded  that  the  main  hazard  to 

which  clones  are  exposed  is  that  arising  from  incomplete  or  inappropriate  nuclear 

reprogramming  of  the  genetic  information  from  the  donor  somatic  nucleus  (e.g.  epigenetic 
effects31).  This  would  explain  the  low  “success  rate”  of  cloning,  death,  metabolic 

derangements,  or  other  the  perinatal  difficulties  observed  in  some  newborn  clones,  or 

occasional  examples  of  altered  metabolic  pathways  in  very  young  animals.  Those  clones 

exhibiting the above malformation will be excluded from the market; food hazard may remain 

for  those  clones  that  have  apparently  normal  functions,  but  with  sub-clinical  physiological 

26 http://www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/NEWS/2006/NEW01541.html 
27 In this context, 'conventional animals' were defined as 'animals derived by any reproductive means other than 
SCNT', thus comprising other ARTs such as artificial insemination and IVF. 
28  Hazards  and  risks  are  being  identified,  as  well  as  the  degree  to  which  existing  data  (and  their  pool  size) 
address questions of food safety. 
29 At present, most of the research studies on animal cloning report on the success rates of this biotechnology 
from various donor cell sources and culture conditions; they also report on the frequency of abnormalities and 
other problems such as the large offspring syndrome (LOS), the nature and frequency of developmental defects.  
30 The question arises as to whether enough data have been collected to draw confident conclusions regarding 
food  products  derived  from  animal  clones.  It  is  true  that  the  cloning  technology  has  not  yet  generated  large, 
statistically  strong  datasets  on  clones.  In  this  sense,  one  observation  made  by  the  FDA  concerning 
Developmental Study was that the data on the health of livestock clones were consistent across species, even if 
some anomalies appear to be species-specific. For example, although LOS seems to be more prevalent in cattle 
and  sheep,  surviving  animals  overcame  initial  anomalies  and  became  “healthy  and  normal.”  According  to  the 
FDA, such consistency increases the value of even small datasets (e.g. goats), and contributes to the judgments 
regarding the health of these clones and their suitability as food sources. In addition, the FDA evaluated other 
reports on the composition of meat and milk from clones and their progeny.  
31  Epigenetics  describes stable  alterations  in gene  expression  potentials  that  arise  during  development  and cell 
proliferation, or alterations in DNA function without alterations in DNA sequence. 

16

 
 
 
                                                 
 
anomalies32. However, these effects are not transmitted to the offspring of the healthy animals 

that  are  those  used  for  reproduction,  as  it  is  supposed  that  characteristics  of  an  epigenetic 

nature are in general not transmitted to the descendance. 

The FDA could not identify any toxicological hazard of concern for human consumers and, 

although  they  stated  that  additional  data  from  other  sets  of  animals  would  be  useful  in 

increasing confidence in food safety, the weight of evidence at this time is sufficient for the 

agency  to  draw  the  conclusions  it  has  set  out  in  its  Draft  Risk  Assessment  with  reasonable 

certainty. 

Source 

Cyagra 

Animals 
Cattle 

Viagen 

Swine 

Number 

67 clones 
83 controls 

7 clones  
15 controls 

4 clones 
3 controls 

F1 progeny: 
402 clones 
300 controls 

Table 5. FDA study datasets 

Group 

1) Neonatal 
2) 1-6 months 
3)Up to 18 months 

50 days to 6 months 

Analysis 

1) clinical chemistry and hematology 
2) veterinary examination 

Veterinary examination 
Composition of meat 

For fertility tests 

Semen analysis, breeding capacity 

Development  up  to  ca. 
6 months 

Abnormalities  and  weight  at  birth,  physiology 
tests 
Veterinary examination 

Analysis was not performed in a double blind manner. 

2.9 Biodiversity, epidemics. 

Some  have  advocated  that  the  multiplication  of  bioengineered  gene  pools,  in  a  repetitive 

number  through  cloning,  could  interact  with  mechanisms  of  population  genetics  and  may 
seriously damage biodiversity33 and favour the consolidation of specific allelic frequencies 
at a population level34. It may therefore have a negative impact on adaptive mechanisms35 of 

the  species  and  significant  social  and  economic  consequences  for  rural  areas,  agricultural 

32 The preliminary FDA draft described the analysis of the composition of meat (from bovine and swine clones) 
and milk (from bovine clones) products from F0 generation. The above analysis has not shown any biologically 
relevant difference with the control animals, or food commonly consumed from these species on a daily basis. 
Another  dataset  on  the  progeny  (F1)  of  swine  clones  also  indicated  that  the  composition  of  meat  from  those 
animals does not differ from that of traditionally bred animals (see Table 6). 
33  An  example  in  agriculture:  the  1845  Irish  potato  famine  was  due  to  genetic  uniformity  of  potato  plants. 
(http://www.centerforfoodsafety.org/pubs/fact%20sheet.pdf) 
34  The  possibility  of  continuously  recombining  genetic  data  allows  adaptive  processes.  The  primary  source  of 
genetic variations in living beings is random genetic mutation and during cell division. The first one creates new 
genetic  information  that  will  be  naturally  selected  over  time,  the  second  one  reshuffles  the  random  genetic 
changes created by mutations. 

17

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
trade and public perception36. In the long run it may cause the affirmation of specific allelic 

frequencies, which may lead to epidemics due to the spread of breeds sensitive to a disease 

that may rapidly propagate. It may be a way to reduce diversity in species that are already 

suffering from a reduction of their genetic base. Therefore, cloning may cause an increase in 

pathogenic gene frequencies at a population level or the loss of adaptive capacities. 

Countering  the  arguments  above,  some  have  advocated  that  cloning  cannot  affect  the 

incidence of given genes at population or species level owing to the limited number of cloned 

animals, and that cloning could be a useful tool to breed animals with specific gene lineage, 
such as cattle that are resistant to diseases or to specific environments37. 

2.10. Farm animal cloning at international level 

The first labs involved in mammal SCNT were in the USA, UK and Japan. However, over the 

last decade, and in particular between 1997 and 2003, SCNT research began to be carried out 

in different regions of the globe. At present, more than 160 laboratories in about 37 countries 

are working on SCNT. Most of the resources are directed towards livestock cloning (around 

75% of cases), whereas less than 30% of the work is directed at laboratory animals. Cattle are 

most efficiently cloned by SCNT, which is practised in around 80 laboratories (50% of total 

cloning labs) in 24 countries.  

European Union 

At present, there are very few institutes working on the cloning of large animals, and fewer 

still  that  have  an  economic  interest  in  doing  so  (mainly  for  racehorses  and  other  lucrative 

business, less for the food industry per se). In the EU there are currently roughly 120 cattle 
clones38: in France (ca. 80), Germany (ca. 30) and Italy (ca. 10). 

Japan 

Japan  is  the  country  with  probably  the  highest  number  of  cloned  animals.  Since  the  first 

cloned  calves  born  in  1990,  some  1 242  cloned  bovine  animals  have  been  manufactured  in 

Japan  to  date  (status  as  of  end  March  2007).  As  regards  the  cloning  of  pigs  for  biomedical 

research purposes, the first third-generation pig was born in August 2007 at Meiji University 

35 http://blog.greenparty.ca/en/node/461 
36 http://www.soilassociation.org/ 
37 http://www.kirinholdings.co.jp/english/ir/news_release0601.html 
38 Data from Agrobiogen (Germany). http://www.agrobiogen.com/ 

18

 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                         
 
in  Tokyo39.  Reaching  the  fourth  generation  of  clones  has  significant  implications  for  the 

breeding  and  reproduction  of  valuable  large  cloned  animals,  such  as  racehorses  and  mating 

bulls.  

United States of America (USA) 

So far the USA is the country in which most of the companies have been established with the 

aim of animal cloning for the food industry. The FDA report was based on a large population 
of  cloned  animals  derived  from  two  such  companies:  ViaGen40  and  Cyagra41.  There  are 

currently between 1 000 and 2 000 cloned cattle in the USA.  

Argentina 

The first cloned calf was born in Argentina in summer 2002. Argentina then began to actively 

invest  in  the  cloning  of  large  animals.  Some  of  the  US-based  livestock  cloning  companies 

opened branches in South America, especially Argentina and Brazil. 

China 

Cloning  research  has  been  developing  in  China  since  the  1990's.  The  first  company 

specialising in SCNT was founded in 2001 and its focus is mainly on the cloning of domestic 

animals. At the moment, China seems to represent a possible market for cloned livestock, as 

the first cloned calves of Australian origin were sold to China in early 2002. Chinese experts 

advocated a use of SCNT for the preservation of endangered species, such as the giant panda.  

39 The pig is an important model in biomedical research, particularly for therapeutic purposes for diseases such 
as diabetes and transplantation of the pancreatic Langerhans islets. 
40 http://www.viagen.com/en/our-services/cloning/ 
41 http://www.cyagra.com/index.htm 

19

 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
3. LEGAL ASPECTS  

The framework of EU legislation on animal breeding, animal health and welfare and food is 

applicable to any future technologies on animals, such as animal cloning (SCNT). Most EU 

legislation  may  be  applicable  to  animal  cloning  under  specific  circumstances,  as  there  is 

currently  no  dedicated  regulation  on  food  products  derived  from  cloned  animals  or  animal 

cloning as such in the EU.  

EU  legislation  on  animals  for  food  production  requires  EU  competence  in  the  following 

sectors: 

1.  Internal  market  for  foodstuffs:  National  laws  hinder  the  free  movement  of 

foodstuffs and create unfair competition, thereby directly affecting the functioning 

of the internal market. 

2.  Food  safety and consumer health protection: In order to protect public health, 

certain foods are subject to a safety assessment via a Community procedure before 

being  marketed  in  the  EU  (harmonised  safety  approach  at  EU  level).  Labelling 

measures are also desirable, in order for the consumer to make an informed choice. 

3.  Animal welfare and health: protection of animal health and welfare is an animal 

husbandry requirement in the EU. 

4.  Zootechnics: regulation of the breeding aspects of animal husbandry. 

Other relevant regulatory aspects to be taken into account include: 1) National legislation on 

cloning  (EU  Member  States);  (2)  International  trade  agreements,  (3)  Intellectual  Property 

Rights (IPR). 

3.1 EU Regulatory Framework. 

The  EU  Treaty  lays  down  a  number  of  principles  (which  are  properly  reflected  in  the 
European  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights42)  that  may  apply  to  animal  cloning  for  food 

production, namely: 

42  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights:  ‘Conscious  of  its  spiritual  and  moral  heritage,  the  Union  is  founded  on  the 
indivisible, universal values of human dignity, freedom, equality and solidarity; it is based on the principles of 
democracy and the rule of law. It places the individual at the heart of its activities, by establishing the citizenship 
of  the Union  and by  creating  an  area  of freedom,  security  and  justice.’ (…)  It  seeks  to  promote  balanced  and 

20

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
Article 14 (‘Free movement of goods, persons, services and capital’); Article 94 (‘EU legislation for 

the  approximation  of  such  legislation  of  the  Member  States  as directly  affects  the  establishment  or 

functioning  of  the  common  market.’)  Article  95  (‘The  Commission,  in  its  proposals,  concerning 

health, safety, environmental protection and consumer protection, will take as a base a high level 

of protection, taking account in particular of any new development based on scientific facts. ) 

The Additional Protocol to the Amsterdam Treaty also states that EU Member States desire to 

ensure improved protection and respect for the welfare of ‘animals as sentient beings' and that  

"the  European  Community,  in  formulating and  implementing  the  Community's  agricultural,  transport, 

internal market and research policies, the Community and the Member States shall pay full regard 

to the welfare requirements of animals, while respecting the legislative or administrative provisions 

and  customs  of  the  Member  States  relating  in  particular  to  religious  rites,  cultural  traditions  and 

regional heritage." 

3.1.1 EU food regulations 
Regulation  (EC)  N°  178/2002  lays  down  the  general  principles  of  EU  food  law43  with 

regard to protection of human life and health and the protection of consumers' interests, taking 

account of, where appropriate, the protection of animal health and welfare, plant health and 

the environment. It entails in particular an obligation on operators to place on the market only 

food for which they have an assurance of safety. According to the above Regulation, food that 

complies  with  Community  provisions  governing  food  safety  shall  be  deemed  to  be  safe 
insofar as the aspects covered by specific Community provisions are concerned44. The general 

principles and provisions of food law apply to all foods, including food derived from clones 

and their offspring. 

EU Directive 2000/13/EC on the labelling of food products lays down rules for the labelling 

of  foodstuffs  to  enable  European  consumers  to  obtain  comprehensive  information  on  the 

content and the composition of food products. Labelling helps consumers make an informed 

sustainable development and ensures free movement of persons, goods, services and capital, and the freedom of 
establishment. 
43 General Food Law (Regulation 178/2002): Objectives: High level of protection of human life and health and 
the  protection  of  consumers'  interests,  including  fair  practices  in  food  trade,  taking  account  of,  where 
appropriate,  the  protection of  animal  health  and welfare, plant  health  and  the  environment;  Free  movement  of 
Food;  International  standards  taken  into  consideration;  Science  based  decisions-making.  In  some  cases  other 
legitimate factors need to be taken into account: e.g. societal, economic, traditional, ethical and environmental 
factors and the feasibility of controls. 

21

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                         
 
choice  when  purchasing  their  foodstuffs.  Under  the  terms  of  the  above  Directive,  it  is  not 

necessary to label a production technique or process 'as such', e.g. a cloning technique, used in 

the production of the foodstuff.  

Regulation (EC) No 258/97 on novel foods and novel food ingredients covers food that was 

not used to a significant degree for human consumption before 15 May 1997, and inter alia 

falls into category (e) of Article 1(2):  

foods  and  food  ingredients  consisting  of  or  isolated  from  plants  and  food  ingredients  isolated  from 

animals,  except  for  foods  and  food  ingredients  obtained  by  traditional  propagating  or  breeding 

practices and having a history of safe food use. 

Regulation  (EC)  No  258/97  may  cover  animal  food  products  (e.g.  meat,  milk)  produced 

from  a  clone,  but  not  food  products  derived  from  offspring  of  clones,  since  offspring  are 
reproduced in a 'conventional' way45 (i.e. using a traditional breeding technique).  

Regulation (EC) No 258/97 also states that, in order to protect public health, novel foods are 

subject to a safety assessment and authorisation under a Community procedure before they are 

placed on the market (EFSA). Additional specific labelling for novel foods may be required in 

a  case  where  a  novel  food  or  food  ingredient  is no  longer  equivalent  to  an  existing  food  or 

food  ingredient.  The  comparison,  based  on  a  scientific  assessment,  must  have  regard  to  the 

accepted limits of natural variations for characteristics of food.  

GMO legislation would apply only if the cloning technique were to be combined with genetic 

modification.  Whilst  cloned  animals  are  not  necessarily  genetically  modified,  one  of  the 

reasons for using cloned animals may be the rapid extension of inserted genetic material.  

Directive  2001/18/EC  regulates  the  deliberate  release  into  the  environment  of  genetically 

modified organisms and therefore has environmental and human health protection purposes 
as stated under Article 1 of the Directive46. According to Directive 2001/18/EC47, 'genetically 

44 When there are no specific provisions at Community level, food products have to conform to national food law 
of the Member States in whose territory they are marketed (see also the Art. 28 and 30 of the EU Treaty). 
45  EFSA  will  clarify  in  its  Opinion  the  applicability  of  EC/258/97  provisions  to  products  from  clones  and 
offspring. 
46 In accordance with the precautionary principle, the objective of this Directive is to approximate the laws, 
regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States and to protect human health and the environment 
when: 1) carrying out the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms for any other 
purposes  than  placing  on  the  market  within  the  Community,  2)  placing  on  the  market  genetically  modified 
organisms as or in products within the Community. 

22

 
 
                                                                                                                                                         
 
modified organism' (GMO) means an organism, with the exception of human beings, in which 

the genetic material has been altered in a way that does not occur naturally by mating and/or 

natural  recombination.  Within  the  terms  of  this  definition,  a  genetic  modification  occurs  at 
least through the use of one of the techniques listed in Annex I A of the above Directive48.  

EU  legislation  on  GMOs  (Directive  2001/18/EC,  Regulations  (EC)  1829/2003  and 
1830/200349)  therefore  seem  not  to  be  applicable  to  cloning  techniques  unless  SCNT  is 
combined with genetic modification50. The applicability of this legal framework will need to 

be explored on a case-by-case basis as regards the technique used to produce the clones.  

Genetically  modified  foods  or  food  ingredients  may  be  exempt  from  the  requirements  of 

Regulation  258/97  as  they  are  separately  covered  by  Regulation  1829/2003  on  genetically 

modified food and feed.   

3.1.2 Other existing relevant EU legislation: zootechnics, animal welfare, animal health  

The  breeding  aspects  of  animal  cloning  are  covered  by  Community  legislation  on 

zootechnics  (Directives  77/504/EEC,  88/661/EEC,  89/361/EEC,  90/427EEC,  94/28/EC), 

which has as its aim the need to avoid trade restrictions for purebred animals.  

Zootechnical  rules  have  harmonised  the  EU  marketing  and import  of  animals,  semen,  ova 

and  embryos  whether  they  have  been  bred  by  natural  mating  or  produced  using 

biotechnological  techniques  such  as  artificial  insemination,  embryo  transfer,  in-vitro-

fertilisation or SCNT. The relevant provisions are the following: 

"Member  States  shall  ensure  that  the  following  shall  not  be  prohibited,  restricted  or  impeded  on 

zootechnical grounds: 1) intra-Community trade in pure-bred breeding animals of the bovine species, 2) 

intra-Community trade in the semen and embryos of pure-bred breeding animals of the bovine species 

(…) intra-Community trade in bulls used for artificial insemination". (Directive 77/504/EEC, Article 2) 

47  Directive  2001/18/EC  on  the  deliberate  release  into  the  environment  of  genetically  modified  organisms; 
Scope:   Article 2 
48  Regulations  (EC)  No  1829/2003  and  1830/2003  refer  to  the  definition  of  GMO  laid  down  in  Directive 
2001/18/EC. 
49  Directive 2001/18/EC on the deliberate release of GMOs into the environment and Regulations 1829/2003 on 
GM food and feed and 1830/2003 on labelling and traceability of GMOs. 
50  The  above  Directive  would  therefore  apply  to  animal  cloning  if  manipulation  of  the  gene  sequence  of  the 
cloned animal were to be carried out. 

23

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                         
 
Some  EU  regulations  are  designed  to  regulate  specific  animal  species,  for  example  Dir. 

88/661/EEC  concerns  swine  species,  Dir.  89/361/EEC  sheep  and  goats,  and  Dir.  90/427 

equidae. 

Council Directive 94/28/EC amending Directive 77/504/EEC: Articles 4 – 7 inclusive refer to 

the import of animals, semen, ova and embryos respectively: 

"To  be  imported,  the  (animals,  semen,  ova)  embryos  referred  to  in  Article  1  must:  1)  come  from  an 

animal which is entered or registered in a herd book or register kept by an authority shown on one of 

the lists referred to in Article 3 (1); 2) be accompanied by a pedigree and zootechnical certificate to be 

drawn up in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 12.  

Trade in food products or animal farming is therefore already regulated at EU level.  

Animal  welfare  aspects  are  covered  by  the  Council  of  Europe’s  European  Conventions  on 
the  Protection  of  Animals51  and  several  Council  Directives.  Council  Directive  98/58,  in 

particular,  deals  with  the  protection  of  animals  kept  for  farming  purposes,  and  states  that 

natural,  artificial  breeding  or  other  breeding  procedures  which  cause,  or  are  likely  to  cause, 

suffering or injury to any of the animals concerned must not be practised.  

The  more  recent  Council  Directive  1999/74/EC52  defines  the  minimum  welfare  criteria  and 

addresses  alternative  forms  of  rearing  for  laying  hens,  such  as  free  range  and  enriched 
environment to allow animals a more natural behaviour53. 

In the case of cattle and pig rearing, Council Directives 91/629/EEC and 91/630/EEC opened 

the debate about the most appropriate farming techniques to achieve better health and welfare 

results to improve the quality of the meat; as a consequence, sow stalls were banned and other 

51 http://ec.europa.eu/food/animal/welfare/references/farmspc/jour323_en.pdf 
Article 1:" This Convention shall apply to the keeping, care and housing of animals, and in particular to 
animals in modern intensive stock-farming systems". 
52 1999/74/EC of 19 July 1999 laying down minimum standards for the protection of laying hens.  
53  Since  then,  investments  have  been  increasing  for  research  into  the  correlation  between  hen  farming 
methodology, animal welfare and public health. Simultaneously, the market quota of 'free range' eggs has been 
increasing  steadily  in  many  EU  countries,  showing  European  consumers'  interest  in  welfare  friendly  food 
products,  as  reported  by  two  Eurobarometers  surveys  on  "Consumers  attitudes  towards  welfare  friendly 
products" in 2005 and 2006 http://ec.europa.eu/food/animal/welfare/euro_barometer25_en.pdf  

24

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
measures  were  adopted54,  such  as  investing  in  research  to  find  alternative  solutions  to 

castration of piglets.  

EU  animal  health  rules  are  applicable  to  intra-Community  trade  in  and  imports  of  live 

animals,  semen,  ova  and  embryos,  irrespective  of  whether  they  have  been  bred  by  natural 

mating or produced using biotechnological techniques such as artificial insemination, embryo 

transfer, and in vitro fertilisation. 

Moreover, the framework of the present EU legislation on animal health is also applicable to 

the  movement  of  live  animals  and  their  products  resulting  from  future  technologies  such  as 

SCNT.  

Council Directive 89/556/EEC of 25 September 1989 on animal health conditions governing 

intra-Community  trade  in  and  importation  from  third  countries  of  embryos  of  domestic 

animals  of  the  bovine  species  and  Council  Directive  88/407/EEC  of  14  June  1988  laying 

down the animal health requirements applicable to intra-Community trade in and imports of 
semen  of  domestic  bovine  species  regulate  the  import  of  bovine  semen  and  embryos55, 

subject to the exceptions set out in Article 1(2) of Directive 89/556/EEC: "This Directive shall 

not apply to embryos derived by transfer of nuclei". However, to date, no EU Member States 
have taken action on this exclusion area, and therefore harmonised EU rules apply56.  

In  addition,  there  are  numerous  directives  and  decisions  laying  down  animal  health 

requirements  relating  to  the  movement  of  semen,  ova  and  embryos  of  other  animal  species, 

but none of the other pieces of legislation include any such exception. Cloned embryos from 

animal species other than bovines are therefore covered by EU animal health legislation.  

The  legal  framework  that  regulates  animal  cloning  for  research  purposes  is  Directive 

86/609/EEC on the protection of animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes. 

The scope of that Directive is determined by the likelihood of an animal being subject to pain, 

suffering, distress or lasting harm, including any course of action intended, or liable, to result 

in the birth of an animal in any such condition.  

54 91/629/EC and 91/630/EC of 19 November 1991 laying down minimum standards for the protection of cattle 
and pigs. 
55 For bovine embryos derived by transfer of nuclei, which are excluded from the scope of Directive 89/556/EEC 
[OJ L 302, 19.10.89, p.1], Member States are allowed to set national import conditions. 

25

 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
Article  2  (d)  'experiment'  means  any  use  of  an  animal  for  experimental  or  other  scientific  purposes 

which may cause it pain, suffering, distress or lasting harm, including any course of action intended, or 
liable, to result in the birth of an animal in any such condition,…"57

The Council of Europe Convention ETS 123, on the same subject, was adopted in 1986. The 

Community  is  a  party  to  this  Convention,  with  Directive  86/609/EEC  as  the  implementing 

instrument. With reference to genetically altered animals, the Parties to the Convention agreed 

to interpret the Convention as follows:  

(1)  For  the  purpose  of  the  Convention,  Parties  understand  the  expression  "animals  carrying  harmful 

genetic  modifications"  as  referring  to  genetically  engineered  animals  and  mutant  animals  capable  of 

producing as a consequence offspring likely to suffer significantly.  

(2)  Generating  a  transgenic  strain  is  considered  as  constituting  a  procedure  under  Article 1,  sub-

paragraph 2 c.  

(3)  The  breeding  of  animals  carrying  harmful  genetic  modifications  may  be  considered  on  certain 

conditions  to  be  determined  by  each  Party  as  a  procedure  under  Article  1,  sub-paragraph  2  c.  Such 

procedure must be carried out in accordance with the Convention.  

(4)  If  the  breeding  of  animals  carrying  harmful  genetic  modifications  is  not  considered  to  be  a 
procedure, Articles 14, 15 and 16 shall apply. 58

3.2 National legislation in the EU Member States 

Denmark  is  the  only  EU  Member  State  that  has  specific  legislation  on  cloning  and  genetic 

modification of animals.  The law was passed in Denmark in June 2005 (Act no. 550 of 24 

June  2005)  and  it  allowed  the  cloning  and  genetic  modification  of  vertebrate  animals  after 

approval from the Animal Research Inspectorate (§ 1) for: 

o  Basic research (studies of biological mechanisms) 

o  Applied research aiming at considerable improvement of health or environment. 

o  Breeding of animals producing substances of considerable benefit to health and the environment or 

o  Teaching and education at universities and similar or other teaching at the same level and teaching of 

persons who are dealing with cloning and gene modification. 

56 There are plans for an amendment to Council Directive 89/556/EEC in the near future to close this gap. 
57  Council  Directive  86/609/EEC  of  24  November,  OJ  L  358,  18.12.1986,  p.  1–28  -http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31986L0609:EN:NOT 

26

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                         
 
According  to  Danish  law,  the  Animal  Experiments  Inspectorate  may  refuse  approval  if  the 

cloning, the gene modification or the use of cloned or genetically modified vertebrates is not 

evaluated  to  be  of  considerable  benefit.  The  same  applies  to  breeding  of  cloned  and 

genetically modified animals used for experiments. Animal cloning is therefore not allowed if 
the  expected  benefit  deriving  therefore  is  not  relevant59.  The  Animal  Experiments 

Inspectorate will authorise cloning practice on a case-by-case basis and take the decision for 

approval  following  an  assessment  based,  inter  alia,  on  scientific  issues,  animal  welfare, 

integrity  of  the  cloned  animals,  environmental  risks  compared  to  the  benefits  of  such 

technology, etc.  

Possible  cloning  applications,  which  are  subject  to  approval,  include  the  use  of  this  animal 

biotechnology for the production of human proteins (therapeutic use, e.g. producing milk with 

a  special  composition),  but  not  animals  with  special  characteristics  for  food  production 

purposes  (meat  aimed  at  a  special  market).  The  law  is  silent  about  the  import  of  cloned 

animals and products derived from them. 

3.3 World Trade Organisation (WTO), GATT and SPS agreements 

The World Trade Organisation (WTO) has developed a multilateral system of trade to lower 

customs and trade barriers, and abolish discrimination in international trade. WTO agreements 

are the legal ground rules for international commerce which were negotiated and signed by a 

large  majority  of  the  world's  trading  nations  and  ratified  by  their  parliaments.  The  General 

Agreement  on  Tariffs  and  Trade  (GATT)  and  the  Sanitary  and  Phyto  Sanitary  (SPS) 

agreement include measures that might be relevant for trade of food products resulting from 

animal cloning.   

Since 1995 (after the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade -GATT) 

an  agreement  entered  into  force  regarding  food  safety,  animal  and  plant  health.  Aspects 

covered  by  the  agreement  include  measures  related  to  food  contamination,  pests  and 

pesticides and labeling. As a consequence, individual WTO Member States' policies regarding 

the blocking of food imports are restricted to specific situations, and no WTO Member State 

can  endorse  safeguard  measures  or  a  ban  against  a  specific  trade  product  (including  food) 

58 http://www.coe.int/t/e/legal_affairs/legal_co-
operation/biological_safety,_use_of_animals/laboratory_animals/Res%20interpretation.asp#TopOfPage 

27

 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                         
 
unless it has carried out a relevant risk assessment and provides evidence to support a trade 

restriction.    

Under  the  WTO  SPS  agreement,  the  application  of  quarantine  policies  for  safety  reasons  is 

regarded as a ‘technical barrier to trade’ to the detriment of foreign competitors. According to 

the SPS agreement, if there is no scientific evidence proving a product to be a threat to human 

health  and  the  environment,  its  marketing  must  be  authorized.  It  is  up  to  the  individual 

member countries of the WTO to demonstrate that a product is dangerous before its trade can 

be prevented, even if it is impossible to accurately predict all damage posed by all products.  

Articles 5.1 and 5.2 of the SPS agreement state  

“Members  shall  ensure  that  their  sanitary  or  phytosanitary  measures  are  based  on  an  assessment,  as 

appropriate to the circumstances, of the risks to human, animal or plant life or health, taking into account 

risk assessment techniques developed by the relevant international organizations” and “In the assessment 

of risks, Members shall take into account available scientific evidence;  relevant processes and production 

methods;    relevant  inspection,  sampling  and  testing  methods;    prevalence  of  specific  diseases  or  pests; 

existence of pest- or disease-free areas; relevant ecological and environmental conditions; and quarantine 

or other treatment”.  

Article 5.3 addresses the manner in which risk assessments may be interpreted: 

“In assessing the risk to animal or plant life or health and determining the measure to be applied 

for  achieving  the  appropriate  level  of  sanitary  or  phytosanitary  protection  from  such  risk, 

Members shall take into account as relevant economic factors: the potential damage in terms of 

loss of production or sales in the event of the entry, establishment or spread of a pest or disease; 

the  costs  of  control  or  eradication  in  the  territory  of  the  importing  Member;  and  the  relative 

cost-effectiveness of alternative approaches to limiting risks.” 

The  import/export  of  food  products  derived  from  animal  cloning  will  be  subject  to  WTO 

provisions on trade and barriers to global trade. 

3.4 WHO-FAO Codex Alimentarius 

The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the World Health 

Organization  (WHO)  have  encouraged  food-related  scientific  and  technological  research,  as 

well  as  discussion,  to  raise  awareness  about  food  safety,  hygiene  and  related  issues  at 

59 The Animal Experiment Inspectorate is not in possession of sufficient knowledge to make the evaluation; it 
may obtain the opinion of a competent authority institution or the like before making the decision.  

28

 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                         
 
international  level.  In  1963  they  created  the  Codex  Alimentarius60  as  a  reference  document 

for consumers, food producers, manufacturers and national food control agencies. Since then, 

the Codex Alimentarius has enabled the formulation and harmonization of food standards and 

has  ensured  the  protection  of  public  health  and  fair  practices  in  the  food  trade  through  the 

global implementation of such standards worldwide.  

The Codex Alimentarius also has relevance for the international food trade. Thus, the WTO 

Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement) and 

the  Agreement  on  Technical  Barriers  to  Trade  (TBT  Agreement)  have  encouraged  the 

international  harmonization  of  food  standards.  Codex  Alimentarius  standards  have  become 

the  benchmarks  for  national  food  measures  and  regulations,  and  their  evaluation  within  the 

legal parameters of the WTO Agreements.  

The  latest  report  of  the  Ad  Hoc  Intergovernmental  Task  Force  on  Food  Derived  from 
Biotechnology  (September  200761)  pointed  out  at  the  guidelines  for  risk  assessment  when 

comparing  recombinant-DNA  animals  with  their  conventional  counterparts  in  order  to 

identify new or altered hazards in the new animals. A key element in such analysis is to take 

as a reference animals with a history of safe use. However, the established guidelines do not 

apply to cloning. As the mandate of the work was discussed, the work was limited to genetic 

modification and cloning was seen as an assisting technique for genetic modification. 

3.5 Intellectual Property (IP) regulation  

As a general rule, under Article 52 of the European Patent Convention, patents can be granted 

to  any  invention  which  is  new,  is  susceptible  of  industrial  application  and  involves  an 

inventive  step.  Exceptions  can  be  made  in  the  case  of  specific  classes  of  inventions  that 

cannot be patented, namely for methods of treatment (for both diagnostic and surgery), plant 

or  animal  varieties  and  essential  biological  processes  for  their  production  and,  lastly,  for 

inventions  contrary  to  'ordre  public'  and/or  morality.  For  biotechnological  processes,  which 
cloning  could  be  interpreted  to  be,  rules  23b,  c  and  d  apply62,  opening  the  possibility  of 

60 http://www.codexalimentarius.net/web/index_en.jsp 
61 http://www.codexalimentarius.net/web/archives.jsp?lang=en 
62  Rule  23b…(2)  “Biotechnological  inventions”  are  inventions  which  concern  a  product  consisting  of  or 
containing  biological  material  or  a  process  by  means  of  which  biological  material  is  produced,  processed  or 
used. (3) “Biological material” means any material containing genetic information and capable of reproducing 
itself or being reproduced in a biological system.; Rule 23c Biotechnological inventions shall also be patentable 

29

 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
patenting,  if  cloning  were  not  to  fall  into  the  categories  described  in  Article  53(a)  and,  in 

particular,  in  "processes  for  modifying  the  genetic  identity  of  animals  which  are  likely  to 

cause  them  suffering  without  any  substantial  medical  benefit  to  man  or  animal,  and  also 

animals resulting from such processes". 

According to Rule 23d (d) of the European Patents Convention, patents shall not be granted to 

processes  for  modifying  the  genetic  identity  of  animals  which  are  likely  to  cause  them 

suffering without any substantial medical benefit to man or animal, and also animals resulting 
from  such  processes63.  This  is  also  stated  in  Directive  98/44/EC  on  the  legal  protection  of 

biotechnological  inventions  where  it  is  also  indicated  that  “inventions  shall  be  considered 

unpatentable  where  their  commercial  exploitation  would  be  contrary  to  ordre  public  or 

morality;  however,  exploitation  shall  not  be  deemed  to  be  so  contrary  merely  because  it  is 

prohibited by law or regulation”. Directive EC/98/44, specifically Article 6, states: 

1.  Inventions  shall  be  considered  unpatentable  where  their  commercial  exploitation  would  be  contrary  to 

ordre  public  or  morality;  2.  On  the  basis  of  paragraph  1,  the  following,  in  particular,  shall  be  considered 

unpatentable: (…) (d) processes for modifying the genetic identity of animals which are likely to cause them 

suffering  without  any  substantial  medical  benefit  to  man  or  animal,  and  also  animals  resulting  from  such 

processes. 

This last condition may be interpreted to mean that animal cloning is not acceptable for public 

order and morality if it involves animal suffering and is not carried out for medical purposes. 

The question remains as to whether the arguments in support of animal cloning for food can 

be  categorized  as  a  substantial  medical  benefit  and  whether  cloning  can  be  regarded  as  a 

modification of the animal gene identity. 

if they concern: (a) biological material which is isolated from its natural environment or produced by means of a 
technical process even if it previously occurred in nature; (b) plants or animals if the technical feasibility of the 
invention is not confined to a particular plant or animal variety; a microbiological or other technical process, or a 
product obtained by means of such a process other than a plant or animal variety.; Rule 23d Under Article 53(a), 
European patents shall not be granted in respect of biotechnological inventions which, in particular, concern the 
following: (a) processes for cloning human beings; (b) processes for modifying the germ line genetic identity of 
human beings; (c) uses of human embryos for industrial or commercial purposes; (d) processes for modifying the 
genetic identity of animals which are likely to cause them suffering without any substantial medical benefit to 
man or animal, and also animals resulting from such processes. 
63  EPO:  Rule  23d"Exceptions  to  patentability  Under  Article  53(a),  European  patents  shall  not  be  granted  in 
respect  of  biotechnological  inventions  which,  in  particular,  concern  the  following:  (a)  processes  for  cloning 
human beings; (b) processes for modifying the germ line genetic identity of human beings; (c) uses of human 
embryos  for  industrial  or  commercial  purposes;  (d)  processes  for  modifying  the  genetic  identity  of  animals 
which  are  likely  to  cause  them  suffering  without  any  substantial  medical  benefit  to  man  or  animal,  and  also 
animals 
(http://www.european-patent-
office.org/legal/epc/pdf/epc_2006_v5_bm_en.pdf) 

processes." 

resulting 

from 

such 

30

 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                         
 
Article  27  (3)(b)  of  the  TRIPS  Agreement  (WTO)  provides  that  animals  other  than  micro-

organisms, and essentially biological processes for the production of animals other than non-

biological and microbiological processes, may be excluded from patentability. The European 

Patent Convention recognizes this in rules 23b and 23c. 

31

 
 
 
 
 
4. Ethical issues  

Animal cloning for food supply involves a number of specific ethical concerns that come to 

play when decisions are to be made concerning the application of SCNT cloning technologies 

in breeding establishments for farm animals.  

These ethical concerns are related to a broad spectrum of decisions with regard to (see also 

Table 6):  

a)  cloned animals and their offspring (e.g. use of animals for humans’ purposes; animal 

health; animal welfare; “animal integrity”);  

b)  human beings (e.g. human health and wellbeing; food safety; bio-safety; possibility of 

misuse – in humans (‘slippery slope arguments’));  

c)  environment 

(e.g.  biodiversity; 

environmental  pollution 

and  degradation; 

environmental sustainability); 

d)  human  society  at  large  (e.g.  social  desirability,  social  acceptance;  consumers'  rights; 

justice issues – local, regional, global; intellectual property rights).  

Table 6 Ethical concerns in animal cloning for food supply 

Concerns  
for humans 

Concerns  
for the environment 

Concerns  
for the society 

Human health and 
wellbeing (including food 
safety and food security) 

Biodiversity 
Biosafety 

Concerns  
for the cloned animals 
(and for their offspring) 
Using the animals for 
humans’ purposes  

Animal health  
Animal welfare 

Animal “integrity” 
(“animal rights”?)  

Misuse in humans 
(‘slippery slope’ 
concerns) 

Environmental 
sustainability 

Pollution, degradation 

Public perception 
Social desirability 
Social acceptance 
Consumers’ rights 

Justice issues (local, 
regional, global)  
Intellectual property 
rights 
Industrialisation of 
agriculture 
Sustainability of 
agriculture 

It  should  be  pointed  out,  however,  ethical  issues  outlined  here  are  just  part  of  a  complex 
framework of ethical concerns connected with modern agriculture64, and some advocated that 
animals do not have a moral status and can be instrumentally used for human purposes65.  

64  The  ethical  issues  connected  with  the  use  of  advanced  (bio)technologies  in  agriculture  will  be  analysed  in  the 

following EGE Opinion. 

65 See: Animal Rights & Human Morality by Bernard E. Rollin (Prometheus Books. September 30, 2006) 

32

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
4.1 The moral status of animals  

Historically,  the  moral  status  that  people  attributed  to  the  animals  (or  believed  the  animals 

somehow  possess),  and  especially  to  the  domesticated  and  later  on  to  the  farmed  ones,  has 

mainly evolved along two lines: either animals were seen as a mere objects possessed by their 

owners and available to them for any purpose the owner might wanted to used them, or the 

animals  were  given  various  degrees  of  respect.  These  attitudes  were  influenced  strongly  by 

cultural and religious traditions. 

More recently philosophers have defended the moral status of animals in a number of theories 
arguing  that  an  animal  is  a  moral  subject  as  it  is:  (a)  able  to  feel  pleasure  and  pain66,  (b) 
subject-of-a-life67, an element of biodiversity68 etc.  

The first theory comes back to the philosophy of Bentham and Mill69, and has been advocated 

more  recently,  inter  alia,  by  Peter  Singer.  According  to  his  theory,  actions  causing  pain  in 

sentient  animals  are  morally  unacceptable,  since  animals  are  considered  moral  subjects  – 

Need  quote-.  Therefore,  if  cloning  affects  animal  welfare  and  health,  then  this  use  of 
biotechnology is ethically problematic70.   

Another theory advocates that animals have a moral value in themselves as ‘subjects-of-life’ 

(intrinsic  value  argument)  and  states  that  both  human  and  non-human  beings  are 

(analogously)  moral  entities  because  of  their  sentient  capacities.  The  corollary  of  this 

argument is the non-instrumentalisation of animals for human purposes.  

A  number  of  philosophers  have  opposed  animal  bioengineering  on  the  basis  of  categorical 
arguments  (animals’  intrinsic  value71,  or  integrity72,  or  telos73).  They  argued  that,  as  we 

66  Singer  P.  (1985)  In  Defence  of  Animals  N.Y.:  Blackwell;  Singer  P.  (1990)  Animal  Liberation  N.Y.:  Avon 
Books;  Suzuki  D.  &  Knudson  P.  (1987)  Genethics,  the  ethics  of  engineering  life  Stoddart  Publishing  Co. 
Toronto  
67 Regan T. (1983) The Case for Animal Rights Berkeley California.: University of California Press  
68 Norton B. (1986) Why preserve natural Variety? Princeton University Press Princeton 
69 Jeremy Bentham, The Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation, edited by J. H. Burns and H. 
L.  A.  Hart,    London:  Athline  Press,  1970.  Many  of  John  Stuart  Mill's  works  are  relevant,  especially  his 
Utilitarianism and On Liberty.  
70  Rollin  B.  (1998)  The  Unheeded  Cry.  Animal  Consciousness  Animal  Pain  and  Science.  Oxford  University 
Press  
71 Dol et al. (1999) Recognizing the intrinsic value of animals Van Gorcum & Comp. Assen 
72 Van den Bos et al. (1997) Animal Consciousness and Animal Ethics Van Gorcum & Comp. Assen 

33

 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
attribute  a  moral  value  to  human  beings,  we  ought  to  extend  this  ethical  concern  to  other 
animal  species74  and  oppose  animal  biotechnology  (transgenic  animals  and  cloning  in 

particular, but also other GM of animals for breeding purposes – blind chickens, for example).  

Other  theories  have  advocated  the  possible  use  of  animals  in  animal  biotechnology  under 

specific  conditions  where  animal  pain  is  minimised  and  authorised  in  well  justified 
circumstances75  on  an  assessment  based  on 

the  3Rs  (Reduction,  Refinement  and 

Replacement)  principle  and  on  the  five  freedoms  as  defined  by  the  World  Organisation  for 

Animal Health (OIE): freedom from (1) hunger, thirst and malnutrition;  (2) fear and distress; 

(3)  physical and thermal discomfort; (4) pain, injury and disease; and (5) to express normal 

patterns of behaviour. 

4.2 Sustainability and animal farming  

In the age of globalization, national boundaries tend to diminish in importance because each 

country is largely interconnected with, and interdependent on, many others through economic 

and  political  links.  In  the  area  of  farming,  several  kinds  of  methods  can  be  observed 

worldwide, and such typologies often depend on the scale of farmed rural areas.  

Whereas  in  several  countries  agriculture  is  characterized  by  very  large  farming  areas  which 

belong to a few farmers, in Europe the average size of farming properties is much smaller and 

they belong to a large number of farmers. It is only natural that farming processes have been 

developing differently on different continents. In several countries, agriculture has generally 

been  employed  on  a  large  scale  and  using  automated  means  of  production;  on  the  EU  side, 

family-based  properties  have  tended  to  follow  a  more  traditional  type  of  farming  and  on  a 

smaller scale (Small and Medium-sized Enterprises). Apart from any economic considerations 

in terms of costs and revenues, this development is likely to remain on different tracks.  

According  to  a  recent  FAO  report76  (2007),  cattle  breeds  currently  make  up  22%  of  the 

world’s  recorded  mammalian  livestock  breeds,  and  human  kind  relies  upon  14  species  of 

livestock  in  total  for  90%  of  its  animal  food  production.  Most  probably,  there  are  three 

73 Rollin B. (1989) The Frankestein Syndrome. Ethical and Social Issues in the Genetic Engineering of Animals 
Cambridge  Cambridge    University  Press.  Rollin  B.  (1998)  On  telos  and  genetic  engineering  in  Holland  and 
Jonson (eds.) Animal Biotechnology and Ethics Chapman and Hall London 1998:162 
74 Naess A. (1984) In defence of deep ecology Environmental Ethics 6(3):265-270 
75  Fincham  J.R.  &  Ravez  J.J.  (1991)  Genetically  Engineered  Organisms:  Risks  and  Benefits  University  of 
Toronto Press. Toronto-Buffalo; Fox. M. (1992) Superpigs and Wondercorm Lyons & Bufford N.Y.; Kaiser M. 
Wellin S. eds. (1995) Ethical Aspects of Modern Biotechnology Centre for Research Ethics Goeteborg;  

34

 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                         
 
countries  in  the  world  that  would  initially  use  animal  cloning  for  food  supply:  they  are 

Argentina, USA, and China.  

Consequently,  a  discussion  on  the  ethics  of  animal  cloning  for  food  cannot  be  restricted  to 

economic or legal considerations alone. Other factors related to sustainable agriculture are just 

as  important  (e.g.  human  responsibility  towards  the  environment  and  future  generations  – 

intergenerational  justice  and  ecology).  Sustainable  farming  is  indeed  an  important  focal 

concept.  It  involves  many  dimensions,  including  human  health,  safety,  animal  welfare, 

environmental  concerns,  biodiversity  and global justice. It does not contain or add anything 

that  is  not  covered  by  these  dimensions;  it  combines  them.  The  above  concerns  will  be 

addressed  in  the  next  Opinion  of  the  EGE,  including  issues  related  to  the  ethics  of 

industrialized agriculture at EU and international level. 

Another  concern  that  has  been  put  forward  during  the  discussion  on  cloning  relates  to  the 

potential  use  of  animal  cloning  as  a  tool  to  develop  SCNT  and  then  to  open  the  door  for 

possible use of the technology with human beings (the "slippery slope" argument). 

4.3 Religious considerations  

To  a  great  extent,  the  relationship  between  mankind  and  animals  varies  according  to  the 

religious views of the society involved. Generally speaking, humans' attitude to animals varies 

considerably  between  Western  to  Eastern  cultures.  Eastern  -  predominantly  Hindu  or 

Buddhist - cultures tend to have a greater respect for animals and their protection due to their 

belief in reincarnation and in recognizing the divine in all living forms. Western cultures tend 

to  view  animals  as  instrumental  to  human  wellbeing  and  necessities,  provided  that  such 

necessities do not cause pain to animals.  

4.4 Public perception and public acceptance 

A  survey  conducted  in  the  US  by  the  International  Food  Information  Council  in  2005 

reflected that 34% of respondents would be likely to buy food products from cloned animals if 

the FDA determined them to be safe to eat (compared to 64% against).  Accordingly, public 

perception  of  animal  cloning  is  likely  to  play  a  major  role  in  its  development  and  its 

76 http://www.fao.org/newsroom/en/news/2007/1000598/index.html 

35

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                         
 
commercial  prospects.  This  perception  may  vary  greatly  between  countries,  including 

between EU Member States.  

Since  1991  the  Eurobarometer  surveys  have  examined  the  attitudes  of  the  European  public. 

However,  no  specific  public  surveys  have  yet  been  conducted  on  the  social  perception  of 

animal cloning for food supply. Knowledge in the EU about the public perception of animal 
cloning  is  very  limited77.  According  to  the  available  data,  there  is  public  acceptance  for 

cloning  as  a  research  tool  in  biomedicine  (e.g.  bio-pharming),  but  not  for  its  application  in 

agriculture.  From  the  available  data  it  seems  that  European  citizens  differentiate  between 

medical and agricultural applications and are most sceptical towards biotechnology when it is 

applied  to  animal  rearing  or  food  production.  Public  concerns  about  cloning  tend  to  be 

primarily human-related (food safety; socioeconomic effects, consumer choice) and less often 

zoocentric (animal welfare and integrity). At the present time it seems that the public is not 

fully informed about the uses and implications of cloning. Taking into account the precedents 

of GM food, public interest would be likely to intensify as products came closer to marketing. 

Under  the  6th  Framework  Programme,  the  Commission  has  supported  a  project  entitled 

“Cloning in public”, a specific support action project co-ordinated by the Danish Centre for 

Bioethics  and  Risk  Assessment  (CeBRA,  DK).    The  project  had  two  main  objectives:  1)  to 

stimulate informed public debate across Europe on farm animal cloning and to ensure public 

participation 

in 

the  formation  of  European  policies  and  regulation;  2) 

to  make 

recommendations on regulation and guidelines concerning research and applications of farm 

animal cloning. The argument for this project was that 'Whether a decision is made to rely on 

existing regulation or to introduce new, specifically targeted legislation, concerns about both 
free trade and social acceptability in Europe will have to be negotiated78. 

4.5 The consumer's right to know, free choice and labelling 

Once food safety risks are ruled out, a possible concern would be a requirement for consumer 

information and product labelling, either confined 'only' to clones and products derived from 

77  Earlier  research  indicates  that  public  acceptance  of  animal  biotechnology  is  closely  related  to  the  perceived 
usefulness of the applications suggested. Consequently, research and biomedical applications seem to be more 
acceptable  to  the  public  than  agricultural  applications  which  are  regarded  more  negatively.  See  (a) 
Eurobarometer  EB  52.1,  1999;  (b)  The  report  CLONING  IN  PUBLIC:  Public  perceptions  of  farm  animal 
cloning in Europe (August 2005); and (c) Lassen, J, Gjerris, M & Sandøe, P (2005): After Dolly – ethical limits 
to the use of biotechnology on farm animals. Theriogenology (Submitted). 
78 http://www.sl.kvl.dk/cloninginpublic/

36

 
 
 
                                                 
 
them,  and/or  on  offspring  and  their  products.  Since  a  clone  and  its  derived  products  cannot 

effectively  be  distinguished  from  another  animal,  a  labelling  policy  would  have  to  be 

associated  with  some  sort  of  trace-back  or  integrity  preservation  systems.  Currently,  beef 

meat must be traceable. Animal semen and embryos are also already traceable. However, for 

other  processed  products,  the  control  of  labelling  could  present  difficulties,  in  particular  for 
offspring79.  

From  a  technical  point  of  view,  the  "analytical"  traceability  entails  two  different  issues:  (1) 

the  analytical 

identification  of  clones/offspring  and  derived  products  and  (2) 

the 

authentication of traceability schemes for individual animals and derived products (not limited 

to clones, but generalised). Traceability schemes for animals are already enhanced through the 

use  of  Electronic  Identification/Radio  frequency  identification  of  animals  up  to  the 

slaughterhouse, and this may be further improved through the use of molecular markers (see 

also 2.4.2).  

79  An  open  question  regarding  the  definition  of  offspring  would  be:  For  how  many  generations  would  the 
offspring of clones have to be labelled?  

37

 
 
                                                 
 
5. OPINION 

The aim of farm animal breeding is to select animals that have genetic characteristics such as 

disease resistance or quality features that are of interest to farmers. Cloning of vertebrates via 

SCNT  is  a  recently  developed  technology  which  is  used  in  biomedical  research  and  animal 

breeding, and can also be used for the production of' food, such as meat and dairy products. 

The cloning technology may also be used for the reproduction of animals which are of high 

value to their owners, such as racehorses and pet animals, as well as for the conservation of 

endangered species. 

Animal  cloning  for  food  supply,  however,  raises  a  wide  range  of  safety,  legal,  ethical  and 

societal concerns, as well as political concerns of various kinds (e.g. global trade). Some of 

these  concerns  are  being  analysed  by  the  EFSA,  in  particular  those  related  to  the  scientific 

aspects of food safety and animal welfare.  

5.1 Scope of the Opinion 

The EGE issued an Opinion on ethical aspects of animal cloning in 1997, but given the state 

of  the  art  of  the  technology  at  that  time  it  did  not  address  the  issue  of  animal  cloning 

specifically for food supply. This EGE Opinion updates the previous one and is intended to 

complement that of the EFSA. The ethical considerations in this Opinion will therefore refer 

to the use of cloning in animal breeding in order to produce progeny that could enter the food 

chain.   

The EGE is aware that the experience in animal cloning could be used in the development of 

genetically modified animals (genetic modifications to produce nutraceuticals, bio-pharming 

or  prevention  of  animal  diseases  in  farm  breeding,  or  increasing  the  added  value  of  food 

products from cloned animals and their offspring) or in the development of cloning techniques 
as  such80.  However,  these  issues,  while  acknowledged  as  relevant  and  deserving  of  further 

analysis  with  regard  to  their  scientific,  ethical,  legal  and  social  implications,  are  not  the 

80  As  far  as  the  potential  use  of  SCNT  on  human  beings  for  reproductive  purposes  is  concerned,  the  Group 
reaffirms its opposition to such practices.  

38

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
subject of this EGE Opinion. In line with both the EFSA report and the request from President 

Barroso, this Opinion is limited to the use of animal cloning without genetic modification.  

5.2 Arguments over animal cloning for food 

The major arguments in favour of animal cloning for food are economic ones, aiming, inter 

alia: to keep up European competition vis-à-vis third countries on the free market; to facilitate 

industrial  development;  to  improve  food  production  and  quality,  while  lowering  prices  for 

consumers,  as  happens  in  the  case  of  other  intensive  farm  practices.  Some  have  therefore 

advocated cloning as a possible development towards standardised, cheaper food production, 

particularly meat, which would then be affordable for a larger proportion of  the  population. 

Others  have  argued  that  cloning  may  be  a  useful  tool  to  accelerate  the  breeding  of  animals 
with  specific  genetic  lineage,  such  as  cattle  resistant  to  diseases  or  adverse  conditions81,  or 

that  it  might  have  proven  positive  effects  on  human  and  animal  health,    for  instance  in 
conjunction with transgenesis82. 

Arguments  against  this  use  of  animal  biotechnology,  on  the  other  hand,  articulate  concerns 

that  are  based  on  human  health  and  safety,  animal  health  and  welfare,  animal  integrity, 

biodiversity, the risk of epidemics, social and economic effects on rural areas, and agricultural 

trade  (see  Chapters  2  and  4  of  this  Opinion).  Others  have  pointed  to  the  danger  of  animals 

being valued only in terms of their instrumental use to humankind and identified the risk that 

increased use of cloning might eventually facilitate human reproductive cloning. 

The  Group  is  aware  that  there  are  differing  viewpoints  on  the  moral  acceptability  of  using 

animals in modern farming and is aware that there are some very strongly held views against 

the instrumental use of animals for human purposes regardless of positive consequences this 

might have for humans. The Group therefore recognises that, for some people, animal cloning 

for food supply is an ethically unacceptable practice, whatever conditions are required.   

The EGE wishes to emphasise that embarking on cloning for food supply means opening up a 

new dimension in the general context of breeding that is not merely technical, and which for 

some people may create a moral unease that cannot be simply dismissed. 

81 These last two arguments, however, cover uses of animal cloning other than that addressed in this Opinion. 
82 See paragraph 2.7 of this Opinion. 

39

 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
5.3 Food safety  

The EGE has neither the competence nor the authority to assess risks related to food safety. 

Nevertheless, the decision on the levels of risk to individuals and society that are acceptable 

raises  ethical  issues.  The  scientific  risk  assessment  of  food  safety  of  products  derived  from 

animal clones and/or their offspring falls within the remit of the EFSA (EFSA Opinion and its 

subsequent updating) and the Group bases itself on that. EFSA's draft Opinion states that (1) 

measures  restricting  animal  cloning  for  food  purposes  cannot  be  justified  on  food  safety 

grounds, (2) "the available data for risk assessment are limited" and (3) there are uncertainties 
in their assessment83. The EGE underlines the importance of guaranteeing the safety of food 

products  for  human  consumption  as  a  precondition  for  their  marketing  and  stresses  the 

importance of scientific updates and follow-up research into progeny. 

5.4 Animal welfare and health 
In  the  Amsterdam  Treaty  animals  are  recognised  as  'sentient'  beings84  and,  therefore,  while 

meat  production  is  important  in  the  human  diet,  and  the  slaughter  of  animals  a  necessity,  it 

should always be clear that the way in which we treat animals should be in accordance with 

the existing animal welfare and health standards required by EU legislation (see 3.1.2 of this 

Opinion). However, in addition to these standards, the Group believes that other requirements 

should  be  taken  into  account  in  intensive  animal  breeding,  in  particular  the  guidance  on 
animal  welfare  provided  by  the  World  Organisation  for  Animal  Health  (OIE85),  namely  the 

five  freedoms  already  mentioned  in  paragraph  4.1  of  this  Opinion;  freedom:  from  hunger, 

thirst and malnutrition;  from fear and distress; from physical and thermal discomfort;  from 

pain, injury and disease; and to express normal patterns of behaviour. 

Infringements of the above criteria would need to be balanced by important benefits to human 

beings. The EGE, however, doubts whether infringements of these standards can be justified 

by the benefits obtained through current procedures in cloning animals for food production.  

83 See EFSA draft Opinion, Conclusions chapter, p.30. 
84  This  notion  is  also  stated  in  the  Lisbon  Treaty,  currently  being  ratified,  and  which  is  extended  to  all 
technological developments (B specific amendments). 
85 www.oie.int 

40

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
In addition, having regard to information provided by EFSA, the Group has noted a lack of 
data86 on the long-term animal welfare and health implications of clones and their offspring87, 

due  to  the  current  limited  use  of  the  technology.  Further  studies  and  analyses  on  long-term 

animal  welfare  and  health  implications  for  clones  and  their  offspring,  as  well  as  more 

comparative analyses with other assisted and traditional reproductive technologies in animal 

farming, are needed for a proper assessment of this issue.  

However,  the  Group  is  concerned  that  intensive  breeding  techniques  may  adversely  affect 

animal welfare and feels that a review of current practices should be conducted at European 

level.  For  this  reason  the  Group  suggests  that  the  Commission  take  initiative  to  prepare  a 

Code of Conduct on responsible farm animal breeding, including animal cloning. 

5.5 Farm animal biodiversity and sustainability  

Although the Group acknowledges that cloning could be used to maintain certain rare animal 
breeds among farm animal species88, the intensive industrial use of cloning applied to highly 

prevalent animal races might ultimately reduce diversity and affect their global distribution. 

Recent reports have highlighted the danger that the use of a limited number of breeding lines 

in intensive animal farming may affect the biodiversity of farm animals (see Chapter 2.7.3 of 

this Opinion) and create inbreeding problems.  

While the Group is also aware that the use of animal cloning in animal husbandry would be 
difficult  to  extend  on  a  global  level89,  it  nevertheless  advocates  the  need  to  protect 

biodiversity and limit inbreeding in farm animal stocks as far as possible, in order – among 

other things – to avoid the risk of global epidemics. In that respect, the Group recommends 
the Commission to take proper measures to preserve the genetic heritage of animal species90, 

for  example  by  funding  projects  designed  to  preserve  domesticated  species  and  breeds  in 

Europe. 

86 See EFSA draft Opinion, Conclusions chapter, p.30. 
87  Similar  considerations  apply  to  the  existence  of  data  on  other  assisted  reproduction  technologies  (ART)  in 
animal breeding. 
88  Cattle  (Bos  bovis)  is  a  species  and  there  are  around  1.2  billion  individuals  worldwide,  falling  into  about  a 
thousand breeds, or races, see 2.7.3. 
89 By David Fraser,  ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/009/a0158e/a0158e00.pdf 
90 From the EGE Opinion No 3 on the ethical implications of Biotechnology: "Biodiversity … with ratification 
of the UN Convention on Biological Diversity, the Community would be well advised to start considering the 
matter with a view to clarifying what it understands the concept to mean in practical terms". 

41

 
 
 
                                                 
 
The  Group  is  concerned  about  the  global  impact  of  increasing  meat  consumption  on  the 

environment  as  cloning  of  farm  animals  could  be  another  step  towards  increasing  such 

impact. 

5.6 Societal aspects 

5.6.1 Public participation  

The Group realises that, while cloning is only one step, and so far a relatively marginal one in 

the process of industrialisation of agriculture and globalisation, it is of the utmost importance, 

in  terms  of  global  justice  and  environmental  impact,  that  a  debate  be  held  concerning  the 

issues underlying and accompanying this global development. The Group therefore underlines 

the importance of a public debate on the concept of biotechnologies in modern agriculture, the 

environmental and societal impact of increasing meat consumption and rearing of bovines, the 

fair distribution of food resources and the need to promote sustainable agriculture at EU level 

and worldwide.  

In order to be able to exercise its freedom of choice, the public also needs to be adequately 

informed, and public debate should therefore be promoted.  

The  Group  therefore  invites  the  Commission  to  take  a  pro-active  role  in  promoting  public 

discussion on this use of animal cloning, and its potential implications, by financing a number 

of  ad  hoc  initiatives  at  Member  State  and  pan-European  level  aimed  at  promoting  public 

debate on the marketing of food products derived from animal cloning. Relevant stakeholders 

(media,  industry,  policymakers,  NGOs  and  the  scientific  community)  should  participate  in 

this effort in a pro-active manner and communicate reliable information about the work done. 

Transparency at all decision-making levels (both private and institutional) is essential because 

a  constructive  public  debate  can  only  take  place  on  a  basis  of  reciprocal  trust  and  in  full 

knowledge of factual data. 

5.6.2 Public perception  

The  Group  acknowledges  that  the  "food  philosophy"  of  individuals  and  countries  (i.e.  their 

views on the role and importance of food, the cultural and social traditions associated with it, 

and  related  views  on  the  production  processes  for  different  ingredients)  varies  considerably 

within  Europe  and  worldwide.  The  Group  also  acknowledges  that  European  citizens  have 

different  perceptions  and  (religious)  beliefs  as  regards  the  consumption  of  meat  or  other 

42

 
 
 
  
 
products  derived  from  cloned  animals  and/or  their  progeny91.  However,  there  are  as  yet  no 

definitive  indicators  on  the  public  perception  of  animal  cloning  for  food  supply  and  food 

products derived from cloned animals and their offspring. The Group therefore recommends 

that  the  Commission  launch  a  thematic  Eurobarometer  survey  on  animal  cloning  for  food 

supply, in order to collect indicators on public perception concerning the introduction of such 
products to the food market as is being done in other countries92.  

5.7 Traceability and labelling 

Traceability  and  labelling  raise  many  issues,  which  can  be  related  to  the  well-known 

precautionary principle, and are relevant to safety concerns, economic fairness and fairness in 

the burden of proof as well as to the issues of consumer freedom discussed earlier.  This also 

raises issues of conditions of liability. 

As far as the labelling of food products derived from animal cloning is concerned, the Group 

is of the opinion that consumer freedom can only be achieved when consumers have sufficient 

information to be able to choose the kind of products they want. In order to protect consumer 

freedom of choice, the Group points to the need for enforcement of current EU legislation on 
food regarding traceability of animals and their food products (e.g. Directive 2000/13/EC)93. 

However, the Group is aware of the technical difficulties and costs of labelling products from 

offspring  (information  on  ancestors),  and  calls  on  the  Commission  to  devise  targeted 
procedures (e.g. positive labelling of meat) prior to the marketing of such food in the EU94.   

5.8 Intellectual property issues 

So  far,  patenting  in  animal  cloning  is  limited  to  nuclear  transfer  techniques.  The  Group  is 

concerned that patents might be extended to specific genes or to animals, and that this would 

lead to a monopoly/concentration of the resources that are important for breeding.  

91 In this respect the consumption of milk from cloned animals may probably have a different impact on public 
perception than consumption of meat from clones.  
92http://www.ap-foodtechnology.com/news/ng.asp?n=82108-farm-bill-cfs-cloning 
93 See Chapter 3.1.1 of this Opinion. 
94 The Group is aware that in addition to technical difficulties, costs to consumers will arise as a consequence of 
the implementation of a broad labelling system. 

43

 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
The Group also advocates further clarification, inter alia through research, on the applicability 

of  the  exclusion  clauses  in  Directive  98/44/EC  (Art.  6)  and  the  EPO  rules  (23  d)  to  animal 
cloning for food supply95. 

5.9 Global trade 

EU rules  lay  down requirements in respect of animal welfare and animal ethics  in  breeding 

programmes.  On  the  other  hand,  WTO  agreements  are  based  on  the  requirement  that  only 

scientifically  documented  risks  to  human  health  or  to  the  environment  can  legitimately  be 

used as a reason to limit free trade. If meat from cloned animals were to be marketed in third 

countries,  it  could  be  exported  to  the  EU.  This  presents  a  dilemma  between  free  trade 

considerations on the one hand and ethical concerns regarding the cloning of animals on the 

other. Resolving this political dilemma is not easy. On the one hand, ethical considerations, 

including animal welfare, are seen as crucial – also in terms of public perception – while on 

the  other  hand  import  issues,  including  WTO  compliance,  may  complicate  the  market 
situation96.  

The  Group  acknowledges  the  complexity  of  the  issue,  but  points  out  that  there  are  already 

some  examples  of  specific  requirements  in  the  EU  covering  the  import  of  meat  and  food 

products  from  third  countries,  for  example  as  regards  the  import  of  meat  containing 

hormones.  The  Group  therefore  considers  that  the  import  of  cloned  animals,  their  offspring 

and materials derived from cloned animals (e.g. semen and food products, as described in 3.1 

and 3.3) should be conditional on the documentation as indicated in this Opinion, in particular 

with regard to traceability provisions and animal welfare.  

The  Group  notes  the  statement  in  the  preamble  and  in  Article  2  to  the  Agreement  on  the 

Application  of  Sanitary  and  Phytosanitary  Measures  (SPS  Agreement)  that  members  should 

not  be  prevented  from  adopting  or  enforcing  measures  necessary  to  protect  animal  health, 

95  EPO:  Rule  23d  "Exceptions  to  patentability  Under  Article  53(a),  European  patents  shall  not  be  granted  in 
respect  of  biotechnological  inventions  which,  in  particular,  concern  the  following:  (a)  processes  for  cloning 
human beings; (b) processes for modifying the germ line genetic identity of human beings; (c) uses of human 
embryos  for  industrial  or  commercial  purposes;  (d)  processes  for  modifying  the  genetic  identity  of  animals 
which  are  likely  to  cause  them  suffering  without  any  substantial  medical  benefit  to  man  or  animal,  and  also 
animals resulting from such processes." 
 (http://www.european-patent-office.org/legal/epc/pdf/epc_2006_v5_bm_en.pdf) 
96 For further considerations, please see: Challenges in regulating farm animal cloning. Recommendations from 
the project 'Cloning in public', J. Gunning, M. Hartlev, C. Gambrog et al., Danish Centre for Bioethics and Risk 
assessment (2006).  

44

 
 
 
                                                 
 
subject  to  the  requirement  that  these  measures  are  not  applied  in  a  manner  which  would 

constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between members. It also notes 

Article  5(7)  of  the  Agreement  relating  to  risk  assessment.  There  is  not  enough  scientific 

evidence  on  cloned  animals  and  their  offspring,  and  the  Group  believes  that  research  is 

required as described in the EFSA report.   

5.10 Conclusions 

The  Group  is  aware  of  the  EFSA's  draft  scientific  findings  and  recommendations  on  food 

safety,  animal  health  and  welfare  and  environmental  impact,  as  well  as  the  indications  of 

current  gaps  in  knowledge  about  animal  welfare  and  health  of  animal  clones  and  their 

offspring. The group is also aware of the results of the FDA report published the day before 

the adoption of this Opinion. 

Considering the current level of suffering and health problems of surrogate dams and animal 

clones, the Group has doubts as to whether cloning for food is justified. Whether this applies 

also to the offspring is open to further scientific research. 

At present, the EGE does not see convincing arguments to justify the production of food from 
clones and their offspring97. If, in the future, food products derived from cloned animals were 

to  be  introduced  to  the  European  market,  the  EGE  recommends  that  the  following 

requirements be met: 

Food safety - The safety of food products for human consumption as a precondition for their 

marketing  must  be  guaranteed  and  scientific  updates  and  follow-up  research  into  progeny 

should be carried out. 

Animal  welfare  and  health  -  In  accordance  with  the  Amsterdam  Treaty  (animals  as  sentient 

beings)  and  the  Lisbon  Treaty,  additional  requirements  should  be  met  in  intensive  animal 

breeding,  with  the  aim  of  following  the  guidance  on  animal  welfare  provided  by  the  World 

Organisation  for  Animal  Health  (OIE),  e.g.  the  five  freedoms:  from  hunger,  thirst  and 

malnutrition;  from fear and distress; from physical and thermal discomfort;  from pain, injury 

and disease; and to express normal patterns of behaviour. 

97 The conclusion in this paragraph was dissented by K. Marczewski.  

45

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
Traceability - Current EU legislation on food regarding traceability of animals and their food 

products should be enforced. Steps should be taken to ensure that EU legislation provides for 

the ability to identify individual animals where necessary. 

Global  trade  -  The  import  of  cloned  animals,  their  offspring  and  materials  derived  from 

cloned  animals  (e.g.  semen  and  food  products)  should  be  conditional  on  proper 

documentation, in particular with regard to traceability provisions and animal welfare.  

In addition the EGE recommends the following:  

Animal  welfare  -  Further  studies  and  analyses  on  long-term  animal  welfare  and  health 

implications for clones and their offspring, as well as more comparative analyses with other 

assisted and traditional reproductive technologies in animal farming, should be carried out for 

a  proper  assessment  of  this  issue,  in  line  with  the  EFSA  draft  opinion.  The  Commission 

should  take  initiatives  to  prepare  a  Code  of  Conduct  on  responsible  farm  animal  breeding, 

including animal cloning. 

Farm animal biodiversity and sustainability – The Commission should take proper measures 

to  preserve  the  genetic  heritage  of  farm  animal  species,  for  example  by  funding  projects 

designed to preserve domesticated breeds in Europe and to promote sustainable agriculture. 

Public  participation  -  Public  debates  should  be  promoted  on  the  impact  of  farm  animal 

cloning  on  agriculture  and  the  environment,  on  the  societal  impact  of  increasing  meat 

consumption  and  rearing  of  bovines,  and  on  the  fair  distribution  of  food  resources.  The 

Commission should take a pro-active role in promoting public discussion on the use of animal 

cloning  and  its  potential  implications,  by  financing  a  number  of  ad  hoc  initiatives  aimed  at 

promoting public debate on the marketing of food products derived from animal cloning.  

 Public  perception  -  The  Commission  should  launch  a  thematic  Eurobarometer  survey  and 

qualitative studies on animal cloning for food supply, in order to collect indicators on public 

perception concerning the introduction of such products to the food market as is being done in 

other countries.  

Labelling  –  The  EGE  is  aware  of  the  technical  difficulties  of  labelling  products  from 

offspring;  nevertheless  it  recommends  that  the  Commission  take  the  initiative  in  devising 

targeted procedures prior to the marketing of such food in the EU.   

Intellectual  property  issues  –  Clarification  should  be  provided  as  to  whether  the  exclusion 

clauses in Directive 98/44/EC (Art. 6d) on patentability of biological inventions and the EPO 

rules (23 d) apply to animal cloning for food supply. 

Global trade and consumer freedom – The EGE is aware that import issues in respect of food 

products derived from cloned animals, including compliance with World Trade Organisation 

46

 
 
 
provisions,  may  complicate  the  market  situation;  however,  the  EGE  recommends  that  the 

Commission take initiatives to ensure consumers' freedom and rights. 

Research - Further research is needed, in particular basic research into animal cloning, as well 

as  the  impact  on  human  health,  and  animal  welfare  for  farmed  species  other  than  those 

covered  by  EFSA.  Similarly,  further  studies  on  the  ethical,  legal  and  social  implications  of 

animal cloning for food supply as well as qualitative studies on public perception should be 

carried out.  

5.11 The need for revision of this Opinion 

Since  further  research  is  needed  and  cloning  technologies  are  constantly  improving,  this 

Opinion  could  be  reconsidered,  and  possibly  revised,  in  the  light  of  new  scientific  data  and 

societal considerations.  

47

 
 
 
 
Appendix IAddendum requested from Professor Krzysztof Marczewski, EGE memberAppendix IAddendum requested from Professor Krzysztof Marczewski, EGE member