The European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies 
to the European Commission 

Ethically Speaking 

Issue No 10 
July 2008 

Chief Editor 
Maurizio SALVI 

EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

 
 
 
Europe Direct is a service to help you ﬁ nd answers 
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11

(*)  Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers or these calls 

may be billed.

More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu).

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication.

Luxembourg: Ofﬁ ce for Ofﬁ cial Publications of the European Communities, 2008
ISSN 1725-5562

© European Communities, 2008
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Printed in Belgium

PRINTED ON WHITE CHLORINE-FREE PAPER

CONTENTS

Editorial

Maurizio Salvi, Head of the EGE Secretariat, 
Ethically Speaking  ...............................................................................................................................3

Contributions from members of the EGE

Rafael Capurro, ‘Go glocal: Intercultural comparison of leadership ethics’ ........................................9

National and regional ethics committees

Cyprus: Cyprus National Bioethics Committee .................................................................................15

Denmark: Danish Council of Ethics ...................................................................................................19

France: National Consultative Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences ................................21

Germany: German Ethics Council ......................................................................................................25

Greece: The Greek National Bioethics Commission ..........................................................................27

Ireland: Irish Council for Bioethics ....................................................................................................29

Luxembourg: National Consultative Ethics Commission for Life and Health Sciences ...................31

Portugal: National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences ................................................................33

Romania: National Research Ethics Council ......................................................................................37

Sweden: Swedish Council on Medical Ethics ....................................................................................41

United Kingdom: Nufﬁ eld Council on Bioethics ...............................................................................45

European Commission

Paul Timmers (Directorate-General for the Information Society and Media), 
‘Considering ethics and e-inclusion’ ..................................................................................................51

Philippe Galiay (Directorate-General for Research), ‘Small is beautiful: 
European Commission adopts a code of conduct for responsible nanosciences 
and nanotechnologies research in February 2008’ .............................................................................55

International Ethics Committees

Council of Europe’s Bioethics Division .............................................................................................61

International Bioethics Committee of Unesco: activities carried out in 2006–07 
and the work programme for 2008–09 ...............................................................................................63

Ethics and Health at WHO .................................................................................................................67

1

Editorial

On 13 December 2007, the ‘Reform Treaty’ of the European Union was signed in Lisbon by 
the Heads of State or Government of the 27 EU Member States. The Reform Treaty, inter alia, 
clearly  indicates  a  set  of  European  values,  which  include  the  protection  of  human  dignity, 
freedom,  democracy  and  human  rights,  pluralism,  non-discrimination,  tolerance,  justice, 
solidarity, gender equality, etc. The above values are set out in the European Union Charter 
of  Fundamental  Rights,  which  is  a  key  framework  for  the  design  of  EU  policies  and  their 
implementation.

The Charter shows that, while Europe is multicultural, there exists a stock of shared values, 
a value platform which is intimately linked to the identity of the EU. This stock can help the 
ﬂ ourishing not only of a European identity but also of a European way of implementing its 
policies in the EU and beyond (from research to security, from public health to environment, 
from biomedicine to ICT). However, this mechanism must involve open debate, mutual respect 
and  tolerance:  three  axes  on  which  the  EU  is  focusing  its  efforts,  actions  and  initiatives  at 
European and international level.

The Reform Treaty also reinforces the role of the EU in the international policy arena (Europe 
is a global player in a multi-polar world). This role is already incorporated in a number of EU 
policy sectors: from the economy and global trade (e.g. the new version of the Lisbon agenda 
and globalisation) to research (the European research area and the international dimension in 
research), and from energy and climate change (e.g. the role of the EU in the debate on the 
Kyoto protocols) to security and immigration.

This ambitious policy strategy is already embodied in the work programme for 2008 adopted 
by  the  European  Commission  in  December  2007.  According  to  this  work  programme,  the 
Commission will be focusing on delivering core policies for the globalisation agenda, being 
fully aware that ‘internal and external policy goals are intertwined as never before, underpinning 
the need for a modern and integrated vision on how to project, promote and protect Europe’s 
interests and values successfully’.

Examples of international actions in the Commission pipeline for 2008 include the following.

• 

• 

 The Commission will examine new avenues to be followed in its work to implement the 
millennium  development  goals.  It  will  present  an  ambitious  package  on  ﬁ nancing  for 
development and on aid effectiveness in preparation for the top-level international meetings 
to be held in Accra (September 2008) and Doha (December 2008).

 The Commission will move ahead with its global Europe agenda, continuing to press for 
a  WTO  trade  agreement  and,  at  the  same  time,  working  on  an  ambitious  set  of  bilateral 
negotiations.  The  year  2008  will  also  be  the  ﬁ rst  year  of  the  economic  partnership 
agreements and the 10th European Development Fund: new resources and a new focus on aid 

3

• 

• 

• 

effectiveness and complementarity will play a fundamental part in delivering development 
within the broader relationship that is now in place with ACP partners.

 Work  in  the  area  of  humanitarian  assistance  will  build  on  the  declaration  ‘Towards  a 
European consensus on humanitarian aid’. The Commission will also continue its work on 
the preparation, launch, negotiation or conclusion of agreements with, inter alia, Armenia, 
Azerbaijan,  Brunei,  Cambodia,  China,  Georgia,  India,  Indonesia,  Iraq,  Laos,  Malaysia, 
Moldova,  Philippines,  Russia,  Singapore,  Thailand,  Ukraine,  Vietnam,  the  Andean 
Community, central America, the Gulf Cooperation Council and Mercosur. 

 The Commission will remain active regarding political developments across the globe and 
continue its engagement in the stabilisation and reconstruction efforts in the Middle East, 
including through its role in the Quartet and as a major donor in the region, as well as in 
Africa and south Asia.

 The Commission will also seek to further strengthen the transatlantic partnership, which is 
a crucial cornerstone of Europe’s external relations and one which has been given a new 
political impetus through the framework for advancing transatlantic economic integration 
adopted at the last EU–US summit.

This is just a list of the priorities of the EC in 2008 — an ambitious plan and one which reﬂ ects 
the dynamism of the EU. The examples above show, on the one hand, that fundamental values 
will be a key reference for the EU’s policy and legislative design and, on the other hand, that 
the EC intends to give an unprecedented impetus to its work within the international dimension. 
Science and technology are not excluded from this — on the contrary; and the global dimension 
of  bioethics  plays  a  major  role  too.  The  concept  of  Europe  as  a  community  of  values  and 
the role of the EU as a main actor in international affairs explain the Commission’s intention 
to concentrate its efforts, fully respecting its powers and the principle of subsidiarity, in the 
area of global discussions on research and innovation, science and technology, a debate where 
bioethics plays a central role.

A  new  initiative  devised  by  the  Bureau  of  European  Policy  Advisers  (BEPA)  to  implement 
the global dialogue in bioethics includes the future establishment and ﬁ nancing (in the second 
half of 2008) of the International Dialogue on Bioethics. This will comprise a series of annual 
conferences the aim of which is to facilitate the sharing of information and open dialogue in 
the ﬁ eld of bioethics between EU and non-EU national ethics councils (NECs). The event will 
be chaired by the Chair of the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 
(EGE).  It  will  be  attended  by  the  chairs  of  15  non-EU  NECs  (Argentina,  Australia,  Brazil, 
Canada, China, Egypt, India, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, Philippines, Russia, South Africa, 
USA and the Association of African NECs), EGE members, the chairs of the EU-27 NECs and 
representatives of international organisations (UN agencies, Council of Europe, etc.).

In addition, starting from its next issue, the newsletter Ethically Speaking will open its pages to 
contributions from the NECs of the countries involved in the above international dialogue.

This purpose of this effort, which has already started in previous issues of Ethically Speaking 
with contributions from relevant international organisations (Council of Europe, Unesco, WHO, 
etc.), is to facilitate open debate, mutual respect and tolerance: three axes on which, as has been 
mentioned, the EU is focusing its efforts, actions and initiatives at European and international 

4

level and which take on a particular relevance in the realm of ethics, where socio-cultural and 
religious factors play a central role in the debate on science and technology.

Maurizio Salvi, PhD, 
Head of the EGE Secretariat
Member of the Bureau of European Policy Advisors. (BEPA)
European Commission, Rue de la Loi 200
B-1049 Brussels 
Tel. (32-2) 299 11 79
Fax (32-2) 299 45 65
E-mail maurizio.salvi@ec.europa.eu 
EGE website: http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm

5

Contributions from members 
Contributions from members 
of the EGE
of the EGE

Go glocal: intercultural comparison 
of leadership ethics (1)

Rafael Capurro

Leadership ethics, understood as the study of moral rules and values particularly in economics 
and politics, is both a new (Ciulla et al. 2005) and a very old ﬁ eld of philosophical research, 
dating  back  to  pre-Socratic  philosophy.  Today’s  quest  for  global  moral  responsibility  on 
the  part  of  economic  and  political  leaders  and  institutions  has  become  crucial  because  of 
the  increasing  violence  arising  particularly  from  cultural  struggles,  global  media,  ecological 
disasters, economic injustice and political oppression. Intercultural ethical research faces two 
dangers: either we are satisﬁ ed with merely juxtaposing concepts or we stall at an early stage 
of the dialogue, relying on what may look like either common ground or an incompatible view. 
In the light of further dialogue, however, such obstacles to deep mutual understanding might 
dissolve into far more complex interrelationships. 

Leadership: West and East

The essence of the Western perspective on leadership is grounded in the concept of efﬁ cacy 
(Jullien 2004). According to Jullien, thinking on efﬁ cacy has been characterised since its very 
beginning by the Greek concepts of: the goal (telos) and means (di’ou), action (praxis/poiesis) 
and  will  (boulesis),  the  model  (eidos),  the  leader  (hegémon;  demiourgós)  and  actualisation 
(enérgeia). The goodness of the action of a leader is conceived of with regard to a model or goal 
that the leader is supposed to achieve through theoretical (nous) and practical reason (phronesis) 
on the basis of a plan or an idea/ideal in order to master or ‘inform’ a situation. Efﬁ cacy is the 
power or capacity to produce a desired effect. It is based on a project that anticipates a process 
towards a goal. It is direct, based on the will, the courage and the knowledge of the leader, who 
tends to be a decision-maker and master of the situation. To be a morally good leader means 
eventually  to  become  a  (tragic)  hero.  Nature  (physis)  itself  is  conceived  of  as  a  production 
process conducted by a pottery god (demiourgós). Good leaders are god-like. In contrast, the 
key leadership concepts in classical Chinese thinking are: process (dao), situation, non-action 
(wu wei), the sage and potentiality. The key underlying idea is that of the potentiality of the 
situation. This potentiality, and not primarily the will and knowledge of a leader, is ‘efﬁ cient’ 
which means that the main task of the leader is to evaluate this potentiality according to the 
changing factors affecting the situation but not in advance according to a plan or model as in 

(1)  Short version of a keynote address to the sixth Leadership Forum ‘Growing successfully — Crossing borders’ 
organised  by  the  DB  Akademie  (http://www.db.de/site/bahn/de/unternehmen/unternehmen.html)  under  the 
patronage of Hartmut Mehdorn, Potsdam, 30 November to 2 December 2006. See full version at: http://www.
capurro.de/DB_Akademie.html 

9

the case of the concept of efﬁ cacy. There is a tendency of the situation from the very beginning 
but there is no model to follow. Instead of the view of the leader as a hero mastering the world 
through his action, Chinese thinking puts the role of the human actor into perspective so that 
he becomes almost invisible. A Chinese sage follows the prescription of Laozi, ‘do nothing 
(wu wei) and let nothing be left undone’, which means that he does not impose his plans on the 
situation but emerges in the spontaneous course of things. 

If the Western tradition has a tendency to mysticise action, Chinese thinking relies on the virtue 
of immanence — either that of the ‘way’ (dao), as in the case of Daoists, or that of morality 
or inner rectitude, as with Confucians. According to Daoists, good is not a norm outside the 
world and imposed on it but is the virtue or efﬁ cacy of something that is immanent, the notion 
of immanence being common to both schools of thought. In both cases, morality, understood 
as inner rectitude and/or the spontaneous course of things, is more effective than violence of 
(individual) action. The sage allows the effect to come about instead of claiming to be its origin 
or making it proprietary. He lets things ripen and has no plan or dream of mastery. The ripening 
process of nature is called ‘heaven’, which spontaneously interacts with ‘earth’ in an unending 
process of initiative and receptivity, yin and yang. Interaction with the process is indirect or 
gradual. There are no blockages based on models or ﬁ nal achievement or full actualisation of 
potentiality. Efﬁ cacy derives from emptiness which is ‘quite simply that which allows an effect 
to pass’ (Jullien 2004, 111)

The logic of emptiness is neither material nor spiritual but functional. This kind of (non-)action 
without a speciﬁ c goal is in fact a reaction more than an action. Aiming, for instance, for a 
speciﬁ c moral effect such as ‘equity’ also incorporates a global principle, namely ‘humanity,’ 
that allows equity to be fulﬁ lled in a particular case without coming to full effect (Jullien 2004, 
122).  Non-action  takes  place  upstream,  not  with  regard  to  the  end  but  to  the  beginning  of 
a  process.  It  works  as  an  efﬁ cient  strategy  that  allows  the  necessity  for  efﬁ cacy  and  action 
to  diminish  as  the  process  advances  instead  of  having  to  act  directly  or  downstream  on  the 
situation.  Instead  of  relying  upon  the  efﬁ cacy  of  a  leader  or  a  (transcendent)  god  as  in  the 
West,  the  Chinese  tradition  roots  human  action  on  situative  adaptation  and  emphasises  the 
constant and immanent transformation or transition of reality. For the Chinese sage, efﬁ cacy 
is at its best, i.e. fully efﬁ cient, when it becomes invisible. This is the reason why China gives 
primacy to indirect speech while in the West the principle of free speech (parrhesia) plays a 
fundamental role in the conception of Greek democracy and later on in the modern principles 
of freedom of the press and freedom of access. In China, the sage speaks less and gives signs. 
He calls attention, instead of transmitting a message. Instead of a speculative moral theory we 
ﬁ nd the logic of the path and ﬂ uctuating speech accompanying the process of the dao. The spirit 
of Chinese strategic thinking is to avoid the trap of particularity or individuality by getting the 
opponent to adapt and keeping oneself open to adaptability. Chinese efﬁ cacy might be used to 
defeat the enemy in war or to achieve political despotism through the ‘logic of manipulation’ far 
more than in Machiavelli. This is the moral price of conceiving of everything, including human 
behaviour, as a process: ‘there is no room here for values of any kind’ (Jullien 2004, 152). 

Lessons learned

The shortcomings of Chinese leadership ethics have to be confronted with the Western quest 
for ethical principles and values in such a way that dialogue might lead to mutual understanding 

10

and dissolve prima facie incompatibilities into a theory of complex interrelationships. The West 
would face the Chinese challenge of focusing on being rather than doing, on efﬁ ciency rather 
than efﬁ cacy, on processes and potentialities of situations rather than on leaders and actions. 
With regard to the Western history of leadership, we can easily realise that taking values and 
principles as absolute can lead and has led to violence, intolerance and totalitarianism. Learning 
leadership  ethics  from  China  means,  in  this  regard,  learning  to  see  values  not  as  something 
transcendent  and  permanent  but  within  a  process  by  which  we  continuously  and  efﬁ ciently 
evaluate everything that is between us (natural and artiﬁ cial things) as well as our interplay 
itself. If we take moral and economic values for granted they can become thinking and business 
killers in so far as they block and eventually hinder both the process of mutual and asymmetric 
recognition  and  the  process  of  evaluating  natural  and  artiﬁ cial  things.  In  other  words,  they 
hinder sustainability. By contrast, they become a source of efﬁ ciency and efﬁ cacy when we 
learn to see them as what they are, namely a mutual ascription coming from the other in the 
case of moral values, and a product of the interplay with regard to natural things and artiﬁ cial 
products in between us. 

To put this insight into Chinese terms: it is the dao in between us that makes effectively and 
efﬁ ciently possible our engagement with and detachment from things and products, which are 
fundamentally worthless but potentially valuable, as well as our mutual recognition as invaluable 
co-players. The leader who draws on Chinese as well as Western insights in the quest for a truly 
intercultural  leadership  ethic  is  capable  of  avoiding  the  pitfalls  either  of  reducing  values  to 
processes or of blocking processes on the basis of absolute values. The motto of intercultural 
leadership ethics is therefore: ‘go glocal’, i.e. open your mind to intercultural dialogue, grow 
successfully by crossing borders, and learn from China without giving up your roots and values. 
‘Feed your life’ (Zhuangzi, cited in Jullien 2005) and the life of your company, your society, 
and  our  common  world  through  a  sustainable  process  of  moral  and  economic  evaluation  of 
your actions and goals. Good leadership is consequently based upon the capacity for efﬁ cient 
economic evaluation, on the one hand, and, on the other, awareness of the invaluable human 
contribution to it against the background of the dao of nature.

References

Ciulla,  Joanne  B.,  Price,  Terry,  L.  and  Murphy,  Susan  E.,  eds.  (2005):  The  quest  for  moral 
leaders: essays on leadership ethics. Edward Elgar Publications.

Jullien, François (2005). Nourrir sa vie. À l‘écart du bonheur. Paris.

Jullien, François (2004). A treatise on efﬁ cacy: between Western and Chinese thinking. Hawaii 
Press (Traité de l’efﬁ cacité. Paris 1996; Über die Wirksamkeit. Berlin 1999).

11

National and regional 
National and regional 
ethics committees
ethics committees

The Cyprus National Bioethics Committee

The Committee

The Cyprus National Bioethics Committee (CNBC) was established in 2001 by the Law on the 
Establishment and Operation of the National Bioethics Committee (Law 150 (I)/2001).

The Committee’s mission is to constantly monitor, survey, systematically analyse and evaluate 
the  issues  and  problems  associated  with  scientiﬁ c  research,  advances  in  and  applications  of 
biotechnology, biology, medicine, genetics and pharmaceutics, as well as human intervention 
in biological processes and the human genotype, and to investigate their moral, ethical, social, 
humanistic and legal dimensions.

The CNBC is an independent body and is not subject to the administrative supervision of any 
ministry, agency, department or service and has the powers conferred on it by the current law 
and any future legislation.

The  CNBC  has  13  members,  including  the  chairperson.  The  members  represent  different 
professions and disciplines, and are appointed by the Council of Ministers of the Republic of 
Cyprus for a term of ofﬁ ce of four years. According to the provisions of the legislation, at least 
four members must come from the humanities and social sciences, four members from the area 
of medical and biological sciences, and four members must come from any other science or 
profession or be distinguished in any area of activity relevant to their contribution.

The CNBC adopted with very few changes the ‘Operational guidelines for ethics committees 
that  review  biomedical  research’  formulated  by  the  World  Health  Organization,  to  form  the 
basis of guidelines issued to ethics committees in Cyprus. The operational guidelines for the 
establishment of ethics committees to review biomedical research involving human subjects in 
Cyprus were enacted on 31 March 2005 (K.∆.Π. 175/2005).

In  accordance  with  the  above  operational  guidelines  and  with  the  authority  assigned  to  the 
Committee by Law 150 (I)/2001, the Committee set up three Bioethics Review Committees. 
Each Committee reviews protocols relating to:
• 
• 
• 

biomedical research on human beings and their biological substances;
clinical trials of medicinal products for human use; 
medical devices used on human beings.

The role of the Bioethics Review Committees is to:
• 

 contribute to safeguarding the dignity, rights, safety and well-being of all actual or potential 
research participants;
 provide  independent,  competent  and  timely  review  of  the  ethical  aspects  of  proposed 
studies;
be responsible for reviewing research proposals before the research begins.

• 

• 

15

The CNBC monitors, directs, coordinates and reviews the work performed by the above Bioethics 
Review Committees. The members of the Bioethics Review Committees are appointed for a 
period of two years.

Recent opinions

Predictive health information in the conclusion of health and life insurance contracts
This opinion considers whether it is ethical and justiﬁ able for insurance companies to demand, 
obtain and use predictive health information concerning proposers, before the conclusion of 
health and life private insurance contracts.

Using the results of modern medical diagnostic techniques and genetic tests, insurance companies 
can predict health risks and future diseases, thereby obtaining a more accurate assessment of 
insurance risk and premiums.

Implementation of this policy by insurance companies raises some serious concerns, including 
discrimination  and  injustice,  stigmatisation  and  impairment  of  self-esteem,  infringement  of 
the  right  to  informational  self-determination  and  particularly  the  right  to  ignorance,  the  risk 
of avoiding medically useful predictive tests, and the concept of risk equivalence instead of 
solidarity.

The opinion also examines the application of the solidarity model and the contract model in 
the Cypriot insurance system, especially in the light of the forthcoming implementation of the 
general health scheme by the Ministry of Health. Under this scheme, the level of contributions 
depends on the income level of each individual and not on the probability of a claim. Everyone 
is thus insured on the same terms and conditions, without assessment of the risk.

Concluding, the CNBC believes that there must be a balance between the proposer’s and the 
insurer’s interests and that anyone wishing to conclude a private personal insurance contract 
must  honestly  disclose  to  the  insurer  information  about  his/her  health  that  could  affect  the 
insurance risk.

Prenuptial test for thalassaemia before the celebration of a civil wedding
At the request of the Ministry of Health the Committee issued an opinion on the above subject 
on 18 March 2008. Currently in Cyprus couples intending to hold a religious wedding ceremony 
have  to  visit  the  Thalassaemia  Centre  of  the  Arch.  Makarios  III  State  Hospital  to  perform 
a  prenuptial  test  for  thalassaemia.  The  doctors  are  trained  to  give  non-directive  counselling 
describing the homozygous state and the treatment choices available if the couple decides to 
have a child with thalassaemia. Also all the choices available for the avoidance or prevention of 
such a birth are described including the risks involved in any of these procedures. 

This policy was and is not aimed at encouraging eugenic practices. The couple is free to make 
its choices and also to go ahead with the religious ceremony irrespective of the choice made.  

Considering the above, the Committee states in its opinion that no bioethical issues arise from 
the performance of the prenuptial test for thalassaemia on couples celebrating a civil wedding 
provided that the following conditions are met:

16

1.   Proper  non-directive  counselling  is  provided,  in  the  same  way  as  for  couples  intending 
to  hold  a  religious  wedding  ceremony.  In  this  way  the  couples  will  be  able  to  manage 
the knowledge they receive in accordance with their own free choice and autonomy. The 
couples will then sign a declaration that they either:

• 

• 

 choose to perform the test (the test results will not in any way impact on issuance of 
the marriage licence) and that they wish to be informed of the test results, or

 they do not wish to perform the test, again with this refusal having no implications on 
issuance of the marriage licence. In this way, foreigners with no history of thalassaemia 
in their country will avoid unnecessary procedures.

2.   The results of the test must not in any way impact on the choices made by the couple.

3.   The application of the prenuptial test for thalassaemia in civil weddings has to be implemented 
by law, and this law should be in agreement with the provisions of the Constitution and the 
other relevant laws enacted in the Republic. 

Conferences in 2008

In collaboration with the Pancyprian Medical Association, the Committee held a conference 
on ‘Palliative care for terminally ill and dying patients’ on 12 January. The conference was a 
great success as it attracted more than 100 participants from a wide range of ﬁ elds (students, 
scientists, physicians and the general public). 

Current work and forthcoming opinions

• 

• 

Genetically modiﬁ ed organisms

Palliative care 

Previous opinions

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Opinion on human organ donor registries

Opinion on transplantation of biological substances of human origin

Opinion on PGD and sex selection of in-vitro procreated embryos

Opinion on the use of the pre-implantation genetic diagnosis method

Opinion on cord blood banking

Opinion on medically assisted human procreation

17

Further information

Rena Vrahimi-Petridou
President
Cyprus National Bioethics Committee 
1 Apelli Street
1403 Nicosia
Cyprus
Tel. (357) 22 88 92 27 / (357) 22 88 91 03
Fax (357) 22 66 50 80
E-mail: repetridou@law.gov.cy
Website: www.bioethics.gov.cy

18

The Danish Council of Ethics

A call for interest in technology between man and machine

Intending to support popular ethical debate, the Danish Council of Ethics last year launched 
a multimedia website on technology that challenges the boundary between man and machine. 
What  ethical  prospects  are  there  to  being  able  to  hook  up  robot  parts  directly  to  the  human 
brain? And what will we do the day robots become so intelligent that they are reminiscent of 
humans? 

At the forefront of ethical debates

It  will  be  many  years  before  we  can  upgrade  our  organism  with  night  vision  or  superior 
intelligence, and perhaps this will never be the way of things. It will be many years before it 
becomes hard to tell a person from a robot. And perhaps that will never be the way of things.

But the integration of man and machine is not a futuristic scenario. It is a high-priority ﬁ eld 
of research in the EU, the USA and Japan. In Denmark, the government has just decided to 
spend billions on the development of robotic technologies tailored to support the care of the 
elderly. Just as well, since robotic care technologies and the research in interfaces between the 
human neuronal system and robotic devices are high-priority ﬁ elds in the EU research funding 
programmes FP7 and FP8. 

The Danish Council of Ethics holds that the time is right for debating, ethically speaking, which 
are  the  desired  purposes  of  such  technology,  and  which  are  not?  The  Council’s  multimedia 
website www.homoartefakt.dk is especially designed for dissemination and debate. The website 
contains a ﬁ lm, several interviews with European researchers, a lot of background articles and 
ethical essays from members of the Council. Furthermore, the website supports the possibility 
of adding blogs and online debate.

A call for interest

In  its  deliberations  on  ethical  aspects  of  implanting  IT  technology  in  the  human  body  from 
2005, the EGE suggested that the national ethical councils furthered the debate on these issues. 
The Danish Council of Ethics is doing so with success. Now the Council would like to take 
the debate on to a European level by translating the website www.homoartefakt.dk and thereby 
transforming it into a platform for pan-European debate about ethics and technology between 
man and machine. But in order to do so we need partners, both ﬁ nancial and intellectual. This 
contribution to the EGE newsletter therefore ends with a call for interest: Anyone who sees 
possibilities and would like to contribute to this project, please do not hesitate to contact the 
Danish Council of Ethics.

19

Further information

Project leader Thomas Laursen 
E-mail: Thomas.laursen@etiskraad.dk 
Tel. (45) 35 37 58 33 / (45) 20 87 06 70
Websites: www.homoartefakt.dk (in Danish)
http://www.etiskraad.dk/sw293.asp (The Council’s homepage in English

20

The National Consultative Ethics Committee 
for Health and Life Sciences, France

Legal basis and mandate

The  National  Consultative  Ethics  Committee  for  Health  and  Life  Sciences  (CCNE)  was 
established by presidential decree on 23 February 1983 as an independent authority linked to 
the ministries of research and health. Set up pursuant to the law of 29 July 1994, the CCNE now 
operates under the law of 6 August 2004.

Taking an ethical view of health and life sciences
The  CCNE’s  mission  is  to  ‘provide  opinions  on  the  ethical  problems  and  societal  questions 
raised by progress in the ﬁ elds of biology, medicine and health, and to publish recommendations 
on these issues’(2). 

The CCNE at work

Decree No 2005-390 of 28 April 2005 established the composition, organisation and operation 
of the committee, and speciﬁ ed how it can be tasked.

A purely consultative body, the CCNE receives requests submitted by presidents of parliamentary 
assemblies,  government  representatives,  higher  education  establishments,  public  institutions 
and ofﬁ cially recognised foundations working in research, technological development or the 
promotion and protection of health. The committee may also address various issues raised by 
people other than those listed above.

The CCNE’s highest decision-making authority is the plenary committee, composed of all its 
members.

Cases  are  investigated  by  the  technical  section,  which  includes  12  members  chosen  by  the 
committee  on  the  basis  of  nominations  by  the  CCNE  president.  Each  issue  is  handled  by  a 
working group made up of committee members, who may request help from outside experts 
in  order  to  shed  new  light  on  a  subject.  The  technical  section  then  examines  the  case  and 
presents  it  to  the  plenary  committee.  Meetings  of  the  plenary  committee  and  the  technical 
session are closed to the public. After the case is examined, a ﬁ nal report is published, including 
recommendations or opinions. 

(2)  Article 1412 of Law No 2004-800 of 6 August 2004.

21

Law No 2004-800 of 6 August 2004 determines the composition of the committee

• 

• 

• 

• 

 The  CCNE  president  and  two  honorary  presidents  are  appointed  by  the  President  of  the 
French Republic.
Five  key  ﬁ gures  from  the  main  philosophies  and  religious  faiths  are  appointed  by  the 
President of the French Republic.
Nineteen members are chosen for their expertise and interest in ethical issues: ﬁ fteen are 
designated by various ministers concerned by biology and health issues, the four remaining 
members are named respectively by the presidents of France’s two parliamentary houses, 
the  vice-president  of  the  Conseil  d’État  (France’s  highest  administrative  court)  and  the 
president of the Cour de Cassation (supreme court of appeal).
Fifteen representatives from the research sector are designated by their peers.

Composition of the Committee

The Committee was recently renewed (Ministerial Order of 8 March 2008 of the Ministry of 
Higher Education and Research and the Ministry of Health, Youth and Sports)

• 
• 
• 

President: Alain Grimfeld
Honorary President: Didier Sicard
Members:
– Persons from the main philosophies and religious faiths:

Olivier Abel
Ali Benmakhlouf
Haïm Korsia
Xavier Lacroix
Blandine Kriegel

– Persons chosen for their expertise and interest in ethical issues:

André Comte-Sponville
Alain Cordier
Pierre Le Coz
Bernard Debré
Chantal Deschamps
Anne-Marie Dickele
Frédérique Dreifuss-Netter
Marie-Thérèse Hermange
Bernard Kanovitch
Chantal Lebatard
Claire Legras
Jacqueline Mandelbaum
Lucien Neuwirth
Christian de Roufﬁ gnac
Philippe Rouvillois
Michel Roux
Alain-Gérard Slama
Dominique Stoppa-Lyonnet
Philippe Waquet

22

– Representatives of the research sector:

Annick Alpérovitch
Jean-Claude Ameisen
Marie-Germaine Bousser
Claude Burlet
Pascale Cossart
Georges Fauré
Alain Fischer
Patrick Gaudray
Françoise Héritier
Pierre Joliot
Martine Loizeau
Pierre Le Neindre
Roger Pol Droit
Maxime Séligmann
Claude Sureau

The National Consultative Ethics Committee on the international scene

The Committee is in charge of organising the next Global Summit of National Bioethics Advisory 
Bodies, which will be held in Paris on 1 and 2 September 2008.

The  Committee  will  organise  the  10th  European  Conference  of  National  Ethics  Committees 
(Cometh) during the French Presidency of the European Union, in partnership with the Council 
of Europe and the European Commission (27 and 28 November 2008).

Current work

• 
• 

Surrogate gestation
Access to the patient’s medical ﬁ le by insurance companies

A few recent publications

• 

• 
• 

Opinion No 101: Health, ethics and money: ethical issues as a result of budgetary constraints 
on public health expenditure in hospitals
Opinion No 102: The situation of autistic children and adults in France
Opinion  No  103:  Ethics  and  childhood  deafness:  consideration  of  information  regarding 
systematic neonatal screening and the medical management of deaf children

23

Further information

Marie-Hélène Mouneyrat
Secretary General
National Consultative Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences
7, rue Saint-Georges
F-75009 Paris
Tel. (33) 01 53 86 11 49 / 52
Fax (33) 01 53 86 11 40
Email: contac@comite-ethique.fr
Website: www.ccne-ethique.fr

24

The German Ethics Council

Inauguration of the German Ethics Council

Following the Ethics Council Act which came into force on 1 August 2007 the members of the 
German Ethics Council were appointed by the German Parliament (Deutscher Bundestag) and 
the  German  Federal  Government  on  13  February  2008.  The  German  Ethics  Council  will  be 
inaugurated on 11 April 2008. At the same time the Council members will elect their Executive. 
The German Ethics Council will adopt its rules of procedure and work programme at the next 
meeting.

Further information

Ulrike Florian
Press and public relations ofﬁ cer
German National Ethics Council
Jaegerstrasse 22/23 
D-10117 Berlin
Tel. (49-30) 20370-242
Fax (49-30) 20370-252
E-mail: kontakt@ethikrat.org 
Website: www.ethikrat.org 

25

The Greek National Bioethics Commission

Obituary 

The Greek National Bioethics Commission is very sad to announce the sudden death of its President, 
Emeritus Professor George Koumantos, on 16 August 2007. Professor Koumantos was the founding 
President of the National Bioethics Commission and a pioneer in the ﬁ eld of bioethics in Greece.

Current leadership 

Professor George Maniatis, Vice-President of the Commission, is currently Acting President. 

Most recently issued opinion

February 2008: Opinion on ‘The use of genetic information in private health and life insurance’
Abstract

The  use  of  genetic  information  in  health  and  life  insurance  is  currently  under  scrutiny  by 
lawmakers,  researchers  and  the  general  public  worldwide.  Different  countries  have  adopted 
different solutions, while in Greece the matter has not yet been dealt with. The interest of insurers 
in genetic information is expected to increase along with the number of available genetic tests 
that can determine the genetic predisposition of individuals to various disorders. 

The possible use of such information in the calculation of actuarial risk raises ethical dilemmas, as 
there is a conﬂ ict of interest between the protection of privacy of the insured and the lawful business 
rights of the insurer. Another issue that arises is the need to conduct medical genetics research for 
which the collection of genetic information is necessary. Due to public perception of possible genetic 
discrimination, if genetic information is used by insurers, volunteers are likely to be discouraged 
from taking part in medical genetics research. In addition, while genetic information is important for 
personal and public health, its predictive value for disease onset should not be overvalued. 

The National Bioethics Commission formulated its opinion based on the following principles: 
(i) health and life insurance are public interest goods; (ii) the value of genetic information should 
not be overestimated; and (iii) research on the human genome should not be discouraged. The 
Commission recommends that there should be a moratorium during which insurers should not 
make use of genetic information for the calculation of risk. Within this period, and following 
public consultation, the authorities should prepare legislation such that individuals are protected 
from discrimination while insurers are protected from fraud. 

Please note that an English version of the full text (in pdf format) of all opinions and reports 
issued by the Commission can be found at the following URL: http://www.bioethics.gr/category.
php?category_id=55 or requested from the Secretariat, Secretariat@bioethics.gr

27

Current work

The Commission is currently discussing the issue of research ethics. An opinion on the subject 
is expected to be issued by the end of summer 2008 and the English translation is expected to 
be published by the end of the year. 

Seminars

The Commission is currently organising a series of seminars on ‘Research ethics in FP7” for 
researchers, in several cities in Greece. The seminars aim to inform the scientiﬁ c community 
about EU and Greek legislation regarding research ethics and to assist scientists in submitting 
research proposals under FP7.

Presentations 

Members of the Commission and senior scientists regularly participate in international conferences 
and meetings.

Highlights of presentations from October 2007 to March 2008

Date

Conference/meeting

Title

Participant

3 and 
4 December 2007

Roundtable, Strasbourg

29 and 
30 January 2008

EFGCP (European Forum 
for Good Clinical Practice) 
Annual Conference 2008, 
Brussels

‘Predictivity, genetic 
tests and insurance’

Professor G. 
Maniatis, Acting 
President

‘Safety in clinical 
trials — are we in 
jeopardy?’

Dr Ariadne Hager, 
Senior Scientist 
of the Commission

27 and 
28 February 2008

11th Forum of NECs, Brdo, 
Slovenia 

‘Animal cloning and 
food production’

Professor G. 
Maniatis, Acting 
President

Further information

Mrs Marianna Dracopoulou
Executive Head Secretary
Greek National Bioethics Commission
47 Evelpidon Street
11362 Athens
Greece
Tel. (30-210) 88 47 700
Fax (30-210) 88 47 701
E-mail: Secretariat@bioethics.gr
Website: www.bioethics.gr

28

The Irish Council for Bioethics

Irish Council for Bioethics opinion: ethical, scientiﬁ c and legal issues concerning 
stem cell research

One  of  the  most  widely  discussed  and  most  controversial  questions  in  ethical  and  political 
debates of recent years is whether research on human embryos should be permitted and, if so, 
what kind of research and for what purpose. On 23 April 2008, the Irish Council for Bioethics 
published an opinion document on the ethical, scientiﬁ c and legal issues concerning stem cell 
research. The key ﬁ ndings of the report are as follows.

• 

• 

• 

The Council considers the embryo to have signiﬁ cant moral value rather than full moral 
status.  The  moral  value  that  embryos  are  seen  to  possess  is  based  on  their  potential  to 
develop into persons, as well as the value they derive from representing human life in its 
earliest stages.

The Council believes that the moral value of human IVF embryos that will otherwise remain 
frozen  or  be  destroyed  needs  to  be  balanced  against  the  moral  value  of  those  members 
of  society  who  are  suffering  from  debilitating  illnesses.  While  accepting  that  the  value 
of human life demands that we hold signiﬁ cant respect for embryos, it also demands that 
we  consider  our  obligations  to  care  for  humankind  more  generally.  The  Council  would 
therefore consider embryonic stem cell research to be acceptable in certain contexts. Hence, 
the  Council  supports  the  carefully  regulated  use  of  supernumerary  in  vitro  fertilisation 
embryos, which are otherwise destined to be destroyed, for the purposes of embryonic stem 
cell  research  aimed  at  alleviating  human  suffering.  A  person’s  or  persons’  decisions  to 
donate their supernumerary embryos for research should be voluntary, free from any form 
of coercion, and made under the strict conditions of informed consent.

The Council does not believe that the creation of embryos speciﬁ cally for research is currently 
justiﬁ ed or that it represents a proportionate response while supernumerary embryos exist. 
This is based on the recognition of the need to avoid the instrumentalisation of embryos and 
women and the value of the embryo as a symbol of how we treat each other as members 
of the human race. This assessment is also cognisant of the current technical limitations of 
somatic cell nuclear transfer. If in vitro fertilisation processes were to become more efﬁ cient, 
with a resultant decrease in the number of supernumerary embryos available for research, 
or if the therapeutic potential of SCNT is borne out by research, the balance of the ethical 
concern  over  the  creation  of  embryos  versus  the  value  to  society  of  such  research  may 
have to be re-evaluated. If creation of embryos for research were deemed to be acceptable 
at some point in the future, the Council would have no principled objection to the creation 
of human–animal hybrid cell-lines, which would obviate concerns relating to coercion and 
exploitation of women.

29

• 

• 

• 

• 

It is the view of the Council that a failure to provide a comprehensive and cohesive regulatory 
system to govern stem cell research and its application undermines the moral value of the 
human embryo. It may also hinder developments in this ﬁ eld of research in Ireland. Thus, 
the Council recommends the establishment of a State-funded regulatory authority, which 
would  function  independently  and  transparently  (in  terms  of  its  principles  and  agenda) 
to  oversee  embryo  research.  Such  an  authority  should  be  tasked  with  the  registration, 
licensing and inspection of persons/premises/activities working with human embryos and/
or embryonic material. Furthermore, the authority should develop codes of good practice for 
professionals working in the area and accessible information for the public. Should in vitro 
fertilisation processes become more efﬁ cient, with a resultant decrease in the availability of 
supernumerary embryos for research, or if the therapeutic potential of somatic cell nuclear 
cloning is borne out, the balance of concern over the creation of embryos versus the value 
to society of such embryos may have to be re-evaluated. 

If, on the basis of scientiﬁ c evidence and economic analyses, umbilical cord blood banking 
were judged to be a useful investment for Irish healthcare, a public rather than private model 
should be adopted in order to secure equal access to beneﬁ ts for all. 

Given the moral value accorded to human embryos, the Council is opposed to the patenting 
of embryonic stem cells on the basis of protecting human dignity and avoiding an undue 
instrumentalisation of human life.

In  keeping  with  the  Council’s  modus  operandi  since  its  establishment  in  2002,  a  public 
consultation was undertaken prior to the drafting of this opinion document. It is important to 
make clear that the purpose of the consultation was to inform the deliberations of the Council, 
rather than serve as an opinion poll on the topic of stem cell research. Over 2 000 individual 
responses were received by the Council from members of the general public. An analysis of 
the submissions is included as an appendix to the opinion document. 

The opinion document is available in hardcopy by contacting the secretariat or can be downloaded 
from the ICB’s website www.bioethics.ie

Further information

Dr Siobhán O’Sullivan
Irish Council for Bioethics
Regus House, Block 4, Harcourt Centre
Harcourt Road
Dublin 2
Ireland
Tel. (353-1) 477 32 15
Fax (353-1) 402 95 90
E-mail: s.osullivan@gmail.com
Website: www.bioethics.ie

30

National Consultative Ethics Commission for 
Life and Health Sciences (CNE), Luxembourg

The Commission

The  National  Consultative  Ethics  Commission  for  Life  and  Health  Sciences  (CNE)  was 
established by government decree in 1988 and began its work in 1989. The CNE is thus one 
of the oldest European national ethics committees. Since its foundation, the CNE has issued 
21 opinions on various topics such as dissemination of GMOs, medically assisted procreation 
and reproductive cloning of human beings.

The Commission consists of 15 members, among them a chairman and a vice-chairman. Members 
are nominated by the government and appointed for a renewable ﬁ ve-year term. Five members 
at least are chosen on account of their expertise and experience in medicine, paramedical care, 
biomedical research, molecular biology and genetics. Five members at least are chosen on the 
basis  of  their  expertise  and  experience  in  the  ﬁ elds  of  law,  psychology  or  sociology,  social 
work, philosophy and theology.

Recent opinions

Opinion No 20 — The limits of access to healthcare in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
Opinion No 20 was published in 2007. Its goal was ‘to lead an ethical debate in order to assess 
whether access to healthcare in Luxembourg is satisfactory from an ethical point of view’.

The Commission addresses four questions. The ﬁ rst is to identify the improvements that could 
be made to the Luxembourg health system in order to better fulﬁ l the ethical requirements.

The  second  question  consists  of  an  analysis  of  the  social  security  scheme  to  assess  who  is 
covered by social security and who is not, and what kind of access to healthcare exists for those 
not covered by social security.

A third question highlights the services covered by social security, more speciﬁ cally by health 
insurance and nursing insurance. The fourth and last question concerns the various drawbacks 
that may limit access to healthcare even where a person is covered by social security.

Opinion No 21 — The diagnosis of death in relation to organ donation
Opinion No 21 was issued in March 2008. The minister for health asked the CNE to submit 
proposals regarding the revision of the criteria for cerebral death with reference to an update of 
the decree of August 1983.

31

The Commission reﬂ ects on the deﬁ nition of death, the medical criteria for determining death 
and tests permitting with certainty the diagnosis of death. It also puts forward proposals with 
regard to an update of the decree. Finally, regarding organ donation, the CNE addresses medical, 
legal, ethical and pragmatic considerations.

The members of the CNE consider that simple amendment of the decree dated 10 August 1983 
is insufﬁ cient. In their opinion, modiﬁ cation of the law of November 1982 is necessary.

Regarding organ donation, the members of the CNE recommend improving information and 
education provided to the general public and health professionals.

All  members  are  in  favour  of  an  inter-hospital  network  for  better  identifying  patients  with 
cerebral death. They also recommend encouraging the organisation of critical debates concerning 
the ethical and social issues of organ donation and the transparency of procedures.

All 21 opinions are available on the Commission’s website (in French only).

Further information

Jean-Claude Milmeister
Head of Ofﬁ ce
Luxembourg National Consultative Ethics Commission for Life and Health Sciences
2 Circuit de la Foire Internationale
L-1347 Luxembourg
Tel. (352) 24 78 66 28
Fax (352) 26 68 35 01
Email: cne@mcesr.etat.lu
Website: www.cne.lu

32

National Council of Ethics 
for the Life Sciences

Legal basis and mission

The National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences (CNECV — Conselho Nacional de Ética 
para as Ciências da Vida) is an independent body, created in 1990 by Law No 14/90 of 9 June 
for the purpose of ‘analysing systematically the moral problems which arise out of scientiﬁ c 
progress in the ﬁ elds of biology, medicine or general healthcare’. The CNECV deﬁ nes itself 
as  national,  independent,  pluralist  and  consultative.  The  third  and  current  term  of  ofﬁ ce  of 
the  CNECV  (2003–08)  began  on  4  September  2003,  presided  over  by  Paula  Martinho  da 
Silva. Apart from the President, appointed by the Prime Minister, the CNECV is composed of 
20 members, from a wide variety of backgrounds ranging from the human or social sciences to 
the ﬁ elds of medicine or biology.

The CNECV’s activities in 2007

The CNECV reﬂ ects upon a great diversity of subjects, both on its own initiative and in response 
to the requests it receives. Its interdisciplinary and autonomous character reveals the range of 
the  debate,  as  well  as  one  of  the  most  important  aspects  of  bioethical  debate:  the  capacity 
for  dialogue,  the  acceptance  of  divergence  and  the  willingness  to  reach  consensus.  Over  the 
course of 2007 and the beginning of 2008, the CNECV drew up and concluded the following 
opinions.

Opinions

Opinion on pre-implantation genetic diagnosis — 51/CNECV/2007 (10 April 2007)
On its own initiative, the CNECV reﬂ ected upon the ethical issues arising from the use of PGD 
techniques, with reference to some of their possible applications and to the principles underlying 
the ethical discussion of this subject, particularly the dignity and the non-instrumentalisation of 
human beings, informed consent, solidarity and precaution.

Opinion on the legal regime for DNA proﬁ le databases — 52/CNECV/2007 (12 June 2007)
When Parliament was debating the creation of a DNA proﬁ le database in Portugal for the purposes 
of civil identiﬁ cation and criminal investigation, the CNECV’s reﬂ ection upon the draft bill 
providing for its creation and maintenance arose in response to a request for an opinion from 
the Under-Secretary of State for Justice.

33

The  CNECV’s  analysis  considered  values  such  as  concern  for  public  safety  and  respect  for 
individual privacy; the risks and the beneﬁ ts involved in setting up a DNA database, including the 
ﬁ nancial costs; the criteria for quality, security, transparency and autonomy in the procurement, 
analysis and storage of biological samples and the processing of the respective data; the rights 
of the most vulnerable, such as minors and incapable persons.

Opinion on Draft Bills No 126/X (which establishes the principles of scientiﬁ c research 
in stem cells and the use of embryos) and No 376/X (which establishes the legal regime 
for the use of stem cells, for research purposes and the respective therapeutic applications) — 
53/CNECV/2007 (10 July 2007)
The drawing-up of this opinion came about following a request from the Health Committee of 
the Assembly of the Republic, with a view to analysing the draft bills presented by two political 
parties concerning scientiﬁ c research on stem cells and the use of embryos, as well as in relation 
to the respective therapeutic application.

The CNECV pondered this matter in depth in its Opinion No 47/CNECV/05 — Opinion on 
stem cell research. The new opinion, based on that reﬂ ection, concentrated on analysing the 
speciﬁ c questions raised by the draft bills, essentially on consent issues.

Opinion on the legal regime of quality and safety relative to the donation, procurement, 
testing, processing, preservation, storage, distribution and application of tissues and cells 
of human origin — 54/CNECV/2007 (11 December 2007)
The  Bureau  of  the  Minister  of  Health  and  the  Authority  for  Blood  and  Transplant  Services 
(ASST)  asked  for  the  CNECV’s  opinion  on  the  preliminary  draft  of  a  decree  law  which 
transposes into the Portuguese legal system Community Directives 2004/23/EC, 2006/17/EC 
and  2006/86/EC,  which  deal  with  questions  relating  to  ‘the  donation,  procurement,  testing, 
processing, preservation, storage and distribution of tissues and cells of human origin’, and ‘the 
traceability, notiﬁ cation of adverse events and technical requirements for the coding, processing, 
preservation, storage and distribution of tissues and cells of human origin’.

The CNECV has already given its opinion on the ethical questions raised in former laws regulating 
transplantation  (Opinions  Nos  1/CNECV/93,  41/CNECV/2003  and  50/CNECV/2005).  In 
Portugal, many of the ethical and juridical principles applicable have already been duly deﬁ ned 
in Law No 12/2005 of 26 January (personal genetic information and health information), which 
establishes rules for the procurement and preservation of biological products for genetic testing 
or research. These principles are in fact stated in Opinion 43/CNECV/2004.

Opinion on the draft bill on the legal regime of quality and safety relating to the donation, 
procurement, testing, processing, preservation, storage, distribution and application of 
tissues and cells of human origin — 55/CNECV/2008 (12 February 2008)
Following Opinion No 54/CNECV/2007, the draft bill on the legal regime governing quality 
and  safety  concerning  the  donation,  procurement,  testing,  processing,  preservation,  storage, 
distribution and application of tissues and cells of human origin was reformulated. When the 
new document was submitted for the CNECV’s opinion, the comments and recommendations 
relating to aspects which had previously been analysed by the CNECV were found to have been 
complied with.

34

Organisation of international meetings — NEC Forum

The 10th Forum of National Ethics Councils (10th NEC Forum), held on 11 and 12 October 2007 
under  the  auspices  of  the  Portuguese  Presidency  of  the  European  Union,  was  of  the  utmost 
importance. The principal theme of the meeting was dedicated to the 50th anniversary of the 
Treaty of Rome: reﬂ ection upon the principal ethical values shared at European level and the 
role of ethics in public policy in Europe.

The various panels at the 10th NEC Forum dealt with such themes as the recent activity on governance 
and ethics at the European Commission, the inﬂ uence of mobility on the fundamental values of the 
European Union, or the connections between the bioethics debate at local, national and international 
levels. The themes were enriched by the contributions of renowned specialists such as Jean-Michel 
Baer, Gören Hermerén, Francesco Paolo Casavola, José Cruz Vilaça, George Maniatis, Rena Petridou, 
Anette  Nissen,  Maria  de  Belém  Roseira,  Roberto  Carneiro  and  François  Chapuis.  The  reﬂ ection 
upon the new bioethical frontiers in a global world included the Brazilian perspective presented by 
Volnei Garrafa, Director of the Unesco Chair in Bioethics at the University of Brasília.

Due to its pertinence and interest, the theme of access to biobanks and DNA databases merited 
special attention, with presentations by Hugh Whittall, Chris Womack and Jorge Soares.

The contributions were of a high quality and stimulated debate. The meeting brought together 
around 100 participants, including chairpersons, secretaries, speakers and guests.

A  joint  meeting  between  the  CNECV  and  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New 
Technologies of the European Union (EGE) was also held in October 2007. The meeting dealt with 
such issues as animal cloning for human consumption and nanomedicine (EGE Opinions Nos 23 and 
21) and the exchange of experience between the two organisations. Pedro Fevereiro, a member of 
the CNECV and Director of the Laboratory of Biotechnology of Vegetable Cells of the Institute of 
Chemical and Biological Technology at the New University of Lisbon, gave a talk on ‘agri-food’.

In 2008, the CNECV plans to continue the projects begun in 2007 as well as to undertake new 
initiatives.

Further information

Conselho Nacional de Ética para as Ciências da Vida

Paula Martinho da Silva (President)
pres.cnecv@sg.pcm.gov.pt

Ana Soﬁ a Carvalho (Assessor for the President)
ascarvalho@sg.pcm.gov.pt

Ed. Presidência do Conselho de Ministros
Rua Professor Gomes Teixeira 
P-1350-265 Lisboa
Tel. (351) 21 392 73 16 
Fax (351) 21 392 76 29
E-mail: cnecv@sg.pcm.gov.pt
Website: www.cnecv.gov.pt

35

National Research Ethics Council, Romania

The National Research Ethics Council is the Romanian government’s advisory body for ethical 
issues raised by scientiﬁ c and technological advances in research activities and for monitoring 
the application of moral and professional codes in research activities.

The  National  Research  Ethics  Council  was  established  following  a  comprehensive  review  of 
the regulatory and advisory framework for good research practice undertaken by the Romanian 
government in 2004. It was enacted in Law 206/2004 on good practice and Orders 400/2007 and 
9306/2008 issued by the Minister of Education, Research and Youth establishing the procedures 
governing appointments, the composition and functions of the National Research Ethics Council.

The ﬁ rst meeting of the National Research Ethics Council was in March 2007. The Council 
is made up of 11 members, plus a secretary without voting rights. Pursuant to Law 206/2004 
the  National  Research  Ethics  Council  brings  together  personalities  from  various  scientiﬁ c 
and philosophical backgrounds. All its members are appointed by the National Authority for 
Scientiﬁ c  Research  for  a  renewable  period  of  four  years.  The  acting  chair  is  Prof.  Dr.  Paun 
Otiman of the University of Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine in Timisoara.

The National Research Ethics Council’s role should be seen in the context of other advisory and 
regulatory bodies in the regulatory and advisory framework for research (e.g. the Consultative 
Council of the National Authority for Scientiﬁ c Research). Matters for consideration are referred 
to the Council in writing and resolutions are adopted by a majority vote.

The general aims of the National Research Ethics Council are to support government needs for 
an advisory and regulatory framework. In essence its roles are to:
• 
• 

express opinions and suggest solutions, also for the purpose of preparing legislative acts;
address the ethical and legal problems that may emerge from the advances made through 
research;
promote  the  drawing-up  of  codes  of  conduct  for  practitioners  operating  in  the  various 
research sectors concerned, and to encourage communication with the general public;
act as an expert body working towards the resolution of ethical issues relating to research.

• 

• 

The current activities of the National Research Ethics Council involve:
• 
• 
• 

considering appeals against decisions of research ethics committees at institutional level;
keeping a record of appeals and resolutions;
presenting  the  Minister  of  Education  Research  and  Youth  with  an  annual  report  on  the 
Council’s work;
cooperating with institutional research ethics committees.

• 

The  National  Research  Ethics  Council  introduced  a  systematic  approach  to  exchanging 
information with other equivalent bodies in the international arena. In March 2008, a meeting 
was  held  in  Bucharest  at  the  National  Authority  for  Scientiﬁ c  Research  with  Prof.  Matthias 

37

Kaiser of the Norwegian Ethics Council. The discussions focused on the draft of code of conduct 
for research elaborated by the Romanian Council.

The work of the National Research Ethics Council is carried out within permanent or temporary 
bodies, as follows.
a)   Plenary Council — the top deliberative authority. It meets when necessary to debate opinions 

in the pipeline. Adopting an opinion requires a quorum of 66 % of members.

b)   Permanent Commissions — for (a) socio-humanistic sciences; (b) life sciences; (c) technical 
sciences. Under Order 9306/2008 of the Minister of Education, Research and Youth, the 
number of members in each Commission was raised from seven to nine.

c)   Temporary Commissions — on an ad hoc basis. The Permanent Commissions can initiate a 
debate by creating a temporary commission if a question is more complex or has far-ranging 
implications for society.

d)   Sub-commissions — proposed by the Permanent Commissions and approved by the National 

Research Ethics Council.

All plenary council, permanent and temporary commissions and sub-commissions sessions take 
place behind closed doors.

Current activities

Starting from December 2007, a series of meetings focusing on research ethics took place in 
different university centres (Bucharest, Cluj Napoca, Timisoara). The purpose of these meetings 
was to raise scientists’ awareness of ethical issues in research.

In January 2008, a debate entitled ‘Informed consent — ethical and legislative matters’ took 
place in Bucharest at the Cantacuzino Institute. The participants decided to create a working 
group to draft speciﬁ c informed-consent forms for research projects and for elaborating a guide 
in this ﬁ eld.

In  February  2008,  a  meeting  entitled  ‘Stem  cell  research  —  ethical  and  legislative  matters’ 
took  place  within  the  Unesco/Romania  Bioethics  Commission.  Presentations  were  given  on 
IPR, stem cell transplants, religious points of view (both the Catholic and Orthodox churches 
participated), embryonic stem cells and IVF.

In March 2008, a debate on ‘Research integrity’ took place at the University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy in Cluj Napoca. In this context, members of the National Research Ethics Council’s 
Life Sciences Commission, members of the Institutional Ethics Committees, philosophers and 
medical doctors discussed research integrity in publications, institutional needs for research, 
government and research management. Case studies were presented.

The next meeting, focusing on ‘Animal research — ethical and legislative matters’, will take 
place in April 2008 in Timisoara.

Web page: http://www.mct.ro/ancs_web/index.php?action=view&idcat=482

38

Further information

Ioana Ispas
Secretary-General
Romanian National Ethics Council
Ofﬁ cial title: Consiliul National de Etica a Cercetarii Stiintiﬁ ce, Dezvoltarii Tehnologice 
si Inovarii
21–25 Mendeleev Street, 
010362 Bucharest
Romania
Tel. (40-21) 212 77 91
Fax (40-21) 318 30 53
Email: iispas@mct.ro
Website: http://www.mct.ro/ancs_web/index.php?action=view&idcat=482

39

The Swedish Council on Medical Ethics

Current work

A number of end-of-life issues which place emphasis on decision-making and patient autonomy 
are being considered. In January 2008, the Council hosted a conference on end-of-life decision-
making, which was attended by medical experts and other representatives from several healthcare 
areas. The discussions and the work of the Council are due to be summarised in an opinion in 
the course of 2008.

A debate has been going on in Sweden for the past two years on the issue of equal access to 
healthcare for asylum-seekers and undocumented people. The Council has closely followed this 
debate and has also discussed the issue with several invited experts in the ﬁ eld. In March 2008, 
the Council proposed in a letter to the Swedish government that healthcare for asylum-seekers 
and undocumented people in Sweden should be improved.

The Council has recently started to work on the following topics: hybrids and chimeras, priorities 
and ethical principles in healthcare and prenatal diagnosis by means of analysis of ‘foetal cells’ 
in maternal blood.

New website www.smer.se

The Council has launched a new website. On it you will ﬁ nd information about the Council’s 
current work and news about bioethical issues.

Please contact the secretariat if you have information about a recent opinion or any other matter 
that you would like to announce on our newsfeed.

Recent opinions

Opinion on the risk of violations of children’s rights in healthcare due to ambiguous 
regulations, 8.1.2008
The Swedish Council on Medical Ethics has proposed in a letter to the Swedish government that a 
review be undertaken of the legal options for the promotion of children’s rights in healthcare.

Sweden  lacks  explicit  general  regulations  concerning  young  people’s  status  as  patients  in 
healthcare. Although the Swedish Healthcare Act does espouse the principles of the Convention 
on Children’s Rights, such as respect for the best interests of the child, there are nevertheless 
aspects in the legislation and in the implementation of the Convention in the sector that are 
unclear.

41

In the Council’s view, there is a risk that the ambiguity of the regulations might lead to violations 
of  the  integrity  of  young  patients.  Furthermore,  the  Council  expresses  the  concern  that  the 
provision of healthcare, protection and support to these patients is unsatisfactory.

Clarifying the regulations with regard to young people in healthcare would make their needs 
more visible and strengthen their autonomy and rights.

Opinion on a new method for risk assessment as a basis for decision-making in prenatal 
diagnosis, 6.11.2007
The Council has analysed a new method for assessing the risk of chromosomal anomalies in the 
foetus. The method (known as CUB) is a combination of ultrasound and maternal biochemistry. 
The  result  of  this  combined  test  affects  the  decision  on  whether  to  offer  genetic  prenatal 
diagnosis.

The method entails a risk assessment based on an early ultrasound screening (10th–14th week), 
a blood sample and the age of the pregnant woman. Its aim is to give a pregnant woman the 
best possible basis for her decision on whether to undertake a genetic prenatal diagnosis (PND), 
which involves samples being taken either from the amniotic ﬂ uid or the placenta, and entails 
a risk of miscarriage.

The combined test is an alternative to the method currently in use. The current method, referred 
to hereinafter as ‘age indication’, is based on the manner in which chromosomal anomalies vary 
statistically with the age of the pregnant woman. Genetic prenatal diagnosis is currently offered 
to women over 35 years of age.

Several  counties  are  currently  considering  introducing  the  combined  test.  In  the  report, 
the  Council  discusses  the  ethical  aspects  to  be  considered  when  choosing  between  the  two 
methods.

The Council concludes that the combined test is preferable to age indication. According to the 
Council, the combined test does not pose a threat to human dignity as long as it is made clear 
that both the combined test and the genetic prenatal diagnosis are offers that the woman can 
accept or decline at her own discretion. How this information is communicated to the pregnant 
woman and her partner is of great importance. The appropriate procedure for this is discussed 
in the report.

It is likely that a large-scale introduction of the combined test will lead to a higher frequency 
of  foetuses  identiﬁ ed  with  chromosome  abnormalities,  such  as  Down’s  syndrome.  This,  in 
turn, might lead to fewer births of children with those anomalies. The Council emphasises that 
steps towards a more accurate prenatal diagnosis should not undermine society’s support for 
functionally disabled people.

Continued advances in prenatal diagnosis can be expected, for example methods based on the 
analysis of foetal cells or free foetus DNA extracted from the blood of the pregnant woman. The 
Council intends to monitor developments in this area and it stresses the importance of paying 
careful attention to the ethical aspects of new methods prior to their introduction.

For  further  information  about  the  Council  and  its  work,  please  visit  the  Council’s  website: 
www.smer.se

42

Further information

Swedish Council on Medical Ethics
Ministry of Health and Social Affairs
Kv. Spektern
SE-103 33 Stockholm
Sweden

Contact:
Chairman: Professor Daniel Tarschys, daniel.tarscys@statsvet.su.se , Tel. (46-8) 16 15 78
Secretariat: Dr Erik Forsse, erik.forsse@social.ministry.se , Tel.(46-8) 405 17 39
Ms Lotta Eriksson, lotta.eriksson@social.ministry.se , Tel. (46-8) 405 27 58
Website: www.smer.se

43

The Nuffi  eld Council on Bioethics, UK

The  Nufﬁ eld  Council  on  Bioethics  was  established  by  the  Nufﬁ eld  Foundation  in  1991  to 
identify, examine and report on the ethical issues raised by recent advances in biological and 
medical research. Since 1994, it has been funded jointly by the Nufﬁ eld Foundation, the Medical 
Research Council and the Wellcome Trust. The Nufﬁ eld Council’s independence of government 
has  become  an  increasingly  important  feature,  particularly  as  a  result  of  the  growing  public 
unease  about  aspects  of  biomedicine  and  biotechnology.  The  Council  provides  independent 
advice to policymakers and aims to stimulate debate in bioethics.

New working party on dementia

Dementia is diminished brain function caused by diseases such as Alzheimer’s and vascular 
dementia. The ageing of the UK’s population means that increasing numbers of people, their 
families, healthcare staff and carers have to deal with the difﬁ culties that these conditions can 
cause.  At  the  same  time,  developments  in  neuroscience  are  improving  our  understanding  of 
these conditions and helping us to provide better treatment and care. 

Following  an  exploratory  workshop  held  in  March  2007,  the  Nufﬁ eld  Council  has  set  up  a 
working party to examine the ethical, legal, economic and social issues raised by dementia. It is 
chaired by Tony Hope, Professor of Medical Ethics at the University of Oxford.

The Working Party will consider:
• 
• 
• 

how decisions are made for or with people with dementia; 
how dementia care is provided and the standards of care currently available; 
the use of advance directives or ‘living wills’ to specify treatment (or non-treatment) at a 
point in the future when mental capacity may be lost or seriously impaired?/compromised; 
whether it is acceptable to restrict a person’s freedom for their own safety, for example by 
locking doors, or to deceive them for their own good, for example by disguising medication 
in food; 
whether people with dementia should ever be given experimental treatments; 
how conﬂ icts between the interests of the individual and their carers can be resolved, for 
example where a husband beneﬁ ts from his wife’s care, but she can no longer cope; 
the implications of changes in behaviour for the individual and for their relationships with 
other people. 

• 

• 
• 

• 

The working party will be seeking the views of people with dementia, carers, health professionals, 
policymakers, and other members of the public on these issues during spring and summer 2008. 
A report with conclusions and recommendations will be published in mid-2009.

Further information: www.nufﬁ eldbioethics.org/go/ourwork/dementia/introduction 

45

Progress with previous reports

The Council continues to carry out dissemination activities for a year or so after the publication 
of a report. For example, working party members give presentations to stakeholders to encourage 
uptake of recommendations or simply to promote debate.

The forensic use of bioinformation: ethical issues (September 2007)
The  debate  surrounding  the  national  DNA  database  has  rarely  been  out  of  the  media  since 
this report of the Council was published last year. Representatives of the Council have given 
interviews  on  a  regular  basis  and  the  report’s  recommendations  have  been  widely  cited  in 
articles. Ten presentations on the report have been given at a range of conferences and meetings, 
including the 2007 Labour Party Conference, an FBI symposium in Washington and several 
events attended by the general public and schoolchildren. The Council has also had individual 
meetings with relevant policy makers and provided evidence to the House of Lords Constitution 
Committee for its inquiry into ‘The impact of surveillance and data collection’.

Public health: ethical issues (November 2007)
This report covers four areas of public health: tobacco and alcohol, infectious disease, obesity 
and ﬂ uoridation of water supplies. There have been many opportunities since the publication 
of the report for the Council to debate its recommendations, as all of these topics are currently 
high  on  the  public  agenda.  The  debate  around  alcohol  consumption  has  received  particular 
attention,  and  several  meetings  have  taken  place  between  the  Council  and  policymakers  to 
discuss recommendations in this area. The report has been raised in Parliament nine times in 
debates and questions related to public health. A busy programme of presentations is planned 
for 2008. 

All the Council’s publications are available to download from the Council’s website at: www.
nufﬁ eldbioethics.org/publications 

‘Forward Look’ lecture and seminar

The Council has invited Professor Göran Hermerén, Chair of the European Group on Ethics, 
and Professor of Medical Ethics, University of Lund, to give a public lecture in London on 
7 May 2008. The lecture will be entitled ‘The ranking of values as a basis for ethical decision-
making’. Those interested in attending should contact: cperkins@nufﬁ eldbioethics.org 

The following day the Council will hold its annual ‘Forward Look’ seminar, where it considers 
possible topics for future work. This year, members and invited guests will focus on three areas:
• 
• 
• 

nanotechnology; 
volunteering, donation and payment in clinical practice and research; and 
the establishment and use of cord blood and other cell banks.

New Chair of the Council

In January, the Council was delighted to announce the appointment of Albert Weale, Professor 
of Government at the University of Essex, as the new Chair of the Council. He will hold the 
post for ﬁ ve years. Professor Weale was a student at Cambridge before beginning his research 

46

and teaching career at the University of Newcastle. After several other appointments, he moved 
to the University of Essex in 1992, where his academic interests focused on political principles 
and  public  policy,  particularly  in  the  areas  of  health  and  the  environment.  Professor  Weale 
succeeds Professor Sir Bob Hepple QC. 

Resources for teachers on animal research

The Nufﬁ eld Curriculum Centre and the Nufﬁ eld Council on Bioethics have worked together to 
produce a set of teaching resources which explore the issues surrounding the use of animals in 
research. The resources are designed to ﬁ t into science and citizenship lessons and aim to help 
students engage in informed debate about this controversial topic and make informed decisions 
about their own views.

Download the resources: www.nufﬁ eldbioethics.org/go/aboutus/externalactivitiespage_908.html 

Further information

Hugh Whittall
Director, Nufﬁ eld Council on Bioethics
28 Bedford Square
London WC1B 3JS
Tel. (44-207) 681 96 19
Fax (44-207) 637 17 12
Email: bioethics@nufﬁ eldbioethics.org
Website: www. nufﬁ eldbioethics.org

47

European Commission
European Commission

Considering ethics and e-inclusion

Paul Timmers (*)

European Commission, Brussels
Paul.Timmers@ec.europa.eu

Abstract3  

The use of information and communication technologies by people at risk of social and economic 
exclusion (e-inclusion) raises challenging questions about the position of the ‘vulnerable user’. 
A paradigm shift is potentially under way.

1 

Introduction

E-inclusion (4), or ICT for inclusion, means both inclusive ICT and the use of ICT to achieve 
wider inclusion objectives (ICT = information and communication technologies) [Riga, 2006]. 
It focuses on participation of all individuals and communities in all aspects of the information 
society. It concerns in principle any group that is at risk of exclusion due to factors such as age, 
disability, lack of skills, geographic location (living in a remote or deprived area), culture or 
income. The aim of e-inclusion policy is to reduce gaps in ICT usage and to promote the use of 
ICT to overcome exclusion, and improve economic performance, employment opportunities, 
quality of life, social participation and cohesion. 

The European Commission’s e-inclusion policy [EC, 2007e] argues that achieving e-inclusion 
is necessary for both social justice and economic growth. Inclusion in the information society 
reinforces social and economic inclusion and vice versa. However, progress towards inclusion in 
the information society is insufﬁ cient [EC, 2007a]. Action is warranted, to increase awareness, 
enable access to the information society (broadband, accessible ICT, digital literacy), increase the 
delivery of beneﬁ ts and provide better coordination. The Commission’s e-inclusion policy is closely 
linked to its policy on ICT and demographic ageing [EC, 2007c] and e-health [EC, 2004]. 

Both in ICT for ageing and in e-inclusion ethical considerations are prominent. Much more than 
for regular consumers, ethical questions arise with regard to people at risk of exclusion when 
considering technology development and service delivery, precisely because by deﬁ nition the 
consumer concerned is vulnerable and relatively weak. Sometimes this is so much so that they 
should not be called ‘consumers’, as this would go too far in suggesting that they are capable of 
acting as independent actors in a consumer market [EC, 2007c].  

(*) 
 Opinions expressed here are the author’s and do not necessarily represent the views of the European Commission.
(4)   For the European Commission’s e-inclusion activities see http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/activities/

einclusion/

51

To  illustrate  some  of  these  ethical  considerations,  let  us  consider  elderly  people  at  risk  of 
exclusion. In two recent debates on ethics and e-inclusion (5), much attention was (naturally) 
given  to  privacy  concerns  in  view  of  potentially  intrusive  technology  which  enables  elderly 
people to live independently and with assistance. However, as the debate also revealed, there 
is  a  much  richer  set  of  ethical  questions  that  come  into  play,  as  reﬂ ected  in  the  Charter  of 
Fundamental  Rights,  which  is  in  the  new  Treaty  of  Lisbon  to  become  part  of  primary  law. 
The  Charter  includes  the  right  to  human  dignity,  to  the  integrity  of  the  person  (and  derived 
from  this  the  obligation  to  obtain  informed  consent  in  medicine  and  biology),  respect  for 
private and family life, protection of personal data, as well as non-discrimination principles. 
Speciﬁ c rights are mentioned for the elderly: ‘The Union recognises and respects the rights of 
the elderly to lead a life of dignity and independence and to participate in social and cultural 
life’, and for persons with disabilities: ‘The Union recognises and respects the right of persons 
with  disabilities  to  beneﬁ t  from  measures  designed  to  ensure  their  independence,  social  and 
occupational integration and participation in the life of the community.’

To  further  focus  the  ethical  considerations,  consider  a  speciﬁ c  aspect  of  the  right  to  human 
dignity  and  independence  which  has  been  formulated  as  the  principle  of  autonomy  [Weale, 
1983]:  ‘all  persons  are  entitled  to  respect  as  deliberative  and  purposive  agents  capable  of 
formulating  their  own  projects’.  In  terms  of  technology  design,  this  could  be  interpreted  to 
imply that the point of choice is presumed to be with the user, unless it is evident that the user 
cannot make the choice. The principle would require there to be a good reason not to leave 
autonomy, that is, the possibility to choose, to the user. 

Currently,  even  for  the  simple  case  of  most  websites,  the  principle  of  autonomy  is  hardly 
respected.  Once  the  user  has  navigated  to  a  website  this  usually  involves  being  forced  into 
a strict, rigid procedure with little autonomy for the user, let alone being able to apply his or 
her experience. For example, banking websites are usually highly procedural, making the user 
follow the steps of a transaction. They do not contain many options for user choice (such as a 
selection of methods for user identiﬁ cation, or for free-text-based navigation, or for recognising 
and properly dealing with the user’s experience level). But perhaps the user does not care for 
banking sites and relatively simple and standardised activities. However, this may be different 
when users request a service which is less well deﬁ ned or for which they consider they have a 
right to be treated well, e.g. when requesting online public services or online participation in 
democratic decision-making (e-democracy). Being forced down the path of a ﬁ xed questionnaire 
may be felt to be unsatisfactory or even undemocratic. A rigid one-size-ﬁ ts-all approach may 
be  even  more  objectionable  for  ICT-enabled  independent  living  systems  (smart  homes). 
Nevertheless, calling for assistance in such systems risks being hard-programmed, conditioned 
by the care organisation or availability of relatives, with little override possibility for the actual 
user. 

As is often the case in the ethics debate, the question arises where the boundaries are: is user 
choice technologically feasible, or affordable or even desired by the user? While the ‘we will take 
care of you’ attitude can easily become hard-coded into technology solutions, user autonomy 
can also be objected to. For example, from consumer surveys it is known that a plethora of 
choices is not appreciated either. It could even be argued that it is patronising to presume that 

(5)  Workshop on ethical aspects of inclusion in the information society, 29 October 2007; see EC references to 

e-inclusion and launch of the Senior project, 3 March 2008.

52

people should make choices for themselves and, as a consequence, should be willing to invest 
time in learning about the various options of the technology.

And  at  least  as  seriously:  is  user  choice/user  autonomy  desirable  in  situations  of  urgency, 
emergency and danger? It could be argued that there has to be a single ‘panic button’ with a clear 
function. However, even then more ﬂ exible and free-format interaction with the user could be 
beneﬁ cial. Emergency centres (e.g. handling the 112 emergency number) have recognised that 
video interaction with users in an emergency situation brings increased richness of interaction 
which enables better judgment of the need for and extent of emergency assistance. Given limited 
resources and time, availability of such better information can be crucial. As an interesting aside 
(see the section on technology), the need for video-based interaction with an emergency centre 
is driven by dealing with persons with a special need, namely speech- and hearing-impaired 
users.  More  generally,  a  great  deal  of  research  is  under  way  into  intelligent  technology  that 
interacts with the user to offer a best ﬁ t for the situation and the user’s autonomy. 

Respect for autonomy illustrates many of the ethical issues that arise in e-inclusion: the proper 
deﬁ nition  of  the  user,  the  risk  of  implicit  assumptions  about  the  ‘average  user’,  the  moving 
target of technology, situational contingencies, etc. E-inclusion technology development should 
be  embedded  in  a  still-to-be-formulated  ethical  framework.  Above  all,  the  e-inclusion  and 
ethics debate contains a shift in perception: even vulnerable and relatively weak users should 
principally be considered in their full autonomy and assumed to be capable of exercising their 
rights.

This  represents  a  potential  paradigm  shift,  namely  from  the  viewpoint  of  ‘we  take  care  of 
you’  to  a  presumption  of  self-realisation,  even  if  embedded  in  proper  enabling  and  even  if 
conditioned by what is realistically feasible. Clearly the starting point under this presumption 
is different: it is the user in his/her own right. This shift is in line with the Zeitgeist of increased 
emphasis on individual responsibility, provided the individual is enabled to choose and select 
opportunities [Le Grand, 2003, Le Grand, 2007]. The European Commission recently observed 
that a new social vision is emerging across Europe, formulated around opportunities, access and 
solidarity based on ‘an increasingly accepted view that whereas society cannot guarantee equal 
outcomes for its citizens, it must become much more resolute in fostering equal opportunities’ 
[EC, 2007d].

Such reﬂ ections on ethics and e-inclusion represent a process of confrontation with surprising 
and  perhaps  disturbing  phenomena,  namely  that  the  relatively  weak  user  can  have  such  an 
important role and that autonomy should be the starting point rather than dependency. The ﬁ eld 
of e-inclusion requires an open reﬂ ection on the shift of our viewpoints on ICT and persons at 
risk of exclusion.

References

[EC, 2004] European Commission: E-health — making healthcare better for European citizens: 
an action plan for a European e-health area, COM(2004)356, 30 April 2007. 

[EC, 2007a] European Commission: Riga e-inclusion dashboard, 1st edition, 8 November 2007.

[EC,  2007b]  European  Commission:  Staff  working  paper,  Ageing  well  in  the  information 
society, 14 June 2007, SEC(2007)811.

53

[EC, 2007c] European Commission: i2010 initiative action on ICT and ageing, ‘Ageing well in 
the information society’, 14 June 2007, COM(2007)332.

[EC, 2007d] European Commission: Opportunities, access, and solidarity: towards a new social 
vision for 21st century Europe, COM(2007)726, 20 November 2007.

[EC, 2007e] European Commission: European i2010 initiative on e-inclusion ‘To be part of the 
information society’, 8 November 2007, COM(2007)694.

[Le Grand, 2003] Julian Le Grand: Motivation, agency and public policy: of knights and knaves, 
pawns and queens, Oxford University Press.

[Le Grand, 2007] Julian Le Grand: The other invisible hand, Princeton.

[Riga, 2006] Ministerial declaration on an inclusive information society, Presidency of the EU 
Council of Ministers, June 2006.

[Weale, 1983] Albert Weale: Political theory and social policy, Macmillan, London.

Further information

Dr Paul Timmers
Head of Unit ICT for Inclusion
Directorate-General for the Information Society and Media 
European Commission
Tel. (32-2) 299 02 45
Email: paul.timmers@ec.europa.eu
Website: see http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/activities/einclusion/

54

Small is beautiful: European Commission 
adopts a code of conduct for responsible 
nanosciences and nanotechnologies 
research in February 2008

Europe is in the vanguard of the emerging ﬁ eld of nanosciences and nanotechnologies (N & N), 
a  developing  ﬁ eld  of  science  with  the  potential  for  major  positive  impact  economically, 
socially and environmentally. Nevertheless, knowledge gaps remain about the impact of these 
technologies on human health and the environment, as well as issues relating to ethics and the 
respect of fundamental rights. This is why the Commission is recommending that the Member 
States  adopt  a  code  of  conduct  to  govern  research  in  this ﬁ eld.  Based  around  seven  general 
principles covering issues such as sustainability, precaution, inclusiveness and accountability, 
the  code  of  conduct  invites  Member  States  to  take  concrete  action,  involving  universities, 
research institutes and companies, for the safe development and use of nanotechnologies.

Nanotechnology is the study of phenomena and ﬁ ne-tuning of materials at atomic, molecular 
and macromolecular scales, where properties differ signiﬁ cantly from those at a larger scale. 
Products  based  on  nanotechnology  are  already  in  use  and  analysts  expect  markets  to  grow 
by  hundreds  of  billions  of  euro  during  this  decade.  These  advances  can  contribute  to  the 
European Union’s growth, competitiveness and sustainable development objectives and many 
of  its  policies,  including  public  health,  employment  and  occupational  safety  and  health,  the 
information  society,  industry,  innovation,  the  environment,  energy,  transport,  security  and 
space. 

‘Nanotechnologies  and  nanosciences  could  very  well  be  the  next  revolution  in  enabling 
technologies, and Europe has a good track record in their development’, says European Science 
and  Research  Commissioner  Janez  Potočnik.  ‘Part  of  our  strength  is  in  the  attention  we  are 
giving to their responsible development and use. The code of conduct is a tool developed by the 
Commission after public consultation that will make it easy to address the legitimate concerns 
that can arise regarding nanotechnologies.’

The European Commission launched a consultation on the code of conduct in July 2007 (see 
IP/07/1140). On the basis of the replies received, the Commission’s text was drawn up. It is 
very much in line with the objective of promoting integrated safe and responsible nanosciences 
and  nanotechnologies  that  lies  at  the  heart  of  the  2005  nanotechnologies  action  plan  (see 
IP/07/1321).

55

The seven principles are as follows.

Meaning:  N  &  N  research  activities  should  be  comprehensible  to  the  public.  They  should 
respect fundamental rights and be conducted in the interest of the well-being of individuals and 
society in their design, implementation, dissemination and use.

Sustainability: N & N research activities should be safe, ethical and contribute to sustainable 
development. They should not harm or threaten people, animals, plants or the environment, at 
present or in the future.

Precaution: N & N research activities should be conducted in accordance with the precautionary 
principle, anticipating potential environmental, health and safety impacts of N&N outcomes 
and taking due precautions, proportional to the level of protection, while encouraging progress 
for the beneﬁ t of society and the environment.

Inclusiveness: Governance of N & N research activities should be guided by the principles 
of openness to all stakeholders, transparency and respect for the legitimate right of access to 
information. It should allow the participation in decision-making processes of all stakeholders 
involved in or concerned by N & N research activities.

Excellence:  N  &  N  research  activities  should  meet  the  best  scientiﬁ c  standards,  including 
integrity of research and good laboratory practices.

Innovation: Governance of N & N research activities should encourage maximum creativity, 
ﬂ exibility and planning ability for innovation and growth.

Accountability:  Researchers  and  research  organisations  should  remain  accountable  for  the 
social, environmental and human health impacts of their work.

The code of conduct also provides guidelines that implement these seven principles under:
• 
• 
• 

good governance of research;
due respect for precaution;
dissemination and monitoring of the code of conduct.

For more information on nanotechnologies in Europe, see IP/07/1738 and http://ec.europa.eu/
nanotechnology/index_en.html

For more information on the code of conduct for responsible nanosciences and nanotechnologies 
research see Commission recommendation on: http://cordis.europa.eu/nanotechnology/ and ftp://
ftp.cordis.europa.eu/pub/nanotechnology/docs/nanocode-recommendation-pe0894c08424_
en.pdf

56

Contact: 

Philippe Galiay
Tel. (32-2) 295 40 68
E-mail: philippe.galiay@ec.europa.eu
Directorate-General for Research, Governance and Ethics Unit

Tonia Jiménez
Tel. (32-2) 299 21 92
E-mail: maria-antonia.jimenez-nevado@ec.europa.eu
Directorate-General for Research, Communication Unit

57

International Ethics Committees
International Ethics Committees

The Council of Europe’s Bioethics Division

Legislative activities

Draft additional protocol to the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, 
concerning genetic testing for health purposes
The  draft  protocol  concerning  genetic  testing  for  health  purposes,  approved  by  the  Steering 
Committee on Bioethics (CDBI) in June 2007, is currently being examined by the committee of 
ministers with a view to its adoption.

Genetic counselling, direct access to tests and genetic tests for the beneﬁ t of family members 
carried out on persons not able to consent are among the issues addressed in this additional 
protocol to the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine (Oviedo Convention). The text 
of the draft protocol as well as its draft explanatory report can be consulted on our website.

Genetic testing and insurance
The  Steering  Committee  on  Bioethics  (CDBI)  organised  a  seminar  on  ‘Predictivity,  genetic 
tests and insurance’ in Strasbourg on 3 and 4 December 2007. Videos of the presentations (in 
French and English) and other documents can be consulted on our website.

Following this seminar, and on the basis of its conclusions, work has now started with a view 
to the elaboration of a new legal instrument. 

Guide intended for research ethics committee members
The  working  party  responsible  for  the  elaboration  of  a  guide  for  research  ethics  committee 
members  is  continuing  the  work  started  in  September  2007.  The  intention  is  not  to  develop 
new principles, but to draft a guide explaining in practical terms the principles laid down in 
particular  in  the  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  Biomedicine  and  its  additional  protocol, 
addressing concrete situations and giving practical suggestions for fulﬁ lling the requirements 
of the European legal texts.

Publications

Educational tool on bioethics soon available in different languages
For persons wishing to initiate an open debate with young people on ethical questions raised by 
the following issues: organ donation, genetic testing, medically assisted procreation, cloning 
and biomedical research, the Council of Europe has developed an educational tool. In addition 
to the French version already published, this tool will soon be available in English as well as 
other languages, in particular German and Russian. 

61

The tool consists of a set of factsheets providing relevant ethical, legal and scientiﬁ c information 
on the individual topic and presenting actual cases which can be used as a basis for debate.

The objectives of this tool are to:
• 
• 
• 
• 

raise young people’s awareness of bioethical issues;
promote independent thinking; 
encourage active participation in public debate (education for citizenship);
show the European dimension of bioethical thinking.

For more information on the above items, please consult our website: http://www.coe.int/bioethics

62

The International Bioethics Committee 
of Unesco: activities carried out in 2006–07 
and the work programme for 2008–09

The International Bioethics Committee of Unesco (IBC) is a body of 36 independent experts in 
the life sciences and in the social and human sciences, including law, human rights, philosophy, 
education and communication The experts are appointed by the Director-General of Unesco in 
their personal capacity. Created in 1993, the Committee provides the only global forum for in-
depth reﬂ ection on the ethical and legal issues raised by research in the life sciences and their 
applications, as well as to encourage the exchange of ideas and information.

Since  the  adoption  of  the  Universal  Declaration  on  Bioethics  and  Human  Rights  (2005) 
(hereinafter  ‘the  declaration’),  IBC  has  focused  its  action  on  promoting  and  disseminating 
the  declaration.  In  2006–07,  the  Committee  addressed  two  principles  in  particular:  consent 
(Articles 6 and 7) and social responsibility and health (Article 14). It also set up two working 
groups on these issues, under the chairmanship of Professor Eugenijus Gefenas (Lithuania) and 
Professor Adolfo Martinez Palomo (Mexico) respectively.

The results of these working groups were examined by the full Committee at its 13th session (at 
the Unesco headquarters in Paris in November 2006) and at its 14th session (in Nairobi, Kenya 
in May 2007). IBC was able to complete its work on consent, while the draft report of the IBC 
Working Group on social responsibility and health is currently in its preliminary stage and will 
be further developed by IBC over the next two years (see below).

The report of the IBC on consent

The IBC report on consent (SHS/EST/CIB-13/06/CONF.505/2 Rev.2) was ﬁ nalised by the IBC 
on 19 June 2007 after discussions at its 14th session. In drawing up its report on consent, IBC 
strived to produce a document for practical use with a pedagogical aim, based on case studies 
and  containing  guidance  as  to  the  application  of  Articles  6  and  7  of  the  declaration  on  the 
subject of consent.

The report should be considered neither as exhaustive nor prescriptive. It is within a context 
where the principle of consent has been, and continues to be, the subject of intense debate at both 
international and local levels, and has already been dealt with in existing international standard-
setting instruments both within and outside the framework of the United Nations system.

The report outlines the general framework of the issue of consent, and develops and describes the 
special circumstances of the application of this principle in different types of practice (clinical 
practice, biomedical and clinical research, epidemiological research, public health, emergency 

63

situations, organ donation), subjects requiring special protection (neonates, children, clinically 
confused  patients,  patients  with  learning  difﬁ culties,  the  mentally  ill,  unconscious  patients) 
and in different contexts (economic, social and cultural). Finally, the last part deals with the 
application and the promotion of the principle (education and training, public involvement and 
the role of States).

The  IBC  report  —  which  is  available  online  in  English  and  French  (www.unesco.org/shs/
bioethics) — is currently the subject of careful examination by the Committee, in order to make 
any changes of an editorial or explanatory nature which may be necessary in order to improve the 
clarity and readability of the report, with a view to publishing the second edition of the report in 
a new Unesco series of reports of IBC related to the principles of the declaration.

Fourteenth session of the IBC: focus on Africa

At the kind invitation of the government of Kenya, the 14th (ordinary) session of the IBC was 
held in Nairobi from 17 to 19 May 2007 and brought together more than 150 participants from 
53 countries, with the active participation of numerous government representatives and experts 
from various African countries.

As this was the ﬁ rst time the session was taking place in sub-Saharan Africa, an entire day of 
the session was devoted to the African perspectives and was organised around the following 
themes:
• 
• 
• 

What is special about bioethics in Africa? An overview
Challenges and institutional constraints on bioethics development in Africa
Legislative  and  administrative  measures  for  the  implementation  of  the  declaration  in 
Africa
Moral sensibilities and emerging technologies: Implications for Africa.

• 

The discussion enabled a constructive and fruitful exchange to take place between members of 
the IBC and African participants, and was of particular signiﬁ cance after the adoption of the 
Addis Ababa Declaration by more than 50 Heads of State or Government who had committed 
themselves to ‘ensure scrupulous application of scientiﬁ c ethics in Africa with a view to preserving 
the  continent’s  environment  and  national  resources  and  preventing  all  practices  harmful  to 
African populations’ (adopted at the eighth ordinary session of the Assembly of the African 
Union on Science, Technology and Scientiﬁ c Research for Development, January 2007).

Access  to  healthcare,  medical  care  and  research,  disease  prevention,  the  protection  of  the 
environment,  biodiversity  and  biotechnology  are  some  of  the  bioethical  challenges  facing 
Africa. The discussion during the IBC session illustrated not only the pressing need for African 
countries  to  strengthen  their  scientiﬁ c,  technological  and  organisational  capacities,  but  also 
to question the impact of science and its technological applications on human health and on 
the  environment,  as  well  as  on  their  implications  for  the  respect  for  human  dignity  and  the 
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.

Does Unesco have a role to play in this regard? While it is up to African countries to review and 
evaluate independently the use of advanced technologies, as well as to empower themselves to 
make their own decisions on these matters, Unesco has the duty to work towards strengthening 

64

Africa’s  capacities  by  addressing  ethical  concerns  raised  by  scientiﬁ c  and  technological 
developments. Its action aims at:
• 

increasing the public awareness and capacity of African countries to deal with ethical and 
social issues triggered by science and technology;
supporting  African  countries  in  implementing  the  provisions  set  out  in  the  Unesco 
declarations in the ﬁ eld of bioethics;
stimulating the establishment of national bioethics committees as well as enhancing their 
role once they are established;
promoting ethics teaching on the African continent. 

• 

• 

• 

The new Bureau of IBC

At its 14th session in May 2007, the IBC elected its Bureau, whose members will remain in 
ofﬁ ce until the end of the 16th ordinary session (2009), provided that they remain members of 
the Committee. The membership of the new Bureau is as follows:

Chairperson: 

Mr Adolfo Martinez Palomo (Mexico)

Vice-Chairpersons:  Ms Regine Kollek (Germany)
Mr Toivo Maimets (Estonia)
Mr Fawaz Saleh (Syrian Arab Republic)
Ms Aissatou Touré (Senegal)

Rapporteur: 

Mr Donald Evans (New Zealand).

Work programme of the IBC for 2008–09

The Bureau of the International Bioethics Committee of Unesco (IBC) has recently ﬁ nalised the 
work programme of the IBC for 2008–09.

Firstly, the IBC will continue to contribute to the promotion and dissemination of the Universal 
Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights (2005) by pursuing its reﬂ ection on the principles set 
forth therein. The Committee will therefore continue its work on social responsibility and health 
(Article 14 of the declaration) in order to complete and ﬁ nalise its report on this subject and will 
also focus on the principle of respect for human vulnerability and personal integrity, as set forth 
in Article 8 of the declaration.

Moreover, the IBC will examine the report of the United Nations University Institute of Advanced 
Studies entitled Is human reproductive cloning inevitable?: Future options for UN governance 
with  the  aim  of  exploring  whether  there  is  any  scientiﬁ c,  social  and  political  change  that 
would justify a new initiative at international level, and submitting its analysis to the Director-
General.

The ﬁ rst public meeting of the IBC in this biennium will be the 15th (ordinary) session of the IBC, 
which will be held at the Unesco headquarters in Paris, on 27 and 28 October 2008, followed by 
a joint session with the Intergovernmental Bioethics Committee (IGBC) on 29 October.

65

 
 
 
Further information:

Mrs Sabina Colombo
Programme Specialist, Section of Bioethics
Division of Ethics of Science and Technology
Human and Social Science Sector
Unesco
1, rue Miollis
75732 Paris Cedex 15
Tel. (33-1) 45 68 38 03 / 39 39
Fax (33-1) 45 68 55 15
E-mail: s.colombo@unesco.org
Website: www.unesco.org/shs/bioethics

66

Ethics and Health at WHO

March 2008 

Ethics and Health continues to be engaged in a wide variety of activities in the ﬁ eld of public 
health and research ethics. The main current projects are highlighted below.

Pandemic inﬂ uenza planning

• 

WHO’s Ethics and Health team has been working on a 
project to study the wide range of challenging ethical 
issues  raised  by  a  potential  inﬂ uenza  pandemic.  A 
technical meeting was held on 18 and 19 May 2006 in 
Geneva  to  examine  the  major  issues,  followed  by  an 
international consultation on 24 and 25 October 2006. 
The conclusions and recommendations of these meetings 
were used to develop a WHO guidance document, entitled 
Ethical  considerations  in  developing  a  public  health 
response to pandemic inﬂ uenza, which was published in 
December 2007:

http://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/WHO_

CDS_EPR_GIP_2007_2c.pdf. 

• 

In 2007, regional and national workshops on pandemic 
inﬂ uenza  preparedness,  including  ethical  aspects,  were 
held in France, Cambodia, Saudi Arabia, Kazakhstan, the 
Democratic Republic of Congo and Burkina Faso. Further 
information can be found at http://www.who.int/ethics/inﬂ uenza_project/en/index.html.

Tuberculosis control

Tuberculosis programmes raise a number of ethical issues which have recently been highlighted 
by  the  rise  of  multi-drug-resistant  TB.  Based  on  a  long-standing  collaboration  between  the 
Health Law team and the Stop TB department, a joint project on ethical aspects of TB control 
programmes has been initiated.

67

Ethics of research 

Capacity strengthening 
Following the training workshop which took place in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, in July 2007, 
Ethics and Health is working on the publication of a manual, aiming to provide material to be 
used for local training on research ethics. 

Following  the  second  African  Vaccine  Regulatory  Forum  (Avaref)  held  in  Ouagadougou, 
Burkina Faso, in 2007, Ethics and Health is preparing a meeting on roles, responsibilities and 
interactions between national regulatory authorities and ethics committees, which will take place 
at the end of August in Geneva, in collaboration with the WHO’s Department of Immunization, 
Vaccines and Biologicals.

International debate
Ethics and Health is part of the steering committee of the Global Forum on Bioethics in Research 
(http://www.gfbronline.com) and is currently preparing the next forum which will take place in 
Auckland, New Zealand, and will focus on ethics and cultural responsibility in research with 
indigenous  peoples  and  vulnerable  populations.  The  deadline  of  the  call  for  applications  is 
1 May 2008. More information is available at: http://gfbr9.hrc.govt.nz/index.php/home.

• 

6)  on  the  preparation  of  a  session  dedicated 
WHO  is  working  with  Unesco  and  Cohred  (
to  research  ethics  for  the  ministerial  forum  on  research  for  health  that  will  take  place  in 
Bamako, Mali, in November 2008 (see http://bamako2008.org/en/index.shtml).

Collaboration with other organisations 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Ethics  and  Health  acts  as  the  permanent  secretariat  for  the  Global  Summit  of  National 
Bioethics  Commissions.  The  next  summit  will  be  hosted  by  the  French  National  Ethics 
Committee (http://www.ccne-ethique.fr/?langue=2) in Paris, on 1 and 2 September 2008, 
just before the World Congress, which will be held in Rijeka, Croatia http://www.bioethics
2008rijeka.info/. 
WHO will host the next meeting of the UN Interagency Committee on Bioethics on 19 and 
20 June 2008 to discuss collaboration in capacity-building activities.
Ethics and Health participated in the Forum on cooperation in bioethics and medical ethics 
held by the French and Senegalese commissions of Unesco in Dakar in February 2008. 
WHO/EMRO’s  ofﬁ ce  and  Unesco’s  regional  ofﬁ ce  in  Cairo  are  co-organising  the  ﬁ rst 
meeting  of  the  Eastern  Mediterranean  and  Arab  Forum  on  Bioethics  in  Research,  which 
will take place at EMRO/Cairo, Egypt, on 12–14 August 2008.
Ethics and Health is working with the Council of Europe (CDBI) on the preparation of an 
international conference on informed consent in the context of research for health, to take 
place in December 2008.

(6)  Council on Health Research for Development. 

68

New WHO Collaborating Centers for Bioethics
The Bioethics Program of the University of Miami, USA (http://www.miami.edu/ethics/) has 
recently been recognised as a WHO Collaborating Center for Bioethics. Three other institutions 
are in the process of designation.

Contact

Dr Marie-Charlotte Bouësseau, bouesseaum@who.int 
Dr Andreas Reis, reisa@who.int  
Updated website: http://www.who.int/ethics 

69

European Commission

Ethically speaking — Issue No 10

Luxembourg: Ofﬁ ce for Ofﬁ cial Publications of the European Communities

2008 — I – II, 69 pp. — 21 x 29,7 cm

ISSN 1725-5562

