Ethics of modern
developments in
agriculture technologies
Proceedings of the round-table debate

BRUSSELS, 18 JUNE 2008

sprout

sprout

Ethics of modern
developments in
agriculture technologies
Proceedings of the round-table debate

BRUSSELS, 18 JUNE 2008

Secretariat of the EGE
June 2008

Chief Editor 
Maurizio SALVI 

Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers
or these calls may be billed.

More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu).

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication.

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, 2008

ISBN 978-92-79-09414-9

DOI 10.2796/11315

© European Communities, 2008
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Printed in Luxembourg

PRINTED ON WHITE CHLORINE-FREE PAPER

Table of contents

INTRODUCTION
The European Group on Ethics

ROUND-TABLE REPORT
Programme 18 June

PRESENTATIONS
Opening by professor Göran Hermerén
Opening by Maria da Graça Carvalho

Rajeswari Raina
Modern agricultural technologies —
Ethics, policy choices and the IAASTD findings

Karsten Klint Jensen
Sustainability and uncertainty:
bottom-up and top-down approaches

Günther Eberz
Innovative agriculture to meet basic needs of life

Wilhelm Gruissem
New technologies and agriculture for the future

Eric Drésin
Strengthening consumer health through sustainability

Erik Millstone
Modern developments in agriculture technologies
and environmental protection

Christoph Then
The industrial gene paradigm and its (ethical) implications

Nathalie Moll
Ecologically, economically and socially
sustainable agriculture: the role of GMOs

ANNEX I
Participants

ANNEX II
Secretariat of the European Group on Ethics

5

7
13

17
21

25

39

51

61

69

81

93

105

115

121

Ethics of modern developments in
agriculture technologies

Introduction

The Group is currently working on an Opinion on the
Ethics of modern developments in agriculture tech-
nologies, to be presented to the Commission by De-
cember 2008.

In preparing its opinions, the EGE engages in broad con-
sultations, involving individual experts, representatives
of European institutions and other international institu-
tions as well as representatives of civil society. The pur-
pose of the Round Table organised by the Group is to
promote a transparent dialogue between parties repre-
senting different interests.

The European Group on Ethics (EGE) is an independent,
pluralist and multidisciplinary body that advises the Eu-
ropean Commission on the ethical aspects of science and
new technologies in connection with the preparation and
implementation of Community legislation or policies.

The Group is composed of fifteen independent experts
appointed by the Commission for their expertise and
personal qualities.

It was set up by the Commission in December 1997 to
succeed the Group of Advisers on the Ethical Implica-
tions of Biotechnologies (GAEIB 1991-1997). During its
first term (1998-2000) the EGE provided Opinions on
subjects as diverse as human tissue banking, human em-
bryo research, personal health data in the information
society, doping in sport and human stem cell research.

In April 2001 the Commission appointed twelve mem-
bers for the period 2001-2004. During its second term,
the Group published Opinions on the ethical aspects of
patenting inventions involving human stem cells (No 16–
7 May 2002), clinical research in developing countries
(No 17–4 F ebruary 2003), genetic testing in the work-
place (No 18 – 28 July 2003), and umbilical cord blood
banking (No 19 – 16 March 2004).

On 11 May 2005, the Commission decided to renew
the Group’s mandate for a further four-year period. For
this third term, the EGE was increased in size from 12 to
15 members. The same year, the Group published its Opi-
nion on the ethical aspects of ICT implants in the human
body (No 20–16 March 2005). So far in 2007 the EGE has
issued Opinions on ethics and nanomedicine1 (No 21–
17 January 2007), on anEt hics review of FP7 human em-
bryonic stem cells projects2 (No 22–13
July 2007), and
on the Ethical Aspects of Animal Cloning for Food Supply
(No 23–16 January 2008).

(1) http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/activities/docs/opinion_21_nano_en.pdf
(2) http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/activities/docs/opinion_22_final_follow_up_en.pdf

5

Ethics of modern developments in
agriculture technologies

Round-Table Report

1. Main goal of the Round-Table

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Tech-
nologies (EGE) is preparing an Opinion on Ethics of mo-
dern developments in agriculture technologies (Opi-
nion 24). As part of its preparatory work the EGE held an
open round-table debate on the issues related to animal
cloning for food supply. The round table was organised
by the Bureau of European Policy Advisers (BEPA).

The main goal of this event was to allow stakeholders to
provide the EGE with relevant data, considerations and
viewpoints for the finalisation of Opinion 24, which is to
be published at the end of 2008.

To maximise the participation of experts, an open invita-
tion was sent to relevant stakeholders (EU and beyond),
members of the National Ethics Councils (EU-27 Member
States), consumer organisations, farmers’ organisations,
environment protection organisations, academics, reli-
gious groups, industries, NGOs, etc. An open invitation
was published on the Internet to allow the full and free
participation of all interested parties and a press an-
nouncement was also published by the Commission
ahead of the event.

Participants were also asked to send contributions to the
EGE, and the round table was broadcast on the Internet.

2. The Round-Table

The round table was structured as a set of contributions
from different speakers representing different interest
groups and as a debate between the attendees, the
speakers and the EGE members.

Around 100 participants attended the round table, in-
cluding representatives of European Institutions, inter-
national organisations, religions, consumers, food and
farm industries, animal protection and environment
organisations, experts (biotechnology, ethics, science,
law, theology, etc.), representatives of EU National Ethics
Committees, etc.

Invited speakers included scientific experts, ethicists,
and representatives of consumer organisations, animal
welfare bodies and industry. The speakers were:

• Ms R. Raina (Centre for Policy Research, New Delhi,

India)

• Mr K.K. Jensen (University of Copenhagen, DK)
• Mr G. Eberz (Bayer AG, DE)
• Mr W. Gruissem (ETH Zurich and EPSO, CH)
• Mr E. Drésin (FWW Europe)
• Mr E. Millstone (University of Sussex, UK)
• Mr C. Then (consultant for Greenpeace)
• Ms N. Moll (EuropaBio)

The round-table was chaired by Professor Göran HER-
MERÉN, President of the European Group on Ethics in
Science and New Technologies, and was opened by
Maurizio SALVI, Member of the Bureau of European
Policy Advisers (BEPA) and head of the EGE Secretariat,
and Graça CARVALHO, Principal Adviser of the Society
Group of the Bureau of European Policy Advisers (BEPA).

Dr CARVALHO argued that inputs to help design a re-
sponsible, ethically sound and sustainable policy for
agriculture in the European Union (EU) were of primary
importance for the EU’s economic welfare, the role the
EU plays in global trade and the social dimension of the
EU. She also stated that equality, health, social cohe-
sion, solidarity, intergenerational justice, environmen-
tal protection, the right to food etc. were all relevant
values that could not be ignored in modern agriculture,
where innovation had to be balanced against sustain-
ability, where globalisation and trade should be linked
to ethics and human rights, including the right to food
and the Millennium goals. Dr Carvalho also reported
on recent initiatives by the Commission to reduce the
prices of agricultural products in the EU, the ‘health
check’ of the EU Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), the
Commission Communications on food prices, energy,
and oil prices, and stressed the fact that the EGE Opin-
ion would help ensure a proper reflection on how to
promote modern agriculture while respecting EU fun-
damental values.

7

Professor Göran HERMERÉN underlined the key role
played by dialogue, tolerance and pluralism in assess-
ing the ethical
implications of new technologies in
modern agriculture and argued that agriculture could
contribute to more and safer food while retaining sus-
tainability and food security as its main objectives. He
explained that the EGE would address new technolo-
gies and methods insofar as they are conducive to the
above goals. He also stressed the need to address social
implications and societal expectations in seeking real-
istic options to propose to the relevant stakeholders in-
volved in the revision of the EU’s common agricultural
policy (CAP) and the global discussion on trade and
sustainability.

Following the opening speeches, the invited partici-
pants were then encouraged by the Chair to openly ex-
press suggestions, concerns and ideas to the EGE.

3. The Round-Table: contributions by speakers

Scientific aspects were addressed by Dr Günther Eberz
(Innovative Agriculture Helps to Meet Basic Needs of Life)
and Professor Wilhelm Gruissem (New Technologies and
Agriculture for the Future).

Dr Eberz (Bayer AG, DE) reported on the industrial per-
spective. He pointed out that there would be 9 billion
people by 2020, with a 30% decrease in the land avail-
able for food production, and stressed the relevance of
sustainability in agro-food production. He underlined
that the current increase in food product costs was
related to increased fertiliser costs and oil prices, but
then pointed tobi otechnology as a potential positive
response in order to (1) safeguard and increase yields
from a limited land area (crop protection, stress shield,
plant breeding and plant biotechnology), (2) adapt
resource management (targeted use of crop protec-
tion, irrigation technology and fertilisers), (3) support
agricultural production under adverse environmental
conditions and climate variability (by developing new
crop varieties with enhanced tolerance to drought and
extreme temperatures, improved plant health and nu-
trient uptake).

Professor Wilhelm Gruissem reported on new tech-
nologies in agriculture. He argued that increased food
production was necessary for both developed and
developing countries although food security options
would need to be addressed mainly in the developing
countries because of the lack of arable land for food pro-
duction. He stated that while hunger did not particularly
affect EU citizens, abstaining from promoting innovative
agriculture in the EU would impact on the use of green
biotechnology across the world and hence contribute to
the current food crisis (800 million people suffering hun-
ger in 2008, of which 170 million under 5 years of age).
Professor Gruissem also advocated an ethics imperative
under which the EU should promote new technologies
in agriculture and seek improvements in productivity
and quality of food products. He also underlined that
the EU was neglecting research on green biotechnology
and losing expertise in this sector.

Sustainability aspects in developing countries were
addressed by Dr Rajeswari Raina (Modern agricultural
technologies — Ethics, policy choices and the IAASTD find-
ings, International Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge,
Science and Technology for Development). Dr Raina (Cen-
tre for Policy Research, New Delhi, India) pointed to the
unethical nature of hunger, poverty, malnutrition and
degradation of the environment. She reported on the
recent United Nations’ International Assessment of Ag-
ricultural Science and Technology for Development re-
garding the impacts of agricultural knowledge, science
and technology (AKST). According to this UN report,
modern agriculture had mainly focused on technology
and generally neglected traditional food systems or so-
cio-cultural considerations, thus contributing to the glo-
bal food divide. Dr Raina mentioned as an example the
current scarcity of water resources and underlined that
new technologies (bio-physics, SRI, molecular genetics,
nanotechnology) could help alleviate this water crisis,
while some uses of biotechnology could improve food
security (targeted promotion of MAS and DNA diag-
nostics). She also stated that technological media could
not be seen apart from socio-cultural dimensions in the
countries where they are applied. Dr Raina then called
for urgent legal and political responses to the current
food crisis.

8

Professor Karsten Klint Jensen (Food production and
sustainability) addressed the notion ofet hics and sus-
tainability and its different uses in agriculture, forestry,
fishery and environmental sciences. Professor Jensen
(University of Copenhagen, DK) argued that the notion
of sustainability had normative uses, but was associated
with a degree of empirical uncertainty and could not be
seen apart from social considerations (addressing farm-
ers’ needs). He underlined that while the notion of sus-
tainability initially referred to economic considerations
regarding the value of resources (stock-taking), it now
incorporated the principle of intergenerational justice
and took account of interrelated phenomena such as
globalisation, climate change, the technical and socio-
economic divide etc. He also argued that the notion of
sustainability based on empirical considerations needed
to anticipate the link between population variation and
productivity — the availability of usable natural resourc-
es. He then pointed to the need to link sustainability to
societal expectations.

4. The morning debate

Following the presentations and the opening speeches,
an open debate was launched. The topics debated in-
cluded the following:

•

•

The relevance of green biotechnology (GM crops in
particular) for solving the food crisis in developing
countries was highlighted by several experts. Some
argued that the controversy surrounding the use of
Genetically Modified (GM) crops in developing coun-
tries did not concern the technology as such but its
current technical limits. Others underlined that some
GM products seeking better nutritional and produc-
tive capacities had led to price rises and detrimental
consequences in terms of economic accessibility in
the developing countries where they were cultivated.

Some indicated that hunger had been portrayed
as a technological problem requiring technologi-
cal solutions while the real issue of food security
was poverty and differing levels of access to food.
They stated that new technological media in the

•

•

•

•

9

agro-food sector might increase food availability
without doing anything about the food divide, and
then called for a proper assessment of socio-cultural
features and needs in countries where new green
technologies were used. They also underlined that
local production systems for small or medium-sized
farmers could play a key role in food security in de-
veloping countries (in India 86% of Indian farms are
minor producers, but account for 70% of the food
consumed in the country).

The role of the EU in the global trade in agricultural
products was stressed, as well as the need not to
limit the discussion of sustainable agriculture to just
the food crisis.

Several participants underlined that genetically
modified plants engineered for developing coun-
tries might benefit local food production but were
not planted by the local population due to the risk
on the global market. Similar considerations were
advanced concerning the EU regulation on food
products (labelling and traceability) and its conse-
quent costs for food producers, as well as IPR issues.
It was also mentioned that EU regulations on chemi-
cals had led to a 25% reduction in cereal production
in the UK.

The need to enhance the role of NGOs and the rep-
resentatives of developing countries in the discus-
sion of external activities under the EU’s CAP was
stressed. Also advocated was extending the impact
assessment of the CAP to include its consequences
for global trade.

Other aspects were also stressed, such as the con-
siderable impact of modern agriculture in eroding
natural resources (including water) and the ethics of
importing food products such as cereals from coun-
tries suffering from hunger and malnutrition in or-
der to feed farm animals.

5. Contributions by the afternoon speakers

Consumer aspects were addressed by Dr Eric Drésin
(Strengthening consumer health through sustainability).

Dr Drésin (FWW Europe) reported on the threats posed
by the current agriculture system to public health and the
environment. He pointed to the negative consequences of
current methods in agro-food production for the health of
citizens (antibiotic resistance and obesity) and the use of
natural resources (87% of world water consumption being
used for food production and nitrate pollution affecting
several EU countries). He also reported on the risks of mo-
nopoly in the food market, and noted that 40 supermarket
companies currently controlled one third of global sales,
10 seed companies accounted for 70% of world sales, 2 ce-
real production companies had 75% of the world market
and 3 food retail companies handled 80% of the world’s
food transport. He called for the CAP to focus on food
safety and consumer protection and promote the quality
and healthiness of food products, noting the growing role
organic food production was acquiring in the EU.

Risk assessment and policy making were addressed
by Professor Erik Millstone (Agriculture and environmen-
tal protection).

Professor Millstone (University of Sussex, UK) addressed
the mechanisms for policy-making on the environment
and agriculture, where science plays an important role
in addressing the long-term consequences of proposed
policy options. He underlined the impossibility of having
predictive measures based on scientific assertions for en-
vironmental or agricultural policies and called for socio-
cultural considerations to play a role in assessing new
technologies. Professor Millstone referred to the role
played by risk assessment in the decision-making pro-
cess and called for a democratic and ethically sound ap-
proach to environmental and agricultural policy reform.

The ethical implications of industrialised biotechnol-
ogy were presented byCh ristoph Then (The industrial
gene paradigm and its [ethical] implications).

According toMr Then (consultant for Greenpeace), mod-
ern genetics was introducing new genetic models that
largely ignore the link between the complexity of living
beings and the environment (genomics, proteomics). He
argued that the use of biotechnology in the agro-food
sector might have detrimental ethical implications, such
as (1) disrespect for life, (2) exposure to new risks (some-
times of an irreversible nature and which may be over-
looked during the risk assessment procedure), (3) the risk
of monopolies due to current patent systems. He stressed
the need to abandon the gene paradigm based on mech-
anistic views, and called for a holistic, more transparent
and democratic process in designing policies in the agro-
food sector.

The industrial perspective was presented by DrNa th-
alie Moll (Ecologically, environmentally and socially sus-
tainable agriculture: the role of GMOs).

Dr Moll (EuropaBio) addressed the complex architecture
of the EU’s food and environmental policies. She under-
lined the need to increase the productivity of arable land
for food production and argued that a sustainable policy
in the agro-food field should equally incorporate eco-
nomical, social and ecological considerations. Dr Moll ex-
plained that the use of agro-biotech crops in the EU had
reduced spray pollution by 40% and herbicide-resistant
crops had allowed active herbicide ingredients to be cut
by 25-33% and CO
emissions to be reduced by 1.2 billion
2
kg. She presented data on increased incomes for farmers
using GM crops and increased production yields.

6. The general debate

Following the afternoon presentation, a debate on sus-
tainability and modern agriculture was launched. Issues
addressed included the following:

•

The need for marketing affordable quality food with
proper labelling was stressed by several partici-
pants. Individual choice in the consumption of food
products was claimed to be a key value that had to
be respected.

10

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Some pointed to the adverse effects of the ban of
chemical products (DDT) on the production of food
products. Some also said that at global level, the ban
on DDT had increased malaria epidemics.

The need to include users and consumers in the
decision-making process was stressed by several
participants. The increase in food prices, particularly
the costs of raw materials, affected the daily lives of
consumers’ and farmers alike and contributed to an
increase in economic inequalities rather than facili-
tating food security and fair distribution. The need
to reduce food waste was also stressed.

Issues related to IPR (plan variety and GM crops) and
the risks of monopolies, including the impact on inno-
vation and growth of local economies in developing
countries, were raised by several participants. Other
participants argued that the moratorium on GM crops
led to monopoly on the part of multinationals.

The role of the precautionary principle in industrial-
ised agriculture for the EU’s position on green bio-
tech and food production was underlined.

Promising technologies mentioned during the
round table included: mutation reading and mar-
ket system breeds, hybrid seed production, ICT, en-
zymes, robotics, and nanotechnology.

Food security policies were recognised as playing
an important role in security and migration policies
(migration to the EU to escape food crises in other
regions of the world).

It was argued that sustainability in agriculture should
also include innovation and take into account other
industrial sectors (e.g. chemicals industry).

The need to find a balance between the sustainable
use of biomass for food production and the produc-
tion of biofuels and bioethanol was stressed. Some
stated that the second generation of biofuels could
play a positive role in the EU’s energy and environ-
mental policies.

Additional topics raised included:

•

•

•

•

•

The need to promote education and research in the
agro-sciences.

The need to respect animal welfare considerations
in animal breeding.

The need for changes in life style and dietary habits.
Some argued that a decrease in meat consumption
would have a positive impact on global hunger, en-
vironmental protection and animal breeding.

Nanotechnology, cloning, patenting, contamination
and coexistence as issues of major relevance for EU
farmers and the revision of the CAP. Other issues of
major significance in this revision included afford-
ability, availability, and consumer choice (including
providing cheap food for those demanding it).

Biodiversity, the impact of technology, and owner-
ship of seeds as major issues that merit proper atten-
tion and an ethical approach.

Maurizio SALVI, Ph. D.
Head of the EGE Secretariat

The video of the round table (English) is available on the EGE Website
(http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm).
The presentations by the invited experts
are enclosed in the conference proceedings.

11

Ethics of modern developments in
agriculture technologies

Programme

18 June

9H30

9H50

10H10

10H30

Welcome address and Introduction to the EGE
Round Table by Professor Göran HERMERÉN,
President of the EGE, and Graça CARVALHO,
Principal Adviser of the Societal Group of the
Bureau of European Policy Advisers (BEPA)

Presentation (10 min.) by Ms Rajeswari RAINA,
senior research fellow, Centre for Policy Research,
New Delhi, India
‘Modern agricultural technologies — Ethics, policy
choices and the IAASTD findings (International
Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Science and
Technology for Development)’
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

Presentation (10 min.) by Mr Karsten Klint JENSEN,
Life Sciences Dept., University of Copenhagen,
Denmark
‘Food production and sustainability’
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

Presentation (10 min.) by Mr Günther EBERZ,
Environmental & Scientific Affairs, Bayer CropScience
‘Innovative agriculture to meet basic needs
of life’
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

10H50

Presentation (10 min.) by Mr Wilhelm GRUISSEM,
Professor ETH Zürich, EPSO
‘New Technologies and Agriculture for the Future’
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

11H10

Coffee break

13H00 – 14H30

Lunch break

14H30 Welcome address to the EGE Round Table by

Professor Göran HERMERÉN, President of the EGE

14H40

15H00

Presentation (10 min.) by Mr Eric DRÉSIN,
Food and Water Watch Europe
‘Strengthening consumer health
through sustainability’
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

Presentation (10 min.) by Mr Erik MILLSTONE,
Professor of Science and Technology Policy,
University of Sussex, UK
‘Agriculture and environmental protection’
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

15H20

Coffee break

15H40

16H00

Presentation (10 min.) by Mr Christoph THEN,
consultant for Greenpeace
‘The industrial gene paradigm and its [ethical]
implications’
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

Presentation (10 min.) by Ms Nathalie MOLL,
Executive Director of Green Biotechnology Europe,
EuropaBio
‘Ecologically, environmentally and socially
sustainable agriculture: the role of GMOs’
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

16H20

Discussion chaired by EGE — contributions from
participants

11H30

Discussion chaired by EGE — contributions from
participants

17H30

EGE Members —
Reactions to stakeholders’ comments
Closing comments from EGE members

12H40

EGE Members —
Reactions to stakeholders’ comments
Closing comments from EGE members

18H00

End of Round Table

13

Presentations

Ethics of modern developments in
agriculture technologies

15

Ethics of modern developments in
agriculture technologies

Göran HERMERÉN

President of the
European Group on Ethics

Professor Göran Hermerén is professor of medical
ethics at the faculty of medicine, Lund University. He is
President of the European Group on Ethics since 2002.

He is a member of the Swedish National Council on Med-
ical Ethics and has served on many governmental com-
missions and as referee for international journals.

Professor Göran Hermerén is chairman of the ethics com-
mittee of the Swedish Research Council, Stockholm and
of the Advisory Board of the German reference Centre for
Ethics in the Life Sciences DRZE in Bonn. He was a former
member of the Steering Committee for Bioethics (CDBI)

of the Council of Europe and of the Bioethics Committee
of the Nordic Council of Ministers and has contributed
to several governmental Commission reports in Sweden
on problems of biomedical ethics.

Professor Göran Hermerén is author of papers and books
on ethical problems in various areas mainly medical re-
search and health care. His current research interests in-
clude priorities and allocation of resources in health care
as well as ethical aspects of genetic testing, care at the
end of life, nanotechnologies, priority setting and stem
cell research.

17

Opening by
Professor
Göran Hermerén

First of all, on behalf of the EGE I want to extend a warm
welcome to all of you. The task of the EGE is to provide
advice to the European Commission on ethical aspects
of science and new technologies in connection with the
preparation and implementation of Community legisla-
tion or policies.

As many of you know, the EGE is now preparing an opin-
ion on ethical aspects of new (and some older) technolo-
gies in agriculture which are relevant to — in the sense
of promoting or hindering — food security and sustain-
ability in particular.

Ege working methods and the role
of round tables

We prepare our opinions by having internal working
meetings, by inviting experts to hearings, sometimes by
commissioning special studies on certain aspects of the
background, by public consultations via the web and by
round tables such as this one.

Round tables are an important part of this process, as
they allow NGOs and stakeholders to express their views,
which will provide an important input to our work. The
round tables also help to establish a dialogue between
different stakeholders and to promote transparency. The
focus of this round table is on dialogue.

We are still in the process of preparing the Opinion, other-
wise it would be pointless to have this round table. As
you know, our opinions are divided into different parts,
including background, concerns and recommendations.

The background

as to the background, it is essential for us to have correct
information about the state of the art, including about
what is produced on arable land, where and how, how
what is produced is stored and distributed from where,
to whom and how, as well as when and where what is
distributed is sold (at what prices, with which subsidies,
import and export taxes, etc.).

In our reports, we also express a number of concerns and
put forward suggestions as to how they should be dealt
with. Of course, the concerns are relative to underlying
values. If the EU, a Member State or an agency wants to
avoid or achieve certain things, some current develop-
ments may give rise to concerns. If, however, they want
to achieve other things, the situation may well be differ-
ent. That is why these underlying values and goals have
to be made explicit.

As you know, the topic is very timely, and the media have
reported about international congresses on this theme.
We welcome contributions on all aspects of this com-
plex problem. But what we hope is that the discussions
today will highlight at least the following dimensions of
the problem: the goals, the means to achieve the goals,
and the regulatory landscape.

The goals

which are the goals of agriculture? Whose goals are they?
Here, we may distinguish between three types of goals.
First, there are general overarching goals such as increas-
ing life expectancy and the quality of life. Agriculture can
contribute to these overarching goals by providing more
food, better food, and safer food. These aims illustrate
the more specific goals of agriculture. In addition, there
are other particular goals, not only for agriculture, such
as promoting sustainability and providing food security.

These goals, and conflicts over them, are related to how
arable land is used and to how what is produced on ara-
ble land is stored and distributed. What kind of products
is arable land used to produce? We discuss these goals in
a European context and setting, but the global dimen-
sion is ever-present.

In this discussion we need to pay some attention to the
relationships between these different kinds of goals. First
of all, the goals have to be clarified. The key terms have
to be defined. The choice of definitions, e.g. of ‘sustain-
ability’, is not ethically neutral. Second, conflicts and ten-
sions between the various goals have to be identified.

18

Arable land is finite. Some of the conflicts have to do with
competing uses of arable land. It is used for the production
of food, feed, fuel, and fibre (such as cotton). As you all know,
competition and a number of other factors have caused ris-
ing food prices and difficulties for developing countries.

Sustainability and food security are also related to the
methods used to achieve the various goals.

The methods

The next dimension has to do with the methods used
to achieve the goals mentioned above. Which methods
are used or could be used? Different classifications are
possible, but the important point in the present context
is whether the methods used help or make it difficult
to achieve food security and sustainability — which, of
course, will need to be defined and clarified.

The methods used to achieve the goals may be of sev-
eral kinds, for example,

• mechanical (use of tractors)

•

•

•

•

•

chemical (use of fertilisers)

genetic (genetic modification of seeds)

or may involve the use of information technologies

others (for example irrigation)

as well as combinations of these.

But we should not forget the importance of the storage
and distribution aspects. These problems can be han-
dled in different ways, which may have an impact on
food security and sustainability.

ing in the developed and developing world. In other
words, we should in our discussions consider not only
their technical or biological consequences, but also their
social and structural impact on farming in different parts
of the world, given present trends and policies (taxes,
subsidies, speculation, etc.).

Whatever the methods, their uses — and the conse-
quences of their uses — have thus to be evaluated with
an eye in particular to the extent to which they will af-
fect food security and sustainability. We may ask — and
here we will listen carefully to your thoughts — whether
adequate methods do or do not exist, whether the exist-
ing methods are counter-productive, whether they are or
are not enough, or whether there are important negative
side-effects of certain methods for food security and sus-
tainability, which need to be countered, and if so, how.

Regulations

A third dimension is the regulatory landscape. It is an im-
portant part of the background, with implications also for
our concerns and recommendations. Goal-setting and
R&D for agriculture take place in an environment regulated
by national laws, international treaties, trade agreements
etc., ranging from EU Directives, GMO bans and patent
conventions to Doha rounds and WTO agreements.

The regulations impose restrictions on both the goals
and the methods. So the regulations need to be identi-
fied and discussed. What are they? Are there problems
with conflicting regulations, unclear regulations, or part-
ly overlapping regulations that have a negative impact
on legal certainty, on the possibility to predict what will
happen in future court cases?

Finally

Thus, we do not want to focus exclusively on GM food.

From an ethical point of view, it will also be important
to raise the question of who has access to these meth-
ods, and how their use will affect the structure of farm-

Finally, identifications of actual or potential problems
will be welcome, as well as suggestions as to what to do
about them. Thank you again for coming and we look
forward to listening to your presentations and to the dis-
cussions today.

19

Ethics of modern developments in
agriculture technologies

Maria DA GRAÇA
CARVALHO

Principal Adviser to the
Bureau of European Policy Advisers

Professor Maria da Graça Carvalho is a Principal Ad-
viser to the Bureau of European Policy Advisers where
she coordinates the areas of Science, Higher Education,
Innovation, Information Society, Energy, Transport, Envi-
ronment, Space and Security Research Policy and Sus-
tainable Development.

Professor Maria da Graça Carvalho is a Full Professor at the
Mechanical Engineering Department of IST-Instituto Su-
perior Técnico (Technical University of Lisbon) since June
1992. She has participated in and coordinated a large

number of international R & D Projects and is author of nu-
merous articles in scientific international journals as well
as for books, international conferences and seminars.

Professor Maria da Graça Carvalho was Minister of Sci-
ence and Higher Education of the XV Constitutional Gov-
ernment of Portugal and Minister of Science, Innovation
and Higher Education of the XVI Constitutional Govern-
ment, Director-General of GRICES-Office for Internation-
al Relations in Science and Higher Education and Deputy
President of the Portuguese Association of Engineers.

21

Opening by
Maria Da Graça
Carvalho

Distinguished Members of the European Group on the
Ethics of Science and New Technologies, distinguished
colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, thank you for attend-
ing this round table organised by Bureau of European
Policy Advisers.

It is as always a pleasure to see that a dialogue platform
bringing together so many relevant and different stake-
holders can be established to discuss a so complex and
heterogeneous issue as the ethics of modern develop-
ments in agriculture technologies.

As you all know, sustainable agriculture, food security
and globalisation have become core issues in the current
political debate in the European Union and beyond.

We are experiencing an unprecedented rise in the prices
of food and oil, also facilitated by financial speculation,
climate change and world population growth, which
has affected the global economy and provoked hunger,
social instability and inflation in different regions of the
world. A phenomenon which seems destined to grow.

Today, modern agriculture feeds six billion people. Over
the next 50 years, the amount of food will have to double
in order to feed the world’s population, which is expected
to grow to nine billion. A growth that will put pressure on
a range of resources, including land, water, oil, and food
supply. Urgent measures to ensure food security and sus-
tainability are therefore needed at EU and global level.

A few weeks ago, on 5 June 2008, the delegates to the
Rome Food Security Summit, 181 nations and more than
40 Heads of State and Government, announced their
increased commitment to the fight against hunger and
to agricultural development. The financing announced
during the Summit included around US$8 billion. The EU
is part of this effort. The EU Ministers of Agriculture have
decided to double EU development aid by 2015, thus
reaching a total amount of €120 billion of aid per year.

But development aid, while being an expression of soli-
darity, does not in itself solve the problem of how to ar-
rive at a sustainable, ethically sound and innovative de-
sign for modern agriculture at EU and global level.

The question is then ‘how to build a modern EU agricul-
ture that respects European values while ensuring ef-
fective and sustainable growth, within the EU and with
third parties?’ The EGE has been asked by President Bar-
roso to contribute to a response to such a complex and
heterogeneous issue.

Ladies and gentlemen, the Common Agricultural Policy
(CAP) has been a key policy pillar of the European Union
since its origins. It was originally conceived to expand
production and provide secure food supplies to Euro-
peans following the food crisis after the Second World
War. Now, after more than 50 years, we have a ‘new’ food
crisis at world level.

Higher prices for food and oil have increased EU infla-
tion, affecting the daily lives of EU consumers and EU
trade. A solution cannot then be postponed.

We should remember that agriculture alone occupies
around 5% of the EU population and accounts for 20%
of average EU household consumer expenditure and
a large proportion of the internal trade and exports of
the EU. It is therefore not only a key economic sector of
the EU, but is also an economic sector with an extremely
high social and political importance.

Inputs to help design a responsible, ethically sound and
sustainable policy for EU agriculture are therefore of pri-
mary importance for the EU’s economic welfare, the role
the EU plays in global trade and the social dimension of
the EU. Equality, health, social cohesion, solidarity, inter-
generational justice, environmental protection, the right
to food, etc. are all relevant values that cannot be ignored
in modern agriculture in the EU, where innovation should
be balanced against sustainability, where globalisation
and trade should be linked to ethics and human rights,
including the right to food and the Millennium goals.

But the complexity of the issue discussed today points
to an intrinsic difficulty in finding unequivocal and com-
prehensive solutions for bringing about a sustainable,
safe and equitable industrial agriculture. Dialogue and
pluralism are therefore the key to identifying the best
options to put forward on the EU policy agenda.

22

Ladies and gentlemen, in 2007 the EU adopted specific
short-term measures to reduce the prices of agricultural
products in the EU, such as increasing the volume of ar-
able land by abolishing mandatory set-aside, increasing
milk production quotas for 2008, reducing buffer stocks
and export refunds, and suspending import duties on
almost all cereals.

In the current ‘health check’ of the EU common agricul-
tural policy, the options being considered include: abol-
ishing the set-aside requirement, gradually abolishing
milk quotas by 2015, adjusting market price aid in the
cereal sector, and making the transition from support
for energy plants to more effective solutions to bolster
the bio-energy sector — without, however, adversely
impacting on the production of foodstuffs and feeding-
stuffs — including the production of second-generation
biofuels.

In addition, the Commission has recently adopted Com-
munications on food prices, energy, and oil prices. It is
therefore trying to pro-actively address the complexity
of the issues discussed here. Now we need inputs on em-
bedding ethics within modern agriculture technologies
and arguments to consider for the forthcoming reform
of the CAP.

The EGE is not being asked to look at the political con-
siderations behind the reform of the CAP, which is not
its role or remit. But the Opinion and today’s platform
debate will certainly help ensure a proper reflection on
how to promote modern agriculture while respecting
fundamental EU values.

Thank you for your patience.

23

Ethics of modern developments in
agriculture technologies

Rajeswari RAINA

Rajeswari S. Raina is a researcher in the social study of
science, specialising in agricultural and rural innovation.
She has a background in the agricultural sciences (B.Sc.
Ag.), marketing management (M.Sc. Ag.), and econom-
ics (Ph.D.). Until early 2005, she was a scientist with the
National Institute of Science, Technology and Develop-
ment Studies (NISTADS, CSIR, Government of India).

Her current research focuses on institutional reform and
policy research as well as policy capacities for (a) poverty-
relevant innovation in India, (b) bio-innovation systems
in Asia, and (c) the agriculture-environment interface. As
a widely published author in the social study of agricul-
tural S&T and rural innovation, and as a policy analyst, she
conducts assessments for international organisations in
agricultural and rural development, NGOs, and private-

and public-sector firms. Recent assignments have been
for the International Assessment of Agricultural Science
and Technology for Development, the National Knowl-
edge Commission and the Planning Commission (Govt.
of India), the Science Council of the CGIAR (Rome), the
Rice-Wheat Consortium (CIMMYT-IRRI), United Nations
University — INTECH (Maastricht), Natural Resources In-
ternational (UK), INRA (Paris), etc.

As a member of academic associations and research and
development groups she maintains active links between
complex rural realities, R&D and policy arenas. She has
organised several interdisciplinary workshops, bringing
social sciences research and natural/physical sciences
research together, capacity-building workshops and na-
tional and international assessments.

25

Modern agricultural
technologies – Ethics,
policy choices and the
IAASTD ﬁndings

Rajeswari S. RAINA

Introducing the IAASTD

A normative ethical position has driven the international
assessment of agricultural science and technology for
development (IAASTD). Hunger, poverty and environ-
mental degradation are unethical — they ought to end.

What the IAASTD gives in answer to this ethical posi-
tion is a set of findings. Agricultural knowledge, sci-
ence and technology (AKST) can reduce hunger and
poverty, as well as help in the conservation of natural
resources and wider environmental systems, if current
systems of knowledge generation, access to and af-
fordability of knowledge and technology, and utilisa-
tion patterns change.

The translation of a normative ethical position into
a process of assessment makes the IAASTD a unique
process. During 2003, eleven consultations were held
under the aegis of an international multi-stakeholder
steering committee, involving over 800 participants
from all relevant stakeholder groups, e.g. govern-
ments, the private sector and civil society. Based on
these consultations, the steering committee recom-
mended to an intergovernmental plenary meeting in
Nairobi — September 2004 — that an international as-
sessment of the role of AKST in reducing hunger and
poverty, improving rural livelihoods and facilitating
environmentally, socially and economically sustainable
development was needed. The concept of an IAASTD
was endorsed as a multi-thematic, multi-spatial, multi-
temporal
inter-governmental process with a multi-
stakeholder bureau, and was co-sponsored by the FAO
(UN), the GEF, UNEP, UNDP, UNESCO, the World Bank,
the EU, and the WHO, as well as some developed coun-
tries. Over 400 authors were selected — each one ap-
proved by the Bureau — and worked over 2005-2008,
giving their time to the assessment.

I make this presentation to the European Group on Eth-
ics as one among 400 authors who have willingly given
their time and energy to this process, millions who have
faith in science and human ingenuity, and billions of citi-
zens whose governments endorsed, approved and ac-
cepted the IAASTD reports.

(IAASTD Global Report, five sub-global reports and IAASTD
Synthesis Report — please see www.agassessment.org
for further details)

Ethics and IAASTD findings

The goals of the IAASTD were (see slide 2) different from
those of other (domestic and international) assessments
of agricultural S&T that we as decision-makers and aca-
demics have been involved with. For instance, the as-
sessment was not about the impact of natural resource
management on groundwater or soil erosion, or of ge-
netic engineering on pest incidence in corn or soya, nor
about the impact of trade on agricultural GDP or farm in-
comes. It had to consider empirical evidence relevant to
its goals: inter-temporal, inter- and multi-sectoral, multi-
spatial, and multi-cultural evidence.

The IAASTD merely presents findings against goals
guided by normative ethics. For us today, it is impor-
tant to underscore the implications of these findings
for policy making — for ethically informed choices in
the practice of and policies for modern science and
technologies in agriculture.

We must note that it would have been an ethical choice
many centuries ago for a Roman senator not to own
slaves, several decades ago for an American cotton farm-
er not to own black people as part of his farm (labour)
inputs, and, till recently, for an Indian family farm not to
use bonded labour or employ children in their farms. The
might of the Roman empire across continents, the pro-
ductivity of American cotton or the success of the green
revolution were not sufficient justification to legitimise
the suffering of slaves or children — those affected by the
duties of the senators or farmers to their states and fami-
lies. Civil wars, social movements and informed choices
have led to appropriate institutions (laws, rules, norms,
habits and behavioural changes) making these unethi-
cal practices formally illegal. (Historically, the growth of
knowledge — in both the natural and social sciences
— has gained tremendously from these institutional
changes and ethical choices.) Agriculture now awaits
similar ethical choices that will lead to appropriate insti-

26

tutions and knowledge systems. Currently, it is an ethical
choice for millions of consumers, producers and policy-
makers not to use modern science and technology that
does not reduce hunger and poverty and adds to envi-
ronmental degradation.

The IAASTD findings are summarised in a brief presenta-
tion made at the global press launch (also in www.agas-
sessment.org) — given asha ndouts today.

The findings highlight that social and economic inequity
as well as environmental quality is worsened by the in-
appropriate and undemocratic choice of technology and
institutional arrangements (like property rights, trade
rules, banking practices, etc.) that may not be appropriate
for local contexts and are likely to worsen (given the risks)
the economic and (given the uncertainties) environmen-
tal conditions of those affected by these technologies.

Policy decisions and technology choices

Let us take a look at two controversial modern S&T issues
that the IAASTD confronted — water and biotechnology.

Water — based on the empirical evidence of increasing
water withdrawal (from surface and groundwater sourc-
es) for irrigated agriculture, the continuing pollution
(and eutrophication) of water sources and the demand
for water to produce to feed increasing populations, the
IAASTD presents a balanced assessment of the current
water crisis in agriculture and multifunctional perspec-
tives on water, agriculture, the environment, trade and
overall economic activities.

The reports, despite a wide difference in regional contexts,

•

Emphasise the need for new paradigms in AKST to
understand and utilise natural resources (especially
water) for socially and environmentally sustainable
development. Holistic systems approaches, agro-
ecological sciences, and capabilities within S&T for
working across multiple scales and different social
and physical systems are necessary, but are cur-
rently inadequately supported. AKST investment

•

•

•

in dryland agriculture and crop-livestock systems
is highly inadequate and follows the limited green
revolution paradigm.

Present empirical evidence, in all the five sub-global
reports, pointing to unsustainable production tech-
nologies and associated water use practices — a
second green revolution especially in Africa will be
unsustainable. What is needed is a real green revo-
lution based on the holistic integration of natural
resource management with other systems of pro-
duction technologies, markets and local govern-
ance. The ESAP, NAE and CWANA reports highlight
the need for the appropriate pricing of water, and
institutional support for the use of modern resource
conservation technologies.

Present evidence of rural infrastructure and other
complementary investments that enable access to
and utilisation of water within localised ecosystems.
There is a need for modern science (for instance,
molecular biology and genetics) to understand
stress and stress response, as well as indigenous and
traditional conservation practices.

Highlight the impact of current crop-water and crop-
livestock use patterns on increasingly economically
unviable and unsustainable farming, local adaptive
responses and management systems in small-scale
farming, increasing inequality, and the responses
necessary to help mitigate and adapt to water stress
(floods and droughts, increasing temperature win-
dows for crops, etc.) climate change.

Biotechnology — drawing upon the definition in the
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety — involves a wide ran-
ge of technologies. There are several discussions about
conventional vs modern biotechnology.

The IAASTD notes that modern biotechnologies used in
containment (enzymes, DNA diagnostics, etc.) are wide-
ly accepted. The application of modern biotechnology
outside containment — for instance GM crops — is con-
tentious. Evidence is often controversial, and selectively
used — by industry, public sector R&D organisations,

27

and NGOs — each with their own stakes in mind. The
IAASTD presents a balanced view given its goals. It

•

•

•

•

Emphasises the need for more and better targeted
investment in biotechnology. For example, marker-
aided selection (MAS) in plant breeding, platform
technologies, DNA diagnostics or chips for the
screening of planting material, nanotechnology for
targeted input delivery or pathogen elimination,
etc. etc.

Highlights the rapid pace of change in biotechnol-
ogy — assessments lag behind development and
application. There is a need for more transparent
and non-anecdotal (whether from poor farmers,
public sector scientists or industry) communication
on the benefits and the costs, risks and uncertain-
ties that cut across systems within agriculture and
across different sectors (health, rural infrastructure,
environment, etc.). Transgenics do not contribute to
addressing the IAASTD goals.

Discusses the ways in which the institutions (IPRs,
seed laws, trade restrictions or globalisation) that
living material and processes that trans-
control
form living material into commercially appropriable
products and processes lead to negative (and highly
skewed) impacts on basic science, personnel or hu-
man resources in agricultural science, the exchange
of and access to seed/genetic material, and the capac-
ities of people (especially small farms) to choose ap-
propriate technologies, crops and cropping systems,
and ultimately of governments to comprehend and
intervene in the scientific, economic, environmental
and social aspects of agricultural production.

Highlights how modern biotechnology can be ef-
fectively integrated with and make contributions
to participatory plant breeding, agro-ecology, re-
source-poor drylands and coastal ecosystems, etc.
Most importantly, the agricultural and allied-sector
applications of modern biotechnology — in food
processing,
leather and other animal products-
based industries, and other manufacturing activities
is crucial for rural employment and incomes in many

developing countries. Fundamental knowledge
of biological components and systems where the
tools/processes of biotechnology are useful will be-
come increasingly important in order to understand
climate change impacts and responses.

Ethical positions

For decision-makers, the IAASTD offers a set of norma-
tive principles providing a basis for taking decisions on
modern science and technology. The utilitarian approach
(embodied in neo-classical economics and its evaluation
methods) is not sufficient to make decisions about mod-
ern S&T in agriculture, when there is empirical evidence
that millions of rural poor and soil, water and forest sys-
tems are adversely affected by certain modern technolo-
gies. Power relationships are crucial. They have to be
understood as ethical or moral issues in modern S&T —
the ways in which the scientifically and technologically
well-endowed exert power over the millions who have
no power to choose, control, monitor or assess the tech-
nologies and information systems that determine what
they cultivate, eat, sell or exchange (on unequal playing
fields). At the very least, it is imperative to ensure that
modern technologies do not destroy (or have the poten-
tial to destroy) other knowledge systems that modern
S&T has not bothered to study or engage with.

Finally,
it is important that decision-makers see the
IAASTD as a beginning. It builds on and adds value to
a number of recent assessments and reports that have
provided valuable information relevant to the agricul-
tural sector, but have not specifically focused on the
future role of AKST, the institutional dimensions and
the multifunctionality of agriculture. These include: the
FAO’s State of Food Insecurity in the World (yearly); the
InterAcademy Council Report: Realising the Promise and
Potential of African Agriculture (2004); the UN Millen-
nium Project Task Force on Hunger (2005); the Millen-
nium Ecosystem Assessment (2005); the CGIAR Science
Council Strategy and Priority Setting Exercise (2006); the
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture: Guiding Policy Investments in Water, Food,
Livelihoods and Environment (2007); the Intergovern-

28

mental Panel on Climate Change Reports (2001 and
2007); the UNEP Fourth Global Environmental Outlook
(2007); the World Bank’s World Development Report:
Agriculture for Development (2007); the IFPRI Global
Hunger Indices (yearly); and the World Bank’s Internal
Report of Investments in SSA (2007).

There are public sector research organisations, public
sector and private sector industry, civil society, the si-
lent poor and their (equally disenfranchised) ecosys-
tems, each with their own stakes — all equally deeply
entrenched and difficult to change. The IAASTD puts
forward findings that demand changes in all these ac-
tors — the silent ecosystems and the poor who (scien-
tific evidence points out) will be the worst affected by
current systems of agricultural production, trade and de-
velopment. Modern science and technology forms part
of other informed choices that decision-makers have to
confront, IF HUNGER, POVERTY AND ENVIRONMENTAL
DEGRADATION ARE UNETHICAL.

29

Modern agricultural
technologies – Ethics,
policy choices and the
IAASTD ﬁndings

Powerpoint Presentation

Modern agricultural technologies –
Ethics, policy choices and the IAASTD
findings

Presentation made to the European Group on Ethics in
Science and New Technologies
Roundtable on the Ethical Aspects of
Modern Developments in Agriculture Technologies,
June 18th 2008

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

What is the IAASTD?

• The International Assessment of Agricultural
Science and Technology for Development
• Assessment of the impacts of AKST on the

following development goals: past, present and
future

• Reducing Hunger and Poverty
Improving Rural Livelihoods
•
•
Improving Nutrition and Human Health
• Facilitating Environmentally, Socially, Equitable and

Economically Sustainable Development

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

30

IAASTD

• Normative ethical position

• HUNGER, POVERTY, MALNUTRITION &
ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION ARE
UNETHICAL

- especially when agricultural knowledge,
science and technology (AKST) can help
resolve these problems

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

Ethical choices

• Historically – Slaves, Child labour
Civil wars, social movements, etc.

transnational treaties, national legislations,
implementation capacities, monitoring and
compliance mechanisms, etc. etc.

The suffering of those affected by the duties of
Roman senators, American cotton farmers,
Indian family farms, demanded ethical choices +
delegitimized certain accepted laws, rules and
norms

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

31

Ethical choices (contd.)

• Now – Hunger, poverty, environmental degradation
Variety of scientific, social, economic, and environmental
movements/ alliances addressing these problems.

AKST awaits similar treaties, legal and institutional

changes, capacities, etc.
pro-active legislation to support knowledge
generation and application that reduces =
legal regulatory mechanisms to delegitimize
knowledge generation and application that adds
to=

==the suffering of those affected by the duties

of some.

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

International assessment

• Why?
Transnational effects – as scientifically and

democratically legitimate correctives of national
legal systems and governance mechanisms

• How?
Cross-cutting transnational problems –

-systems relationships
-exclusion
-knowledge

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

32

From normative to applied ethics

The normative ethical position, applied to the IAASTD -

(i) Shapes the process
Democratic values of representation, voice and

authenticity
The Bureau, the authors selected by the Bureau –
representation by elected/selected representatives within
‘nation states’ was not enough
The voice of all relevant stakeholders and their genuine
participation – to deliberate, question, provide evidence,
and capacity to inform and make conclusions

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

(contd.)

(ii) Informs the empirical evidence
- collected and presented by multiple

stakeholders

- balanced presentation of evidence
- references – only published traceable

references

(iii) Can shape applied ethics and policy

choices

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

33

The inescapable interconnectedness of
agriculture’s different roles and functions (from the IAASTD ppt

– www.agassessment.org)

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

Pathway to the current conception of
modern agriculture (from IAASTD ppt)

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

34

Modern agricultural technologies –
IAASTD findings

• Part of wider systems of AKST – embodied and

embedded in social contexts

• Multiple functions and roles of agriculture –

yield/productivity included as one

• Neglect several other locally adapted, traditional

knowledge systems

• Future - of agriculture, food, nutrition,

environment, employment, society, economy,
polity …

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

A critical challenge - Water
Proportion of water withdrawal for agriculture 2001

(from IAASTD ppt)

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

35

Projected impacts of climate change (from IAASTD ppt)

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

Water

• Crisis – quantitative and qualitative – allocation
• Irrigation intensive production technologies +
externalities +other systems, crops, contexts
neglected

• Evidence of alternatives - agro-ecological

sciences, multi-scale bio–physical and social
systems, traditional conservation practices +
appropriate institutions - lessons for a real green
revolution

• Need modern technologies- - bio-physics, SRI,

molecular genetics, nanotechnology +respond to
new drivers of change

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

36

Modern biotechnology in context (from IAASTD ppt)

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

Biotechnology

• Definition- as in Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety
• Selective use of biotechnology-appropriable

Market led vs. Problem driven

• Controversial, anecdotal evidence–assessments

lag behind development, application

• Skewed impacts on basic science, human
resources, access, capacities, institutions

• Inter- and intra- sectoral processes - options to
be studied + Better, more targeted investments,
processes needed (MAS, DNA diagnostics, etc.)

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

37

Ethically informed policy choices

• Whose deprivation and suffering can science

and modern technology alleviate?

• What are the modern (natural science and social

science based) technologies and other
knowledge systems that can help? What are the
social/political systems in which they are
located? Who has access? At what cost?

• Whose actions improve or worsen the condition

of ‘those affected’?

• How can AKST address current concerns and

future challenges?

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

IAASTD findings for ethics in
modern agricultural technologies

• Hunger, poverty and environmental degradation

are unethical

• Modern technologies - only one part of systems

of knowledge and contexts

• Power matters – those who decide and act vs.

those who are affected

• Ethically informed legal instruments, policy
choices and investments can help AKST
(modern technologies included) to solve these
problems.

Rajeswari S. Raina, CPR,
New Delhi

38

Ethics of modern developments in
agriculture technologies

Karsten Klint JENSEN

Karsten Klint Jensen was born in 1955. He was educat-
ed at the University of Copenhagen (MA in philosophy
1990, Ph.D. in philosophy 1997). He also studied at the
Technical University and at the University of Copenha-
gen’s Department of Economics.

From 1993 to the present day, he has held a series of re-
search posts, first at the Department of Philosophy at the
University of Copenhagen, later at the Institute of Food
and Resource Economics (formerly at the Royal and Vet-
erinary University in Copenhagen and now University of
Copenhagen) and presently at Forest and Landscape.
Since its establishment in 2000, he has been connected
to the interdisciplinary Danish Centre for Bioethics and
Risk Assessment.

His research lies primarily in ethical theory and applied
ethics. A dominant theme has been the interface be-
tween ethics and other disciplines, e.g. economics, deci-
sion theory, animal welfare studies, environmental sci-
ence, risk assessment and risk perception studies.

He has participated in several major interdisciplinary re-
search projects, covering fields such as ‘bioethics’, ‘ethical
accounting for animal husbandry’, ‘landscape manage-
ment’, ‘genetic modification of crops’, ‘risk perception of
zoonoses’,
‘participatory procedures and democratic
legitimacy’ and ‘transparency’. A common denominator
for his contributions to these projects is the uncovering
of the values underlying disagreements.

In recent years, he has primarily worked together with
Martin Peterson (Luleå and Cambridge) in several research
projects within the field of decision-making under risk and
uncertainty, where he has published on both theoretical
and applied aspects. Further publications are in progress.

He serves as referee for Economics and Philosophy, Ethical
Theory and Moral Practice, Pacific Philosophical Quarterly,
Theoria, Journal of Risk Assessment & Management, Jour-
nal of Social Philosophy, Journal of Food Safety and Jour-
nal of Medical Ethics and is a member of the EAAP Ethics
Working Group.

39

Sustainability and
uncertainty: bottom-up
and top-down approaches

Karsten Klint JENSEN

The widely used concept ofsu stainability is seldom pre-
cisely defined, and its clarification involves making up
one’s mind about a range of difficult questions. One line
of research (bottom-up) takes sustaining a system over
time as its starting point and then infers prescriptions
from this requirement. Another line (top-down) takes
as its starting point an economic interpretation of the
Brundtland Commission’s suggestion that the present
generation’s need-satisfaction should not compromise
the need-satisfaction of
It then
measures sustainability at the level of society and infers
prescriptions from this requirement.

future generations.

These two approaches may conflict, and in this conflict
the top-down approach has the upper hand, ethically
speaking. However, the implicit goal in the top-down
approach of justice between generations needs to be
refined in several dimensions. But even given a clari-
fied ethical goal, disagreements can arise. At present
we do not know what substitutions will be possible in
the future. This uncertainty clearly affects the prescrip-
tions that follow from the measure of sustainability.
Consequently, decisions about how to make future ag-
riculture sustainable are decisions under uncertainty.
There might be different judgments on likelihoods; but
even given some set of probabilities, there might be
disagreement on the right level of precaution in face
of the uncertainty.

Keywords: Empirical Uncertainty, Goals and Means, Value
Judgments

Introduction

‘Sustainability’ has become a notorious buzz-word, re-
ferring to something undeniably good. No-one defends
unsustainable development or unsustainable activities,
just like no-one would call their position ‘undemocrat-
ic’. However, the almost universal acceptance of the
claim that development should be sustainable comes
at a cost, namely that the concept has become almost
empty. Different policy-makers appear to interpret the
concept each in their own way, always keen to reaffirm
the sustainability of their policy, regardless of its con-

tent. But this means that it is very unclear what exactly
the practical implications of sustainability are.

Hence, there is a need to clarify the concept. However, any
clarification will also make the concept more controversial.
And of course, more than one clarification is possible. The
differences between conflicting interpretations of ‘sustain-
ability’ will uncover disagreements about value judgments
as well as about empirical issues. This paper attempts to
map the logic of some of the important disagreements.

The concept of sustainability

The first step is to recognise that sustainability is a norma-
tive concept. Sustainability is a valuable state — a goal
we should strive to realise. This means, firstly, that the
only way to make the concept more precise is through
reflection on what is valuable about sustainability and
how this value relates to other important values. And
secondly, analysis of the practical implications of sustain-
ability presupposes that the concept has been clarified.
It only makes sense to determine the necessary means
to achieve a goal when the goal has been specified.

Considerations as to the sustainability of activities date
back to the late 19th century, where the question rose
within forestry how to determine the maximum cut that
could be sustained in the long term; later, similar consid-
erations were developed within fisheries, and eventually
they spread to many other areas. The underlying princi-
ple was the constraint that the resource stock in ques-
tion should be kept constant over time, and the simple
prescription was to keep the harvest rate per year within
some area smaller than or equal to the natural regenera-
tion rate per year for the resource within the area.

This is all right as far as it goes, but unfortunately it does
not go very far. One line of research views a farm as a sys-
tem engaged in exchange with its surroundings. If the
farm is to sustain its production over time, keeping the
resource stock constant over time is not likely to be suf-
ficient. Roughly, the farm also needs to be sustainable in
a social sense. Hence, this research takes the form of un-
covering the expectations of all stakeholders with an in-

40

fluence on the farm’s survival over time (e.g., Kristensen
& Halberg, 1997; Gibbon, 1997). This way of enhancing
the concept of sustainability corresponds roughly to
what Paul Thompson has dubbed ‘sustainability as func-
tional integrity’ (Thompson, 1997).

Another line of research originates in economics. From
an economic point of view, the prescription to keep the
resource stock constant over time leaves many questions
unanswered. For one thing, many resources are non-re-
newable. If they are to be used at all, it is by definition
impossible to keep the stock constant over time. Econo-
mists suggest answers along two lines (e.g. Solow, 1974;
Hartwick, 1977). Firstly, a reduced stock of exhaustible re-
sources can be compensated for by an increase in renew-
able resources. This strategy assumes that substitution
between different types of capital is possible. Secondly,
through technological development it may become
possible to achieve increasing efficiency in the use of re-
sources and hence possible to sustain a constant level of
welfare with a reduced stock of exhaustible resources.

The economic analyses move from the simple prescrip-
tion of keeping a single renewable natural resource stock
constant to the more general prescription of keeping the
welfare level at least non-decreasing. This is inspired by
Brundtland (World Commission, 1987), who defined a sus-
tainable development as a development that ‘meets the
needs of the present without compromising the ability of
future generations to meet their own needs’. Economists
prefer to analyse this in terms of welfare rather than need
satisfaction. The important point is, however, that if we
are going to take substitution and technological devel-
opment into account in order to make more general pre-
scriptions, it is necessary to look at the value of resources,
i.e. their potential to generate welfare or satisfy needs,
rather than simply the stock.

It is implicit in this move that ‘sustainability’ no longer
can be applied to a single activity in isolation, such as
a single farm or even farming; rather, we have to judge
whether society at large and its development is sustain-
able. Hence, I find it reasonable to dub this approach a
top-down approach, because it starts by determining
sustainability at the level of society, and then infers pre-

scriptions for a single activity, given some technologi-
cal stage. On the other hand, the systems approach is
a bottom-up approach, because it starts out by inferring
prescriptions for a single activity, and then reaches pre-
scriptions for society at large by putting together the
prescriptions for all relevant activities.

Discussion and conclusions

If the bottom-up approach is based on the implicit
premise, as it often is, that the system in question should
be sustained perpetually, or at least as long as the time
horizon reaches, it may be in conflict with the top-down
approach. The latter has, among other things, the impli-
cation that an activity that at some time can be part of a
sustainable society does not necessarily need to be part
of it at a later time; for instance, because technological
development may have made it superfluous or just too
costly to maintain. From an ethical point of view, it is
clearly the top-down approach that has the upper hand:
whereas the claim that the level of welfare should not de-
crease over time has great ethical weight, the claim that
some isolated system, e.g. a farming practice, should be
sustained over time has no ethical weight (although the
farmer’s welfare of course should count).

If we take a closer look at the ethical value implicit in the
top-down approach, it seems clear that the objective is
justice within and between generations. However, this
objective needs refinement. One problem is whether the
requirement of non-decreasing welfare over time repre-
sents a too rigid form of equality between generations.
Another, more important, problem concerns the issue of
increasing population. The economic analyses referred
to above assume a constant population over time. But if
the population grows over time, as it is likely to do, and
we understand sustainability as the requirement that the
welfare level per capita should not decrease over time,
this of course results in more stringent requirements for
sustainability. As it happens, population ethics is riddled
with problems, and no-one has so far been able to arrive
at a reasonable concept of justice between generations
with variable population sizes (Parfit, 1984). I shall have
to leave this problem aside in the present context.

41

Given some clarified notion of justice, prescriptions for
sustainability will depend on the rate of population
growth, the rate of increased efficiency in the use of re-
sources and the possible substitutions between types of
resources. These are empirical questions, but at present
we do not know for certain what the answers to them
are. The economic discussion has uncovered disagree-
ments about the likelihoods. We can roughly summarise
this debate in the following table, where the strategies
derived from the main rival assumptions about possible
substitutions are listed as acts together with a rough de-
scription of the consequences if each of these assump-
tions are true:

Table 1: Strategies in the face of uncertainty about substitution

Acts

States

Unrestricted
substitution

Restricted substitution

Keep total stock of resources
constant

Constant level
of welfare

Considerable reduction
of welfare

Natural resources
cannot be substituted

Ecological catastrophe

Keep total constant &
preserve critical resources

Reduction of welfare

Constant level of welfare

Ecological catastrophe

Keep stock of natural
resources constant

Extreme reduction
of welfare

Considerable
reduction of welfare

Constant level
of welfare

42

Hence, there is an empirical disagreement about how
to judge the likelihood of the different possibilities for
substitution. But even given agreement about the like-
lihoods, there might be disagreement about the right
strategy in dealing with this kind of uncertainty about
the future. A strongly precautionary approach would
choose the act with the best worst outcome (i.e. the
most stringent). A weaker type of precaution would
consider the degree of likelihood and the seriousness
consequences and then seek to balance the degree of
precaution against its costs.

Given the indeterminateness of the top-down approach
and the uncertainty of its implications, we might want
to turn to the bottom-up approach. It should not just be
concerned with the expectation of present stakeholders,
but should try to determine the implications of the gen-
eral requirements of justice and sustainability. Hence,
it too cannot avoid dealing with uncertainty, but still it
might be easier to derive practical implications from it.

REFERENCES — Gibbon, A., 1997. Addressing livestock farming systems’
ecological sustainability at the regional level: an example from the Central
Pyrenees. In J.T. Sørensen (ed.) Livestock farming systems: More than food
production. EAAP Publication No 89, pp. 30-41. Hartwick J.M., 1977. Inter-
generational equity and the investing of rents from exhaustible resources,
American Economic Review 66: 972 – 974. Kristensen, E.S. & Hallberg, N.,
1997. A systems approach for assessing sustainability in livestock farms. In
J.T. Sørensen (ed.) Livestock farming systems: More than food production.
EAAP Publication No 89, pp. 30-41. Parfit, D., 1984. Reasons and Persons.
Oxford: Clarendon Press. Solow, R.M., 1974. Intergenerational equity and
exhaustible resources. Review of Economic Studies, Symposium, pp. 29–
45. Thompson, P., 1997. The varieties of sustainability in livestock farming.
In J.T. Sørensen (ed.) Livestock farming systems: More than food produc-
tion. EAAP Publication No 89, pp. 5-15. World Commission on Environment
and Development, 1987. Our Common Future. Oxford University Press.

43

Sustainability and
uncertainty: bottom-up
and top-down approaches

Powerpoint Presentation

FOOD PRODUCTION
AND SUSTAINABILITY

Karsten Klint Jensen
Danish Centre for Bioethics and Risk Assessment

Brussels 18 June 2008 EGE Roundtable
Slide 1

Is Modern Agriculture Seeking Sustainable
Development?

There is no simple and uncontroversial answer:

Value Uncertainty:
’Sustainability’ itself is a contested normative concept
A precise definition is bound to be controversial

Empirical Uncertainty:
The long term consequences of modern agricultural

technologies are uncertain

Ethical assessment will have to deal with these uncertainties:

Clarify the goal of sustainability: 2 main approaches
Determine the right attitude to empirical uncertainty

Brussels 18 June 2008 EGE Roundtable
Slide 2

44

The Concept of Sustainability

Origin in forestry and fishery:

• Harvest rate   natural regeneration rate

Underlying principle:

• Keep the resource stock constant over time

This seems reasonable, but it does not take us very far

The research has taken two directions

Brussels 18 June 2008 EGE Roundtable
Slide 3

The ”Bottom-Up” Approach

The farm as a system in exchange with its surroundings

Under which conditions can the farm’s production be sustained

over time?

The farm should be sustainable in social sense:

• It should meet the expectations of key stakeholders

”Functional Integrity”

Brussels 18 June 2008 EGE Roundtable
Slide 4

45

Brundtland/Economics

Problems with the simple prescription of keeping the resource

stock constant:

• Non-renewable resources?

• Substitutions?
• Increasing efficiency?

Answer: The value of resources

• Needs-satisfaction (Brundtland)
• Welfare (Economics)

Underlying value in sustainability:

• Equality in welfare between generations

Brussels 18 June 2008 EGE Roundtable
Slide 5

The ”Top-Down” Approach

More general idea:

• Justice between generations
• What about increasing population?

From an ethical point of view:

• Justice between generations has great weight
• Sustaining a farm under unjust conditions has not

Value uncertainty: The goal is indeterminate

Brussels 18 June 2008 EGE Roundtable
Slide 6

46

Empirical Uncertainty

Given a precise statement of justice between generations,

prescriptions depend on:

Rate of population increase

• Puts more strain on resources

Rate of increased productivity

• Puts less strain on resources

Possible substitutions between resources

• Can non-renewable resources be substituted?
• Can natural resources be substituted with man-made?

The answers are uncertain and to some extent controversial

Brussels 18 June 2008 EGE Roundtable
Slide 7

The Issue of Substitution

Hypotheses

Unrestricted
substitution

Restricted
substitution

Natural
resources
cannot be
substituted

Ecological
catastrophe

Constant level
of welfare

Considerable
reduction of
welfare

Reduction
of welfare

Constant level
of welfare

Ecological
catastrophe

Extreme
reduction of
welfare

Considerable
reduction of
welfare

Constant level
of welfare

Strategies

Keep total stock
of resources
constant

Keep total stock
constant and
preserve critical
nat. resources

Keep stock of
natural
resources
constant

Brussels 18 June 2008 EGE Roundtable
Slide 8

47

Attitudes to Uncertainty

Strong precaution

• Choose the act with best worst outcome

Weak precaution

• Consider likelihoods
• Consider consequences
• Consider need for precaution
• Consider price of precaution

Brussels 18 June 2008 EGE Roundtable
Slide 9

The “Top-Down” Approach: Summing Up

The goal of justice between generations should be clarified

But even given a clarified goal, there is empirical uncertainty:

we do not know for sure whether some policy is sustainable
or not

Some of this uncertainty can be reduced by future research

But some uncertainty is likely to remain

We need to decide on the right attitude to this uncertainty

Brussels 18 June 2008 EGE Roundtable
Slide 10

48

The ”Bottom-UP” Approach: Consequences

Given the great indeterminateness of the “Top-Down”

Approach, we might want to revive the more simplistic
“Bottom-Up” Approach

However, it needs to be corrected:

• Justice should be the guiding principle, not just stakeholder

expectations

• It should be sensitive to the issue of substitutions

Hence, the uncertainty cannot be avoided

Still, the approach might give rise to useful prescriptions

Brussels 18 June 2008 EGE Roundtable
Slide 11

49

Ethics of modern developments in
agriculture technologies

Günther EBERZ

Günther Eberz was born in 1959 in Bernkastel-Kues, Ger-
many. He studied biology at the Georg-August-Univer-
sität, Göttingen, where he graduated with a degree in this
subject. In 1989 he gained a Ph.D. from the Freie Univer-
sität, Berlin, with his thesis on the ‘Regulation of Hydro-
genase Gene Expression and Catalytically Active Hydro-
genase inAlc aligenes eutrophus’. After joining Bayer AG in
1990, Günther Eberz worked initially for different business
units on directing environmental protection, bioanalyti-
cal and anti-infective research projects as well as innova-
tive projects in the field of natural product biosynthesis.
After subsequently spending four years in Bayer’s corpo-
rate centre with responsibilities for stakeholder aspects of

life science technologies, he moved to Bayer CropScience
and is now concerned with environmental and scientific
aspects at the public and governmental affairs depart-
ment. Previous positions include researcher and teacher
at the Freie Universität, Berlin, and scientific laboratory as-
sistant at the Biological Federal Institute for Plant Protec-
tion in Wine-Growing, Bernkastel-Kues. He is a member
of the Society of German Natural Scientists and Physicians
as well as the Union of General and Applied Microbiol-
ogy. Professional achievements include the Ernst-Reuther
Ph.D. award of the Freie Universität, Berlin (1990), Ph.D.
award by the Union of General and Applied Microbiology
(1990) and the German Youth Research Award (1979).

51

Innovative
agriculture to meet
basic needs of life

Günther EBERZ

The continuous growth of the world’s population and
changing consumption patterns, particularly the in-
creasing consumption of food and changes in dietary
requirements with far greater demand for meat and
higher-quality food, are leading to a growing need for
agricultural productivity. At the same time, available
farm land is limited and climate change is likely to affect
crop production systems. Efforts to protect the climate
and concerns about security of supply with fossil re-
sources are also stimulating endeavours to exploit new
energy sources such as biomass as a renewable resource
for the generation of energy.

There can be no doubt that the need to safeguard an ad-
equate supply of food for a global population that contin-
ues to grow strongly is one of the most important ethical
questions of our time. We need only to look at population
growth and the amount of agricultural land per capita to
realise the extent of the problem. Forecasts published by
the United Nations show that agricultural land is likely to
remain at approximately 1.5 billion hectares worldwide,
which means that the amount of land available per capita
will diminish to just 0.16 hectares by 2050. In other words,
the land available to feed one person in 1950 will have to
serve more than three persons in 2050.

Producing food or non-food crops for an ever-growing
and more demanding world population is a lasting global
challenge. Since plants are continuously exposed to ‘bi-
otic’ and ‘abiotic’ factors that negatively influence growth
and agricultural yields, it is of vital importance to protect
plants from these environmental stress factors. Biotic fac-
tors include attack by insects, fungi, weeds, bacteria or
viruses, which can be controlled by crop protection prod-
ucts. Without crop protection almost half of the current
harvests would be lost. Yields could be further increased
by more than 40% by preventing the actual losses of ag-
ricultural productivity due to biotic factors. Abiotic stress
includes factors such as drought, heat, cold and soil sa-
linity, which in many parts of the earth cause dramatic
yield losses. These abiotic stresses can reduce the optimal
achievable yield of crop plants by up to 80%. The develop-
ment of new crops with better resistance to the stresses
caused by drought and extremes of temperature will play
an enormously important role in this context.

Media reporting in recent months about acute short-
ages of agricultural raw materials, the growing demand
for plant sources of energy, and rising commodity pric-
es have clearly demonstrated the intensive attention
now focusing on what is happening in agriculture. The
reasons behind the recent increase in food prices are
diverse: beside the long-term demand trends of a con-
tinuously growing world population, growing wealth
and changes in consumer habits, the constant increase
in mineral oil prices has made farmers’ production con-
siderably more expensive. Oil prices have an impact, for
example, on the operation of agricultural machinery,
the transport of production materials and harvests, and
air-conditioned storage facilities. In addition, the use of
artificial fertilisers, the manufacture of which is energy-
intensive, makes a significant contribution to the rising
cost of production. Machinery and energy factors make
up approximately 60% of the overall production costs of
wheat growing in Europe. By way of comparison: only
six percent is spent on seeds and eight percent on crop
protection agents. Furthermore, in the past two years in
particular other factors have also had an impact on pric-
ing, including weather-related harvest losses, for exam-
ple due to the worst drought for a century in Australia, as
well as the additional demand for biofuels.

Given the current trends in agricultural markets, we must
also expect the level of food prices to remain compara-
tively high over the coming years. This will have a partic-
ular impact on emerging markets and developing coun-
tries, and the international community must react. Export
restrictions, on the other hand, are counter-productive,
as they only further curb supply. Political approaches for
the future should rather be aimed at strengthening sup-
ply in a sustained fashion. We must therefore promote
international trade by dispensing with unnecessary sub-
sidies and export and market restrictions, and encourage
the cultivation of crops in those countries that offer the
most efficient production conditions for these crops.

Against the background of globally limited resources for
agricultural production, it is vital that we encourage the
long-term supply of agricultural raw materials. For this,
we need a new green revolution: we need to invest more
heavily in research, technology and the agricultural infra-

52

structure to achieve the advances in productivity that we
need to continue to be able to feed the growing world
population. We need a holistic approach that employs
optimised crop rotation and watering techniques as well
as the development of new crop protection solutions and
seeds with greater yield potential. In this context, modern
crop protection, plant breeding and plant biotechnology
have a key role to play. Integrated crop management as
a knowledge-intensive combination of appropriate agri-
cultural options provides a valuable holistic and coher-
ent approach for efficient agricultural production so as
to create a basis for successful resource management to
improve the utilisation of precious natural resources and
help protect environmental health and biodiversity.

53

Innovative
agriculture to meet
basic needs of life

Powerpoint Presentation

Innovative Agriculture Helps
to Meet Basic Needs of Life

European Group on Ethics
Roundtable on the ethical aspects of
Modern Developments in Agriculture Technologies

Dr. Günther Eberz
Environmental and Scientific Affairs
Bayer CropScience AG, Monheim, Germany

Bayer CropScience: one of three strategic
subgroups of the Bayer Group

Management Holding Company

Bayer AG
Board of Management

Bayer
HealthCare

Bayer
CropScience

Crop Protection

Environmental Science

BioScience

Bayer
MaterialScience

Bayer Business
Bayer Business
Services
Services

Bayer
Bayer
Technology
Technology
Ser ces
Servi
Servi
Services

Currenta
Currenta

Business Area Companies

Service Companies

Günther Eberz, Bayer CropScience
Innovative Agriculture Helps to Meet Basic Needs of Life

54

Global change and challenge for agriculture

Growing world population

Need for renewable feedstocks

  increasing food & energy demands

  decreasing farmland per capita

  increasing demand for renewable
resources for the generation of
energy (heat, electricity, biofuels)

Growing wealth

Climate change

  increasing meat consumption and

  yield losses through adverse

need for feed

weather conditions

  decreasing stock availability

  need to reduce greenhouse gas

emissions, such as CO2

Increasing constraints on limited resources such as land, water, energy
Efficient and sustainable use of resources is important for future agriculture

Günther Eberz, Bayer CropScience
Innovative Agriculture Helps to Meet Basic Needs of Life

Food supply: a sustained ethical responsibility

Year

1950

1975

2000

2025

2050

World
population
(billion)

2.5

4.1

6.1

8.0

9.2

Arable land &
permanent crops
(billion hectares)

Farmland
per person
(hectares)

1.3

1.4

1.5

1.5

1.5

0.52

0.34

0.25

0.19

0.16

With limited arable land and a continuously growing world population,
the available farmland per capita is expected to dramatically decrease further

Source: United Nations
Günther Eberz, Bayer CropScience
Innovative Agriculture Helps to Meet Basic Needs of Life

55

Reasons for the increase
of food prices in 2007/2008

! Long-term demand trends

! Increasing world population

Input costs for the
production of key crops:

! Growing wealth and change in consumer

100%

habits

! Climate / weather-induced harvest losses

! Increase in crop production costs

! Energy costs at a record high

! Significant rise in fertilizer costs

! Rising demand for alternative energy sources,

especially biofuels

! Due to recent price developments, agricultural
markets are a focus for the financial markets

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

  Machinery
& Energy

  Labor
  Irrigation
  Fertilizer
  Crop

Protection

  Seed

Wheat Corn Rape

Source: LMC ‘EU Arable Crop Profitability 2007’

The currently observed increase in key commodities is caused by multiple
factors

Günther Eberz, Bayer CropScience
Innovative Agriculture Helps to Meet Basic Needs of Life

Commodity price development of key crops
vs. crude oil price development

  Soybean
  Rice
  Wheat
  Corn

  World oil price

Crop price
development
in US-$ / ton

700
700

600
600

500
500

400
400

300
300

200
200

100
100

0
0

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Recent oil price developments have influenced food prices

Source: FAO, U.S. Energy Information Administration, April 2008
Günther Eberz, Bayer CropScience
Innovative Agriculture Helps to Meet Basic Needs of Life

56

Crude oil price
development
in US-$ / barrel

120

120

100

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20
20

0
0

Prediction of
commodity price development of key crops

US-$/ton
700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

( in %*)

Soybean
(+107%)

Rice
(+61%)

Wheat
(+144%)

Corn
(+145%)

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

2005

2006

2007

2008 E

2009 E

* between Q1 2005 and Q4 2009 E

Commodity prices expected to stabilize at an elevated level

Source: The Economist Intelligence Unit, August 2007 and May 2008
Günther Eberz, Bayer CropScience
Innovative Agriculture Helps to Meet Basic Needs of Life

Innovative agriculture
is vital to safeguard harvests

Major crops analyzed: rice, wheat, barley, corn, potatoes, soybeans, cotton and coffee

Actual
losses

100 %

due to
pests,
weeds and
diseases

42 %

Today
58 %

due to
e.g.
drought,
heat,
cold,
salinity

Further
losses

Prevented
losses

due to
pests,
weeds and
diseases

28 %

30 %

Yield without
crop protection

Actual yield with
crop protection

Attainable yield
without pests

Additional potential
without abiotic stress

Without crop protection almost half of the current harvests would be lost
With stress shielding technologies further yield increase is possible

Source: Oerke et al., Crop Production and Crop Protection, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1994, adapted.

Günther Eberz, Bayer CropScience
Innovative Agriculture Helps to Meet Basic Needs of Life

57

Shielding plants from abiotic stress factors
offers significant yield potential

Yield kg/ha

Plants are continuously exposed to environmental stress factors that negatively
influence growth and development and therefore cause yield losses

Buchanan, Gruissem, Jones: Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of Plants;

Source:
American Society of Plant Physiologists, 2000; Bayer CropScience calculations
Günther Eberz, Bayer CropScience
Innovative Agriculture Helps to Meet Basic Needs of Life

Addressing the pressures put on land: enhancing
productivity while ensuring environmental health

High productivity on land already under cultivation rather than low productivity
This conserves wildlife habitats & biodiversity

Günther Eberz, Bayer CropScience
Innovative Agriculture Helps to Meet Basic Needs of Life

58

Innovation: providing support for
efficient and sustainable agriculture

Limited arable
land coupled
with rising
demand

Safeguard and increase yields from limited land area

  increase yields through innovative crop science

(crop protection, stress shield, plant breeding and plant
biotechnology)

  adapted resource management (targeted use of crop
protection, irrigation technology and fertilizers)  

Climate change

Support agricultural production under adverse
environmental conditions and climate variability

  develop new crop varieties and tools using

cutting-edge technologies

  new crop varieties with enhanced tolerance to drought

and extreme temperatures

  improved plant health and nutrient uptake

Research and innovation are the key to mastering the challenges of agriculture

Günther Eberz, Bayer CropScience
Innovative Agriculture Helps to Meet Basic Needs of Life

Agriculture on the path to a holistic approach

World population

2000: 6.1 bn

1950: 2.5 bn

INTEGRATED
AGRICULTURE

2025: 8.0 bn

1900: 1.6 bn

TRADITIONAL
FARMING

“SECTORAL“
TECHNOLOGY
AGRICULTURE

Improved seeds

Input technologies

Machinery

Irrigation

More resource-efficient
production required

Healthier nutrition & quality

Improved plant health
& plant nutrition

Adapted plant technologies
e.g. stress tolerance: cold, heat,
drought, salinity

1950 1950

-

1980

1990

-

2025

Overall: sense of urgency to sustain demands

Günther Eberz, Bayer CropScience
Innovative Agriculture Helps to Meet Basic Needs of Life

59

  
Thank you for your attention

60

Ethics of modern developments in
agriculture technologies

Wilhelm GRUISSEM

Wilhelm Gruissem has been full Professor of Plant Bio-
technology in the Institute of Plant Sciences at the ETH
Zürich (Swiss Federal Institute of Technology) since 2000.
He was elected President of the European Plant Science
Organization (EPSO) in 2006.

Professor Wilhelm Gruissem studied biology and chem-
istry at the University of Bonn and obtained his Ph.D. in
1979. After two years as a research associate at the Uni-
versity of Marburg, he made his postdoctoral training in
the Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmen-
tal Biology at the University of Colorado in Boulder, USA.
In 1983 he was appointed to the faculty of the University
of California at Berkeley as professor of plant biology.

Professor Wilhelm Gruissem was Chair of the Depart-
ment of Plant and Microbial Biology at UC Berkeley from
1993 to 1998, and from 1998 to 2000 he was Director of
a collaborative research program between the Depart-
ment and the Novartis Agricultural Discovery Institute
in San Diego. From 2004 to 2006 he was Chair of the
Zurich-Basel Plant Science Centre.

Since 2001 Professor Wilhelm Gruissem is Co-Director of
the Functional Genomics Centre Zurich.

61

New technologies
and agriculture for
the future

Wilhelm GRUISSEM

The world is going through unprecedented changes.
While life expectancy has vastly increased in Europe and
the United States, many developing countries continue
to experience large population growth with stagnating
or even decreasing agricultural production. The benefits
of the agricultural ‘Green Revolution’ that supported
population growth have given way to crop shortages,
rising costs for staple foods, and shifting economic in-
terests in the utilisation of agricultural crops. The current
debate on meeting the challenges of an impending hun-
ger crisis is merely symptomatic of the need to develop
and deploy innovative technologies for sustainable agri-
culture and food production that can support a growing
human population.

Europe is at the centre of a controversy about the ac-
ceptance of new agricultural technologies that have
dramatic impacts on developing countries. The backlash
in Europe against the introduction of genetically modi-
fied crops is fuelled by heavily subsidised agricultural
production, a tariff system that favours food exports but
discourages imports, and a romanticised view of agricul-
ture and food production that largely ignores global re-
alities and problems. At the same time, organic farming
is promoted as a form of sustainable agriculture despite
the fact that this will inevitably have a greater impact on
the environment while reducing feed and food produc-
tion. Because of the raging controversy in Europe and
the failure of the European Commission to deal deci-
sively with the adoption of novel agricultural crop and
production systems, many developing countries are
forgoing the development and deployment of promis-
ing new agricultural technologies. These countries, and
especially African countries, are concerned that the Eu-
ropean feed and food market may not be accessible to
them if they produce novel and improved crops, includ-
ing genetically modified crops, which are rejected by the
European consumer.

Can Europe afford to be a bystander as a global food
crisis is unfolding? Is it ethical for Europeans to ignore
scientific facts in favour of promoting agricultural pro-
duction systems that cannot contribute to reducing glo-
bal hunger? Is it ethical for Europe to heavily subsidise its
own agricultural production systems with the Common

Agricultural Policy (CAP) while discouraging developing
countries from adopting novel crops, including geneti-
cally modified crops, that could significantly improve
their own agricultural production? Instead of marginal-
ising plant research and development, should Europe
not be at the forefront of global crop improvement and
agricultural innovation to meet future challenges in feed
and food production?

These questions and their ethical implications must be
considered if Europe wants to lead the world in build-
ing a knowledge-based bio-economy. Predictions show
that conventional agriculture as we practice it today will
be insufficient to meet tomorrow’s demands for food
and feed. At least a two-fold increase in agricultural
yields will be needed in the coming decades, especially
in developing countries, if we want to have a signifi-
cant impact in reducing the number of people that go
hungry every day. This increase in agricultural yields
must be achieved in ecologically sustainable ways. As
much as we need to embrace the general principles of
sustainable agriculture that are the pillars of organic
farming, we must also deploy agricultural biotechnol-
ogy as an important pillar of Europe’s economy. Only
by merging organic farming principles with innovative
crop biotechnology will Europe be able to develop the
new agricultural production systems indispensable to
sustainable economic growth, employment, energy
supply and maintenance of the standard of living. Bio-
technology is expected to help meet the most urgent
global challenges and reduce the threat of future con-
flicts resulting from limited arable land for food versus
non-food crop production.

It is an ethical imperative for European political leaders
to inform the public in an open and transparent way,
based on well-established scientific facts, of the oppor-
tunities — and the risks — of using biotechnology in
agricultural crop production. Political leaders, together
with scientists, farmers, NGO experts and opinion lead-
ers, are essential to building public trust. Only if Euro-
peans embrace biotechnology and innovative and ge-
netically modified crops in combination with organic
farming principles to support their future agriculture will
this send positive signals to developing countries. Euro-

62

pean leadership and ethical commitment to a sustain-
able agriculture that will meet the challenges of global
feed and food supply, as well as the supply of biomass
as raw material for non-food products, will have long-
lasting impacts on developing countries, for example
by improving their agricultural production systems for
economic growth.

Europe is being economically challenged, and the ethi-
cal considerations associated with new technologies in
agriculture today and for the future are clearly defined.
Only by developing ethically responsible policies and
by achieving public acceptance can Europe deploy new
technologies to sustain agriculture for the future in or-
der to avert an impending hunger crisis and contribute
to European and global economic growth.

63

New technologies
and agriculture for
the future

Powerpoint Presentation

New Technologies and
Agriculture for the Future

Thoughts about main ethical issues on

“Ethical aspects of modern agricultural technologies”

Wilhelm Gruissem
President
European Plant Science Organization

In the next 50 years we have to produce more food
than ever before in the history of humankind

Source: World Resources Institute
Source: World Resources Institute

2025: 90% of world agricultural
2025: 90% of world agricultural
production will be required in
production will be required in
developing countries
developing countries

0.45

World population

0.32

0.27

0.21

1960

1980

1995

2025

Available agricultural land per capita (ha)

Source: United Nations

64

IFPRI®

The Human Tragedy

• Each day 800 million people go hungry
• Among them are 170 million children

under 5 years of age

2O

2O

VISION

IFPRI®

2O

2O

VISION

Is it ethical for Europe to ignore
global problems of hunger?

I n t e r n a t i o n a l F o o d P o l i c y R e s e a r c h I n s t i t u t e

Reaching Sustainable Food
Security for All
by 2020

Getting the Priorities and
Responsibilities Right

Is Europe doing enough
to reach food security for all?

65

IFPRI®
IFPRI®

The World Food Summit Goal

Halve the number of hungry people by 2015
• 22 million must achieve food security every year
• Since 1990, only 6 million a year have

left “the prison of hunger”

2O

2O

VISION

2O

2O

VISION

Is it ethical for Europe to block
agricultural innovation?

Is it ethical for Europeans to protest and destroy
new agricultural technologies while people go hungry?

66

Is it ethical for Europe
not to be leader in agricultural innovation?

Is it ethical for Europe to denounce new agricultural
technologies that bring benefits to poor farmers?

Photos courtesy Dr. Peggy Lemaux
University of California at Berkeley

GMO

Conventional

67

Is it ethical for Europe to withhold support
for novel crops to improve human health?

Wildtype

SGR 1

SGR2

For ethical reasons, Europe must contribute to global

• food security
• enhanced food safety, quality and nutrition
• health improvements
• economic growth
• sustainable natural resource management
• agricultural research and knowledge

by accepting leadership and supporting
all forms of agricultural technologies

68

Ethics of modern developments in
agriculture technologies

Eric DRÉSIN

Eric Drésin is the Political Secretary for the food, bever-
ages and tobacco sector since 2004 at the European Fed-
eration of the Agriculture, Food and Tourism Trade Un-
ions (EFFAT). In EFFAT Mr Drésin has dealt with a number
of issues related to agriculture, such as, inter alia: food
labelling; relationship with retailers; BSE/TSE; corporate
social responsibility; workplace health & safety; sugar,
wine and fruit reforms; trade negotiations.

Mr Drésin holds a Law Degree in Public Law (1994) and
a Master in Political Science (1995) from the University of
Lyon, and a Master in European Politics (1997) from the
University of Bruxelles (ULB).

69

Strengthening
consumer health
through sustainability

Eric Drésin

The rapid intensification and globalisation of our food
production and distribution systems has had severe
negative impacts on farmers, public health and the envi-
ronment. These problems demand that sustainability be
placed at the centre of future agriculture policy in the EU
and worldwide. They also demand that traditional defi-
nitions of ‘food safety’ and ‘consumer protection’ be ex-
panded to include social, environmental, economic and
planetary health. Food can no longer be called ‘safe’ and
‘healthy’ unless it is safe and healthy for all people — not
just those who grow and eat it. It must be safe for the
entire planet and people everywhere.

Many questionable technologies pose threats to food
safety and public health. Mass production of livestock
has led to: Mad Cow Disease and other animal illnesses;
massive recalls of unsafe meat — such as the record 143
million pound beef recall in California in February; hu-
man health problems; water, air and soil pollution; and
widespread mistreatment of farm animals. The overuse
of pesticides, first brought to public attention by Rachel
Carson’s book Silent Spring in 1962, has had many nega-
tive human and environmental effects. Artificial food
additives have been linked to emotional problems in
children, leading the EP’s Environment Committee to
vote last month to ban food sweeteners and colourings
aimed at children. Genetically modified organisms pose
health and environmental risks, as well as threats to food
sovereignty, particularly in developing nations.

Industrialised livestock production is a principal cause
of growing antibiotic resistance in food-borne bacteria.
Much of the rise in obesity and obesity-related illnesses
throughout the world can be attributed to industrialised
diets. Childhood disorders linked to industrialised food
include obesity, high blood pressure, early signs of heart
disease and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

The globalisation of the Western-style, fast-food diet has
been especially harmful to indigenous populations, such
as the Oodham Indians in the southwest US. Industrialised
diets cause people to eat higher on the marketing chain,
weakening consumer sovereignty and increasing the food
industry’s manipulation of tastes and desires. Diverse di-
ets can buffer against the ill-effects of poor nutrition.

Intensively produced and globalised food poses many
threats to the environment. Farming, which depends
heavily on fossil fuels for energy, fertiliser and other
inputs, generates 9% of the EU’s greenhouse gas emis-
sions. National governments should tax rather than sub-
sidise fossil fuel development, and a ‘CO2’ label should
be developed to inform consumers of a food item’s car-
bon footprint. Runoff from intensive crop and livestock
operations has created nitrate pollution problems in
many EU Member States. Intensive food production also
contributes to water scarcity. Irrigation accounts for 87%
of global water consumption and 69% of global with-
drawals. Poor farming practices have turned the steppes
and plateaus of northwestern China into a dust bowl,
sweeping dust all the way to North America.

Intensive, globalised food is a threat to farmers and
farming economies. Today, farming is the world’s poor-
est, hungriest occupation. The farmers’ share of the con-
sumer food dollar has shrunken dramatically. In the US, it
fell from 40 to 7 cents from 1910 to 1997. Wheat farmers
there get 6 cents per loaf of bread — the same as what
the wrapper costs. The number of farms in the EU fell
from 7 million to 6.2 million from 1997 to 2005 — with
farms of less than 50 hectares accounting for all losses.
The US now has more full-time prisoners than full-time
farmers. The future does not look promising, as only 8%
of EU farmers are under 35, while more than half are near
retirement. Despite this problem, the CAP lacks a dedi-
cated funding source for young and first-time farmers.
The loss of farmers is transferring food quality control
to distant corporations that extract maximum output at
minimum cost.

Intensification and globalisation have been fuelled by
agri-food consolidation. The international food trade
has quadrupled since 1961. The top 30 supermarket
companies now control one-third of global sales; the top
10 seed companies control one-third of the global mar-
ket; and two companies — Archer Daniels Midland and
Cargill — control 75% of the world cereal market.

Non-local food is a threat to sustainability. American eco-
logical economist Herman Daly said: ‘Americans import
Danish sugar cookies and Danes import American sugar

70

cookies. Exchanging recipes would surely be more effi-
cient.’ Imported ingredients for the traditional UK Sunday
dinner release 650 times more carbon than local ingre-
dients. Pigs raised by US-based multinational Smithfield
Foods are nearly identical genetically and are raised un-
der nearly identical conditions. Tropicana sources its ap-
ple juice concentrate from at least 10 countries.

As an alternative to intensive, globalised food produc-
tion and distribution, sustainability and local production
can serve as promoters and protectors of safe food, pub-
lic health, farming communities, the environment, food
sovereignty and animal welfare.

Local food initiatives are forming throughout the world.
In Hawaii, where cows are routinely shipped 3 500 kilo-
metres to California and the packaged meat is shipped
back, ranching families are uniting to raise their cattle on
former pineapple plantations. Belo Horizonte, Brazil, be-
came the world’s first city to make food security a right,
providing four meals a day to all students and providing
local produce at low, fixed prices. The county of Devon
in England informs farmers of new crops and process-
ing techniques, sets up farmers’ markets and provides
grants to local food businesses.

The Gothenburg Strategy states that the CAP should
reward quality rather than quantity by encouraging or-
ganic and other environmentally friendly farming meth-
ods. The FAO states that organic agriculture can alleviate
world hunger, support the environment, improve public
health, ease global warming and strengthen local econ-
omies. Organic farming also has a strategic role in devel-
oping rural communities. Today, 6.1 million hectares, or
4.1%, of European farmland is under organic production
— with Austria leading with 11%. The EU’s organic food
market is growing by 30% a year.

Sustainable regional brands such as Label Rouge Poultry
in France promote environmentally friendly production
as well as local farming communities and geographic
identity. Label Rouge establishes regional producer
alliances that market branded products under a com-
mon label. All chickens are free-range, slow-growing
birds from rustic stock that are fed no animal products

or growth stimulants. Label Rouge has captured 30% of
the French market.

Serving wholesome school meals is a rapidly emerging
strategy to improve public health and support local pro-
duction. Italy requires organic, local food to be served in
public schools. In Ross School in New York, all meals are
made from scratch with local, in-season ingredients. The
meals contain less fat, sugar and salt, and more fibre and
antioxidants. A Harvard University study has revealed
fewer pesticides in the bodies of children compared
to the general population. In Santa Monica, California,
salad bars have lowered fat and cholesterol intake while
improving pupil behaviour.

To help the plight of farmers, the International Federa-
tion of Agricultural Producers released ‘The World Farm-
ers’ Charter’ in 2006. Among the Charter’s key planks:

•

•

•

•

Family farmers are the basic elements of sustainable
agriculture, have a key role in strengthening demo-
cratic processes, and are equally entitled to all legal
rights and forms of social protection.

Governments have a key role in ensuring reasonable
living standards for farmers.

Rural communities should be sustained for the ben-
efit of all people, and

International trade rules should balance exporters
with importers, and developed with developing
countries.

We need new definitions and new thinking in order to
build a new future. The Gothenburg and Lisbon Strat-
egies state that strong economic performance must
go hand in hand with sustainability, and that the CAP
should emphasise healthy products, environmentally
sustainable production, renewable raw materials and
biodiversity protection. Because technologies such as
intensive livestock production and genetic engineer-
ing threaten the health of the planet, they threaten the
health of people everywhere. Accordingly, the definition
of ‘food safety’ and ‘consumer health’ must be expanded

71

far beyond the context of the individual. Food must be
safe for the entire planet and people everywhere — not
just for those who grow and eat it. We must also change
the definition of ‘consumer.’ A ‘consumer’ is said to be
someone who makes food purchasing decisions based
on taste, cost and convenience — which, not coinci-
dentally, are the same factors that drive intensification
and globalisation. But this is not how growing numbers
of people make their decisions. People want to know
if their food is good for the environment, farmers and
animals. We need to turn consumers back into people
who make their food decisions not as customers of agri-
businesses, but as members of a global community. As
the Gothenburg and Lisbon Strategies very rightly state,
the time has come to place sustainability at the centre of
our food production systems. Doing so will improve the
health of people, the environment, farming communi-
ties and animals everywhere.

72

Strengthening
consumer health
through sustainability

Powerpoint Presentation

Strengthening Consumer Health
Through Sustainability

Eric Drésin
Food & Water Watch Europe

Roundtable on the Ethical Aspects of

Modern Developments in Agriculture Technologies

European Group on Ethics in Science

and New Technologies
18 June 2008, Brussels

20th Century Methods Have
Become 21st Century Problems

• Intensification and globalisation impacts
  farmers, public health, environment

• Redefine ‘food safety’, ‘consumer protection’
  social, environmental, economic, planetary
health

• ‘Safe’ food   safe for the planet and all people

73

Questionable Technologies:
A Threat to Food Safety
and Public Health

• Mass-produced meat

– Mad Cow Disease
– Human health, environmental, animal welfare effects

• Pestidices

– SilentSpring
– Human health and environmental effects

• Artificial food additives
– Hyperactivity in children
– Recent EP vote calling for ban

• GMOs

– Human health, environmental, food security effects

Questionable Technologies:
A Threat to Food Safety
and Public Health

• Growing antibiotic resistance

– Caused by industrialised livestock operations

• Obesity

– UK: 33% of men, 28% of women, 20% of children by 2010
– China: doubled from 1991-2004

• Childhood disorders

– Obesity, high blood pressure, heart disease, ADHD

74

Intensive / Globalised Food:
A Threat to Public Health

• Non-local diets

– Globalisation of Western-style fast/processed foods
• Loss of food skills/consumer sovereignty
– People eat high on the production/marketing chain

• Diversity of diet

– Buffers against disease

Intensive / Globalised Food:
A Threat to the Environment

• Fossil fuel agriculture

– Farming -> 9% greenhouse gases in EU
– Tax rather than subsidise fossil fuels
– CO2 label

• Nitrate pollution in Europe

– High in BE, DE, DK, ES, FR, IE, IT, NL, UK

• Water scarcity

– Irrigation -> 87% global consumption, 69% global withdrawals
– Pumping exceeds replenishment -> 160 billion m3/yr

• Poor land use

– Dustbowls in China

75

Intensive / Globalised Food:
A Threat to Farmers and
Farming Economies

• Farming -> world’s poorest, hungriest occupation
• Farmers’ shrinking share of consumer food

expenses

• Farmers’ shrinking numbers

– Farms -> 7 to 6.2 million (1997-2005) – all losses farms <50 ha
– US: more full-time prisoners than full-time farmers

• Young farmers

– 8% under 35, more than half near retirement
– CAP -> lacks dedicated funding

• Lower food quality

– Control transferred to distant corporations

Agri-Food Consolidation:
A Threat To Food Safety

• International food trade
– quadrupled since 1961

• Corporate consolidation and globalisation

– Top 30 supermarket companies -> one-third of global sales
– Top 10 seed companies -> one-third of global market
– Archer Daniels Midland and Cargill -> 75% of world cereal

market

76

21st Century Solutions
to Intensive, Globalised Food

• Sustainability and local production
  promoters and protectors of:

- Safe food
- Public health
- Farming communities
- Environment
- Food sovereignty
- Animal welfare

Local Food Initiatives

• Hawaii

– Cows shipped 3,500 km to California, packaged meat shipped

back

– Families unite to raise cattle on former pineapple plantations

• Belo Horizonte, Brazil

– First city to make food security a right
– Four meals a day for all students; local produce at low prices

• Devon County, England

– Links farmers with new crops and processing techniques
– Farmers’ markets, CSAs, grants to food businesses

77

Organic Agriculture

• Gothenburg Strategy

– CAP should reward quality rather than quantity

• Hunger, environment, public health, climate

change, local economies (FAO)
• Strategic role in rural development
• 6.1 million ha
– 4% EU’s UAA
– Austria: 11%

• EU market growth

– 25%/yr 1993-98, 30%/yr since

Sustainable, Regional Brands

• Label Rouge Poultry, France

– Regional producer alliances -> branded products, common label
– Free-range, slow-growing birds from rustic stock
– No animal products, growth stimulants in feed
– 30% of French market

78

‘The World Farmers’ Charter’

‘Farmerspledgetomanagetheirfarmsinasustainable
mannerinordertoconservethevaluableagricultural
resourcebase,usingthebestfarmingtechnologiesand
scientificprogress.’(IFAP, May 2006)

• Family farmers   basic elements for sustainable agriculture

• Farmers   key role in strengthening democratic processes,
equally entitled to all legal rights and social protections

• Governments   key role in ensuring reasonable living

standards

• Rural communities   sustain for the benefit of all people

• International trade   balance exporters and importers,

developed and developing countries

New Definitions, New Thinking,
New Future

• Gothenburg and Lisbon Strategies

– Healthy products, organic production, renewables, biodiversity

• Questionable technologies

– Threaten the planet   threaten public health

• Redefine ‘food safety’ and ‘consumer protection’

– Must be safe for entire planet and all people

• Redefine ‘consumer’

– Factors beyond taste, cost, convenience
– Turn consumers back into people
• Sustainability at the centre

– Improving the health of people, environment, farmers, animals

everywhere

79

Ethics of modern developments in
agriculture technologies

Erik MILLSTONE

Erik Millstone is a Professor of Science Policy at the Uni-
versity of Sussex, leader of the Environment and Energy
group at the Science Policy Research Unit (SPRU) and
Director of Studies for the post-graduate programme in
Public Policies for Science, Technology and Innovation.

His first degree was in physics; he then gained three
postgraduate degrees in philosophy. Since 1974 he has
been researching into the causes, consequences and
regulation of technological change in the food industry.
From 1998 to 2004 he researched the links between sci-
ence and policy-making in relation to Bovine Spongi-
form Encephalopathy in European Commission-funded

projects. He was the principal contributor to a European
Commission-funded 9-country comparative study of
obesity policy from 2003-2007. He also led a compara-
tive study from 2004 to 2007 of the relationships be-
tween science and food safety policy-making, looking at
the global Codex-based regime, as well as the UK, USA,
Germany, Japan and Argentina.

He recently embarked on a five-year UK Research Coun-
cil-funded project concerned with ways of reconciling
improved agricultural production, health, water man-
agement and environmental sustainability in develop-
ing countries.

81

Modern developments
in agriculture technologies
and environmental
protection

Erik Millstone

A great deal of agriculture, in both industrialised and
developing countries,
is unsustainable in numerous
dimensions:

•
•
•

•

soils — impoverished and/or lost
energy costs — high and rising
pesticides, fertiliser, pharmaceuticals — escalating
treadmills
employment — innovation is labour-displacing not
recruiting.

As Röling and Jiggins have argued: ‘Agriculture…is a ma-
jor source of the gaseous emissions implicated in global
warming, the largest user of potable fresh water, a lead-
ing contributor to pollution, a source of actual and po-
tential pandemics, and land clearance for agriculture is
a major cause of loss of habitat and biodiversity.’1 Those
challenges are aggravated by an agenda of market liber-
alisation — without interventions to provide floors and
ceilings to prices, agricultural markets are chronically
volatile. Chronic hunger amongst the world’s poor is
the biggest single ethical issue confronting agricultural
technology.

Regulating agricultural technologies —
how can it be understood?

The orthodoxy used to be, e.g. in the UK prior to 20 March
1996, classically technocratic. Technocratic narratives
portray regulatory policies as if they were based on, and
only on, ‘sound science’. Policy-making institutions were
structured in accordance with that model. Commission
Directorates-General and government departments is-
sued policy decisions, and represented them as based
upon and legitimated by sound science as provided by
expert committees.

The technocratic model has, however, been torpedoed
by the obvious fact that scientific evidence and under-
standing is often incomplete, equivocal, uncertain and

contested. From 1986 to February 1996, we did not
know whether or not BSE could cause CJD. We still can-
not forecast precisely how our climates will change as a
consequence of agricultural or industrial activities. If we
could reliably predict the environmental consequences
of cultivating GM crops, the European Directive would
not include a requirement for post-release monitoring.

Once the uncertainties can no longer be concealed or
denied, the technocratic narrative and model lose all
their plausibility. Even if, per impossibile, all scientific
uncertainties were eliminated, scientific considerations
alone still could not decide environmental policy mat-
ters. Policy judgments are concerned for example with
the acceptability of possible risks (and uncertainties) in
exchange for anticipated benefits; and those are socially
variable value judgments — they are normative policy
judgments, not scientific issues. During the late 1990s
and the early years of this decade, many leading Euro-
pean-wide institutions, and those in EU Member States
too, abandoned technocratic narratives and institution-
al structures.

They have been replaced by a new orthodoxy, which
maintains policy-making is a two-stage linear process
in which science influences policy, but policy does not
influence the science. That model is called the Red Book
model after the 1983 US NRS report entitled Risk Assess-
ment in the Federal Government: Managing the Process,
which was bound in a red cover. In this model, it is as-
sumed that the environmental impact of, for example,
agricultural technologies and practices can and should
be assessed scientifically in a value-free, policy-neutral
space. That is often referred to as a ‘scientific risk assess-
ment’. The conclusions of those assessments are then
passed on to those responsible for policy decisions, who
in this context are referred to as ‘risk managers’. At that
second stage, and only then, other considerations of a
normative, ethical, social and political character may le-
gitimately be taken into account by policy-makers. For
example, when deciding what practices and products

(1)

‘Making Trans-disciplinary Science Work for Resource-poor Farmers’, Workshop Farmer First Revisited, Brighton, 12-14 December 2007,
available at http://www.future-agricultures.org/farmerfirst/files/T2b_Roling.pdf.

82

to permit, restrict or forbid, risk management policy-
makers may need to make normative judgments about
trade-offs between risks and benefits, e.g. the ‘adverse
environmental impacts of pesticides’ in exchange for
‘crop protection’.

This model is fundamental to the institutional structur-
al relationship between e.g. DG SANCO (as risk manag-
er) and the EFSA as risk assessor. Similar arrangements
have been introduced in e.g. Germany and France. As
influential and popular the Red Book model may be,
it has been rejected by almost all policy analysts, and
formally repudiated by the European Commission and
all EU Member States. Scholars and policy analysts
have concluded that scientific assessments of e.g. the
environmental effects of agricultural technologies and
processes are not prepared in value-free, policy-neutral
spaces; on the contrary, they are inevitably, and exqui-
sitely, sensitive to their policy, economic, social and cul-
tural contexts.

As my colleagues and I found, in our study of policy dis-
putes in relation to e.g. GM foods and crops, pesticides
and food safety, expert risk assessment bodies disagree,
not because they providing competing answers to shared
questions, but because they are asking and answering
different questions.2 The choice of those questions is a
normative policy-sensitive issue, not a neutral scientific
issue. For example, in the 1990s US assessors deemed
changes to flora and fauna from cultivating GM crops
to be adverse effects only if they harmed the economic
prospects of US farmers, otherwise they were deemed
to be ‘adaptations’. In the EU, any changes to flora and
fauna in either the agricultural or non-agricultural envi-
ronments were deemed to be ‘harm’ and therefore as
‘risks’ that needed to be assessed, and if necessary man-
aged. The US approach was not considered acceptable
by any European Member State.

Policy scholars since the 1980s have talked about the up-
stream ‘framing assumptions’ that condition scientific
deliberations about risks, and the representations and
assessment of them. A major analytical and institutional
innovation emerged in 2003 at the Codex Alimentarius
Commission, when the Codex Member States introduced
a new concept — namely ‘risk assessment policy’, to re-
fer to those up-stream framing assumptions. This risk as-
sessment policy is portrayed in the following terms:

‘Determination of risk assessment policy should be in-
cluded asa s pecific component of risk management.
Risk assessment policy should be established by risk man-
agers in advance of risk assessment, in consultation
with risk assessors and all other interested parties…’3

That implies that Codex acknowledged that risk assess-
ments are framed by prior policy assumptions, which are
risk management issues, and should be decided in ad-
vance and up-stream by policy-makers in consultation
not only with risk assessors but also with all other in-
terested parties such as consumers, environmental in-
terests and industrial interests. That acknowledgement
represents a repudiation of both the technocratic and
Red Book models.

In July 2007, at the plenary session of Codex, all Codex
Member States, which include all EU Member States and
the European Commission, adopted an identical provi-
sion to be applied domestically. The technocratic and
Red Book models have therefore also been repudiated
by the European Commission and all EU Member States.
The new model implies that evaluative, normative and
politically contestable issues arise not only down-stream
but up-stream too.

In a recently completed and published study of risk as-
sessment policy for Codex in the UK, Germany, the USA,

(2)

(3)

Science in trade disputes related to potential risk: comparative case studies, (with P van Zwanenberg, C Marris, L Levidow and H Torgersen), Euro-
pean Science and Technology Observatory Technical Report Series, 2004, available at http://esto.jrc.es/detailshort.cfm?ID_report=1203.

Codex Alimentarius Commission, Procedural Manual, 14th Edition, 2004, Appendix IV, Working Principles for Risk Analysis for Application in
the Framework of the Codex Alimentarius, paras 13-14, p. 103.

83

Japan and Argentina, my colleagues and I concluded
that there are at least three main elements to risk assess-
ment policies (RAP), namely:

substantive
procedural and
interpretative — and they are interdependent.

This is not an exhaustive list of ethical and policy ques-
tions that arise when the environmental effects of agri-
cultural technologies and processes are appraised4, but
does comprise an important set of ethical and policy is-
sues to which far too little attention has so far been paid.
This set of issues is also one that policy-makers have, in
general terms, undertaken to address, but which they
have yet to address adequately.

Since they should be addressed by the European Com-
mission, and the governments of all EU Member States,
they should also be on the agendas of national legisla-
tures and the European Parliament if they are to meet
their responsibilities for oversight of the executive in-
stitutions. Those legislatures should ensure that policy-
makers articulate at least those three key dimensions of
risk assessment policy guidance for their risk assessors,
and that the resulting policies are decided by transpar-
ent and accountable processes.

If these conditions are met, and if the co-evolutionary
model is effectively operationalised and the risk assess-
ment policy provisions properly implemented, then we
may well have institutional structures and procedures
through which policy-making could become both dem-
ocratically and scientifically legitimate.

(4)

For example, a separate issue is: how could we test for the environmental impact of GM crops without taking precisely the risks that the
testing is supposed to help us avoid?

84

Modern developments
in agriculture technologies
and environmental
protection

Powerpoint Presentation

Agriculture and
environmental protection

Prof Erik Millstone

SPRU – University of Sussex

e.p.millstone@sussex.ac.uk

A great deal of agriculture, both in
industrialised and developing country
agriculture is unsustainable in numerous
dimensions:
• soils - impoverished and/or lost
• energy costs - high and rising
• pesticides, fertiliser, pharmaceuticals -

escalating treadmills

• employment - innovation is labour-displacing

not recruiting.

85

How can we understand the regulation
of agricultural technologies and
practices?

To answer that question I provide
several schematic models that have
been used both descriptively and
prescriptively.

Public policy-makers, such as
government ministers, often used
to claim that policies to regulate
food safety risks are always and
only based on ‘sound science’.

But how realistic was that?

86

Model 1: the technocratic model

Science
(= facts)

Policy
Making

• The technocratic model has been

torpedoed by the obvious fact that science
evidence is often incomplete, equivocal
and uncertain.

• From 1986 to February 1996, we did not

know whether or not BSE could cause CJD.

• The local impacts of climate change, or of
cultivating GM crops, are uncertain and
contested.

87

Even if per impossibile all scientific
uncertainties were eliminated, science
still could not decide environmental
policy.
Policy judgements are concerned with
the acceptability of possible risks in
exchange for anticipated benefits, and
those are socially variable value
judgements – they are policy matters,
not scientific issues.

Model 2 - Red Book decisionist model

(= recent conventional official orthodoxy)

Risk
assessment

Risk
management

Risk
communication

Science

Values and
practicalities

Social science

88

That model is flawed because
the source of many of the
uncertainties are the non-
scientific assumptions that
frame risk assessments,
which Codex’s calls

‘risk assessment policy’.

Codex refers to Risk Assessment Policy in the
following terms:
“Determination of risk assessment policy should
be included as a specific component of risk
management.
Risk assessment policy should be established
by risk managers in advance of risk
assessment, in consultation with risk assessors
and all other interested parties…
The mandate given by risk managers to risk
assessors should be as clear as possible.”

89

Model 3 - the co-evolutionary model:
reciprocal links between science and policy

Socio-
economic
and political
factors

Framing
assumptions:
risk assessment
policy

Scientific
factors

Technical, economic,
social
and political factors

Expert
Assessment

-

Policy-making
aka
Risk management

reciprocal communication

Risk assessment policy has

three main elements:

substantive

procedural and

interpretative

and they are interdependent.

90

Substantive RAPs are, for example, about
normative choices concerning:

• What counts as an adverse effect and what is

an adaptation, or ‘herd management’ issue?

• What is the unit of assessment?

- a production-phase or ‘life-cycle’ analysis?
Technologies or products - one at a time, or
comparatively?
A product, or a product in commercial use?

• What kinds of evidence are necessary and/or

sufficient eg tests in (which kinds of) model
systems, or post-release monitoring?

Procedural RAPs are, for example,
about normative choices concerning:

•

•

•
•

•
•
•

how open are the deliberations and decision-
making?
how accountable are the deliberations and decision-
making?
using only published data or also unpublished data?
peer reviewed studies only or also case-reports and
anecdotal reports?
acknowledging and dealing with conflicts of interest?
acknowledging and dealing with uncertainties?
acknowledging differences of opinion, and
interpretative assumptions?

91

Interpretative RAPs are, for example, about normative
choices concerning:
•
•

what is the ‘chosen level of protection’?
how to allocate the benefit of the doubts with respect to
uncertainties?
alignment of interests and the interpretation of uncertainty
and ambiguity?
symmetrical or asymmetrical sensitive to false positives
&/or false negatives?
how to extrapolate from short-term to long-term
exposures?
how to extrapolate from high-dose to low-dose
exposures?
how to extrapolate from models to relevant realities?
how to trade-off ‘risks’ and ‘benefits’- eg in aggregate or
disaggregated?

•

•

•

•

•
•

The co-evolutionary model

indicates institutional structures

and procedures through which

policy-making can become

democratically, scientifically

and ethically legitimate.

92

Ethics of modern developments in
agriculture technologies

Christoph THEN

Christoph Then has been working on biotechnology is-
sues for more than fifteen years. He initiated and coordi-
nated the German No Patents on Life! initiative from 1992
to 1998, and worked for the Green party as an expert on
agriculture and biotechnology from 1995 to 1998. From
1999 to 2007 he worked for Greenpeace in Germany, as
an expert on genetic engineering and patenting. There

he headed the department for agriculture, toxics, genet-
ic engineering and consumer issues for several years, and
also coordinated work on EU issues in the risk assessment
of genetically engineered organisms. He left Greenpeace
in 2007 to initiate the scouting-biotechnology network
(www.scouting-biotechnology.net).

93

The industrial gene
paradigm and its
(Ethical) implications

Christoph Then

‘The industrial gene is one that can be defined, owned,
tracked, proven acceptably safe, proven to have uniform
effect, sold and recalled.’ This quote (by molecular biolo-
gist Jack Heinemann) is taken from an article in the New
York Times published in July 20071 and reflects the wide-
ly accepted perception that as a result of international
research projects such as the Human Genome Project
(published in 2000/20012) and the ENCODE project (pub-
lished in 20073), the 20th century concept of genes and
their function is to a large extent no longer valid. Instead
of viewing a gene as a deterministic building block (In-
dustrial Gene Paradigm), gene functions and their regula-
tions now have to be understood as a part of a systemic
unit influenced by many factors. In fact, the full role of a
gene can only be explained by looking at its context as
a whole. The structure of DNA alone, which according to
the 20th century concept determines the role of a gene,
does not really define or restrict the function of the gene
nor does it sufficiently explain the complex nature of life.
As Craig Venter wrote as regards the Human Genome
Project, which for the first time revealed the complete
DNA structure of humans: ‘(...) we must look elsewhere
for the mechanisms that generate the complexities (...).’4

This new dimension in complexity calls into question the
use of genetic engineering in plants, which is based on the
general idea that a gene can be isolated, transferred to
another organism (in many cases even from another spe-
cies), inserted at random and, at the same time, be used
to transfer a defined biological function. Because a DNA

sequence alone does not define or restrict the function of
a gene, predicting the effect of moving one gene to an-
other organism is not at all as straightforward as has been
assumed5. According to a study by the German Depart-
ment of the Environment:6 ‘A genetically transferred gene
sequence must be understood as genetic information
whose context has been altered in an uncontrolled way’.

Many cases demonstrate that the application of the In-
dustrial Gene Paradigm underestimates the issue of com-
plexity at the level of gene regulation. For example, it has
been shown that changing the function of a single gene
can influence the functioning of several hundred other
genes7. Side-effects associated with genetic engineering
can even cause severe health problems. A slight modifica-
tion in the expression of a new protein in peas as a result
of genetic engineering led to an unforeseen potential
hazard to human health8. Sometimes after unintended
side-effects become evident, they are hailed as a success-
ful result of genetic engineering, for example in the case
of Golden Rice. Originally, Golden Rice kernels were sup-
posed to produce a compound of a red, not yellow col-
our.9 Even if a certain function is transferred ‘successfully’,
the function of a gene may be affected by the environ-
ment (such as in conditions of drought, disease, or salin-
ity) in ways too complex to be predicted based on our
current knowledge. This has been shown in commercially
traded genetically engineered plants such as cotton, soy
and maize. For example the Bt content in MON810 maize
seems to depend on environmental factors.10

(1)
(2)
(3)

(4)
(5)
(6)

(7)
(8)

(9)

Caruso, Denise. ‘A Challenge to Gene Theory, a Tougher Look at Biotech’, New York Times, 1 July 2007, www.nytimes.com.
Venter, J. Craig, et al. 2001. ‘The Sequence of the Human Genome’, Science, Vol. 291, 1304–1351.
The Encode Project Consortium, 2007. ‘Identification and analysis of functional elements in 1% of the human genome by the ENCODE pilot project’,
Nature, Vol 447, 14 June 2007, 799–816.
Venter, J. Craig, et al. 2001. ‘The Sequence of the Human Genome’, Science, Vol. 291, 1304–1351.
See also Greenpeace, 2005 ‘risk underestimated, interviews with nine scientists on the subject of genetically modified plants’, www.greenpeace.de.
Pickardt, T. 2002. ‘Stabilität transgen-vermittelter Merkmale in genetisch veränderten Pflanzen’, study commissioned by the Department of the
Environment (UBA), Texte 53/02, Forschungsbericht 20167 430/2.
Anholt, R.R. et al. 2003. ‘The Genetic Architecture of Odor-Guided Behavior in Drosophila’, Nature Genetics, 35, 180-184.
Prescott VE, et al. 2005. ‘Transgenic expression of bean a-amylase inhibitor in peas results in altered structure and immunogenicity’, J Agricultural
and Food Chemistry, 53, 9023-30.
Beyer, P., Al-Babili, S., Ye, X, Lucca, P., Schaub, P., Welsch, R. & Potrykus, I. 2002. ‘Golden Rice: introducing the ß-carotene biosynthesis pathway into
rice endosperm by genetic engineering to defeat vitamin A deficiency ’, Journal of Nutrition, 132: 506–510.

(10) Griffiths, B.S., S. Caul, J. Thompson, A.N. Birch, C. Scrimgeour, J. Cortet, A. Foggo, C.A. Hacket, and P.H. Krogh. 2006. ‘Soil microbial and faunal com-

munity responses to Bt maize and insecticide in two soils’, Journal of Environmental Quality, 35, 734-74

94

In short, the concept of current genetic engineering in
plants is flawed because it perceives an organism, its
cells and gene functions (and its interaction with the en-
vironment) as being determined by its single parts and
not as being organised by emergence and non-linear
processes. Therefore, the current concept of genetic en-
gineering in plants tends to ignore the results of recent
mainstream research leading the way to the post-ge-
nomic era of the 21st century. The correct understand-
ing of the mechanisms of life by industry is impeded by
potential conflicts with commercial interests11. As Barry
Commoner writes: ‘The fact that one gene can give rise
to multiple proteins also destroys the theoretical foun-
dation of a multibillion-dollar industry, the genetic engi-
neering of food crops.’12

This is relevant not only in the context of the manufac-
ture of products, such as genetically engineered plants,
but also to the patentability of plants, animals and re-
lated genetic resources. Currently, patent offices in the
US and Europe grant patents largely based on the In-
dustrial Gene Paradigm; genetic information is treated in
the same way as chemical compounds are, which can be
isolated and defined at the molecular level of DNA. As
a logical result of this concept, very broad patents are
granted for DNA sequences covering each and every
biological function as soon as a commercial application
is described. Even if a DNA sequence is only described in
its natural context, it might become an invention where
the breeding of plants and animals is concerned. This
is the focus of the discussion at www.no-patents-on-
seeds.org.

The Industrial Gene concept has implications for civil
society on several levels. Driven by economic expec-
tations, it can have far-reaching ethical and socio-eco-
nomic implications.

These implications are addressed in the following four
paragraphs:

1) (dis-)respect for life
2) exposure to risks
3) creating monopolies
4) opting for sustainable solutions

1) (Dis-)respect for life seems to be somewhat of an old
fashioned concept when discussing the implications of
modern biotechnology. But in the light of the underly-
ing Industrial Gene Paradigm this very basic approach
could acquire a new meaning. The construction and
engineering (manipulation) of life forms under flawed
technical preconditions could be perceived as not con-
forming to the very basic concept of respect for living
beings. One might interpret this as abuse of the tech-
nical and economic power to turn life into a product,
which suffers from a fundamental technical misconcep-
tion. This issue has not yet taken centre stage in public
debate — but it might well be on its way, sparked by the
application of biotechnology to animals (including the
advent of cloning).

2) The exposure to risks posed by genetically modified
organisms is reflected in European legislation requir-
ing a general risk assessment for genetically modified
organisms before authorisation. But so far there is still
no protocol for risk assessment which takes the general
complexity of genes and their functions into account.13
It is a matter of great concern that products originating
from biotechnology are released into the environment
and used in food production without a proper under-
standing of genes and their functions. Thus consumers
and the environment are systematically and permanent-
ly exposed to a fairly unpredictable form of risk. Consid-
er the risk of outcrossing: this risk might be prolonged

(11)

See also: Then, Christoph. 2008. ‘Dolly ist tot’, Rotpunktverlag, Schweiz.

(12) Commoner B. 2002. ‘Unraveling the DNA Myth’, Harper´s Magazine, February 2002, 39–47.

(13)

For example, see Greenpeace, 2006, ‘Efsa’s risk assessment on GMOs, case studies and lessons learnt’, www.greenpeace.de.

95

and irreversible with implications for future generations.
The risks emerging from the Industrial Gene Paradigm
are exceptional in nature. As the New York Times points
out: ‘Innovation begets risk, almost by definition. When
something is truly new, only so much can be predicted
about how it will play out. Proponents of a discovery of-
ten see and believe only in the benefits it will deliver. But
when it comes to innovations in food and medicine, be-
lief can be dangerous. Often, new information is discov-
ered that invalidates the principles — thus the claims of
benefit and, sometimes, safety — on which proponents
have built their products.’14

3) Creating monopolies in seed and food production
has been an integral part of modern biotechnology
for approximately 20 years. Today, agrochemical com-
panies such as Monsanto are the main global players
in seed production. One central mechanism for the in-
ternational takeover of the seeds market is patent law.
Wherever DNA sequences of economic relevance can be
identified, they and associated products can be claimed
as intellectual property. This includes the entire chain
of food production as well as all following generations
derived from crossing and propagation. As mentioned
above, this misappropriation of genetic resources is not
restricted to genetically engineered plants. Especially in
the light of the current food crisis, which is driven by the
rising cost of everyday food products, this can have se-
vere implications for civil society particularly in develop-
ing countries. As the IAAST (International Assessment of
Agricultural Science and Technology for Development)
report in 2008 concludes: ‘In developing countries espe-

cially, instruments such as patents may drive up costs,
restrict experimentation by the individual farmer or
public researcher while also potentially undermining lo-
cal practices that enhance food security and economic
sustainability.‘15
Broad monopolies in food and food production tech-
nology can create additional bottlenecks in world food
supply and therefore are in clear contradiction to the
need for sustainable food security. For ethical reasons
these monopolies should be ruled out by the interna-
tional community.

4) Opting for sustainable solutions could also pose an
ethical challenge if it could be shown that technologies
are available that generate identical or better results as
regards yield and sustainable food supply without pos-
ing specific risks as is the case with genetic engineering.

The latest outcome in what is known as marker-assisted
breeding (MAB) has been positive, showing good results
for pest and drought resistance as well as higher yields.16
This technology does not introduce a completely new
breeding technology, but simply supports conventional
breeding with relatively low technical input, using some
kind of gene diagnosis. Indeed, even according to industry,
conventional breeding assisted by gene diagnosis seems
to be more effective than GE technology.17 Since costly
procedures for authorisation, labelling and segregation
are not necessary with MAB, this technology also means
a lower economic burden for participants in the food and
seed market. Seen from this perspective, we must weigh
the pros and cons and take ethical aspects into account.

(14) Caruso, Denise. ‘A Challenge to Gene Theory, a Tougher Look at Biotech’, New York Times, 1 July 2007, www.nytimes.com.

(15) http://www.greenfacts.org/en/agriculture-iaastd/l-2/3-biotechnology-for-development.htm#0.

(16)

For example, see McCouch, p. 2004. ‘Diversifying Selection in Plant Breeding’, PloS Biology, October 2004, Vol 2, Issue 10, www.plosbiology.org.

(17) www.epo/aboutus/events/biotechnology.html.

96

The industrial gene
paradigm and its
(Ethical) implications

Powerpoint Presentation

The Industrial Gene Paradigm and its
[Ethical] Implications

EGE Roundtable on
„Ethical Aspects
of Modern
Developments in
Agriculture
Technologies“*

*reflecting positions of Greenpeace

www.scouting-biotechnology.net

The Industrial Gene Paradigm and its
[Ethical] Implications

  "The industrial gene is

one that can be
defined, owned,
tracked, proven
acceptably safe, proven
to have uniform effect,
sold and recalled."

(Jack Heinemann)

www.scouting-biotechnology.net

97

The Industrial Gene Paradigm and its
[Ethical] Implications

the old model of gene function
www.scouting-biotechnology.net

The Industrial Gene Paradigm and its
[Ethical] Implications

the new model of gene function
www.scouting-biotechnology.net

98

The Industrial Gene Paradigm and its
[Ethical] Implications

case studies:

 interference with cell metabolism: Golden
Rice was supposed to be red, not yellow

 process of genetic engineering: protein altered
becoming a health risk in GE peas

 environment: Bt content depends on soil, sun,
fertiliser etc in MON810

www.scouting-biotechnology.net

99

The Industrial Gene Paradigm and its
[Ethical] Implications

normal
plants and
animals

g

e

n

all
follo
eratio

win

g

n

s

isolation or

identification

of DNA sequence

of economicl

interest

+

describing a

technical

application

=

all biological
functions

genetically
engineered
plants and
animals

production
alllevels

of

seeds
plants
cultivation
harvest
processing
food
feed
biomass

www.scouting-biotechnology.net

The Industrial Gene Paradigm and its
[Ethical] Implications

  (dis-)respect of life

  exposure to risks

  creating monopolies

  Opting for

sustainable solutions

www.scouting-biotechnology.net

100

The Industrial Gene Paradigm and its
[Ethical] Implications

! dis-respect of life

  construction/

manipulation life
forms ignoring the
current scientific
concept could be
considered abuse of
technical and
economic power to
turn life into a
product that suffers
from a fundamental
technical
misconception

www.scouting-biotechnology.net

The Industrial Gene Paradigm and its
[Ethical] Implications

! Exposure to risks

  biosphere is
exposed to a
permanent,
multilevel - in some
cases even
irreversible - risk of
fairly unpredictable
nature

  comprehensive

protocol for
adequate risk
assessment is not
available

www.scouting-biotechnology.net

101

The Industrial Gene Paradigm and its
[Ethical] Implications

! Creating monopolies   broad monopolies in

food and food
production
technology can
create additional
bottlenecks in world
food supply by
raising prices and
hindering access

www.scouting-biotechnology.net

The Industrial Gene Paradigm and its
[Ethical] Implications

! Opting for

sustainable solutions

  in terms of

sustainability and
effectiveness, the
application of GE in
plants is wrong
involving high
collateral costs for
society

  more effective, less
costly and less risky
technologies for
breeding are
available

www.scouting-biotechnology.net

102

The Industrial Gene Paradigm and its
[Ethical] Implications

  define adequate

criteria for
sustainability in plant
breeding taking into
account the post
genomic paradigm

  make plant and

animal breeding an
open source issue

www.scouting-biotechnology.net

The Industrial Gene Paradigm and its
[Ethical] Implications

  empower civil

society and give
precaution a true
chance:

! the right to say no
! transparency to
enable choice
! independent risk

research

www.scouting-biotechnology.net

103

thank you very much for your attention

Dr Christoph Then
Tel +49 151 54638040
christoph.then@scouting-biotech.de

www.scouting-biotechnology.net

104

Ethics of modern developments in
agriculture technologies

Nathalie MOLL

Nathalie Moll is a biochemist and biotechnologist by
training, graduating from St Andrews University in Scot-
land in 1995. Since then, Nathalie has for the past 13 years
been involved in industries and industry associations ac-
tive in different fields of biotechnology at EU and nation-
al level in strategic advice and public and government
affairs positions.

Most recently, Nathalie has been heading the Green Bio-
technology Unit of EuropaBio, focusing on the agricul-
tural applications of modern biotechnology.

105

Ecologically,
economically and socially
sustainable agriculture:
the role of GMOs

Nathalie Moll

The EGE Round-Table comes at a time when sustainable
agriculture, climate change and food security are high on
the political agenda. In light of these discussions, more
and more governments and authorities, including the
Commission and the European Parliament, are recognis-
ing a positive role for agricultural biotechnology in sus-
tainable production. At the same time, the EU regulatory
framework for GMOs, the most stringent in the world, is
currently being discussed at several levels by European
policy-makers. The WTO Panel ruling in 2006 that the EU
was ‘not compliant’ in terms of implementing its legisla-
tion on GMOs also gives an international dimension to
this discussion.

The inability at EU level to approve agricultural biotech
products assessed as safe by the EU Food Safety Author-
ity is denying European farmers access to innovative
biotech crops that would allow them to compete with
equal tools on the global market. In Europe, only one
biotech product has been available for cultivation since
1998, while a number of cultivation approvals have been
blocked in the approval system since then. This is seri-
ously challenging the ethical concept of ‘equal access’ or
‘justice within generations’ for European farmers versus
farmers in the rest of the world.

Furthermore, given that the EU is often an important
agricultural trading partner of developing countries, the
EU’s restrictive policy towards GMOs has a strong impact
on developing countries that would like to adopt agri-
cultural biotechnology but fear losing their trading part-
ner as a result. An assessment, including the ethical im-
plications, of policies and any new EU legislation in this
sector should look beyond Europe’s borders to examine
the effects on other world regions as well.

The lack of progress in approving new biotech products
in the EU is also denying choice to the 42% of consumers

who are not opposed to GMOs1. Indeed, the inconclusive
voting patterns of Member States in the approval proc-
ess show that even though a product is considered safe
by the EU’s own Food Safety Authority, Member States
cannot arrive at a decision on whether or not to let that
safe product onto the market, often on the basis that ‘the
public may not want it’. In reality, consumer perceptions
of GMOs are changing as shown by the trends in the latest
Eurobarometer survey1, where the number of Europeans
worried about biotech crops has declined to 20%, down
from 24% in 2004. Similar studies recently conducted in
the UK2 and Sweden3 have shown that fewer than 3%
of respondents mention GM as a concern in relation to
food. It seems ethically important to allow consumers to
decide which safe products they will or will not purchase
and not take that decision away from them.

Currently, agriculture is facing a number of major global
challenges. The rapid growth in world population (+13%),
global income (+36%) and meat consumption (beef +14%,
pork +11%, chicken +45%) in the last decade are major
drivers of an increased demand for raw materials. There
appear to be only two options to meet this challenge:

1)

Increase the amount of cultivated area, thus further
increasing the pressure on remaining land, includ-
ing marginal grounds and forests

2)

Increase the productivity of currently cultivated land,
which is doubtless the more sustainable option.

The challenges today are to enable all inhabited world re-
gions to produce enough healthy food for their inhabit-
ants while preserving precious resources such as soil and
water and mitigating climate change. Although biotech-
nology on its own cannot meet all the major agricultural
challenges of the new millennium, it is a powerful tool-
box providing innovative and sustainable solutions to a

(1)

(2)

(3)

Eurobarometer study 2008 Attitudes of European citizens towards the environment

Peter Hutton, August 2006 - GM Foods: What Europeans Really Think: An analysis of the progression of European consumer attitudes toward GM foods

Sweden, September 2007 (available in Swedish only) New consumer survey shows increased acceptance

106

wide range of human and environmental issues. Indeed,
agricultural biotechnology has a role in ensuring the fol-
lowing components of sustainability in agriculture:

•

•

•

Ecological sustainability: According to a recently
published peer-reviewed study4 which examined
the technology over a ten-year period from 1996 to
2006, agricultural biotech has reduced greenhouse
gas emissions from agriculture by 14.8 billion kg of
CO
, which is equivalent to removing 6.6 million cars
2
from the roads in 1 year (= 25% of the cars registered
in the UK), and has reduced crop protection spray-
ing by 286 million kg.

Economical sustainability: The global net eco-
nomic benefits of 11 years of biotech crop cultiva-
tion at farm level amounted to €4.5 billion in 2006
and €21.6 billion over the ten-year period4. Farmers
get a direct benefit from growing biotech crops via
higher yields and lower input and management
costs, which translates into a benefit to consumers
through lower prices.

Social sustainability: In 2006, 54% of the increase
in farm income went to farmers in developing coun-
tries. It is mainly the farmer who substantially gains
from agricultural biotechnology. In Europe, as in
the rest of the world, two thirds of the benefits of
growing biotech crops are shared among European
farmers and consumers, while one third goes to the
developers and seed suppliers5.

Given the challenges of food security and sustainable
production, is it ethical for Europe to renounce agricul-
tural biotech as part of the solution?

(4)

Global Impact of Biotech Crops: Socio-Economic and Environmental Effects in the First Ten Years of Commercial Use by Graham Brookes and Peter
Barfoot PG Economics Ltd., Dorchester, UK published in AgBioForum AgBioForum Volume 9 // Number 3 // 2007. http://www.agbioforum.org/v9n3/
v9n3a02-brookes.htm

(5) Demont, M., Dillen, K., and Tollens, E. (2007) GM crops in Europe: How much value and for whom? EuroChoices 6, 46-53.

107

Ecologically,
economically and socially
sustainable agriculture:
the role of GMOs

Powerpoint Presentation

Ecologically, economically and
socially sustainable agriculture:
the role of GMOs

The European Group on Ethics (EGE) Roundtable
on the ethical aspects of
Modern Developments in Agriculture Technologies

Brussels, June 18th 2008

Nathalie Moll
EuropaBio – Executive Director, GBE

Context
agbiotech legislation in EU

Context:
-
- May: Communications from Commission & Parliament recognising “a” role for agbiotech

Since 2003 EU has most stringent regulatory framework in the world

in sustainable production

- May: Commissioners Orientation debate on GMO legislation and its applications
-
- WTO Panel ruling that EU is “not compliant” in terms of implementing its legislation

June: President Barroso calling for Heads of State “Sherpa” group to discuss on same

Issues faced in Europe around biotech approvals and products:

Member States “devolving” decision power to the Commission + backlog in approvals:

  Impacts of the misapplication of the legislation on:

•

“Equal access” or “justice within generations” between EU consumers/farmers and
rest of the world (RoW) as well as impact on access to EU market & uptake of
technologies in the rest of the world

• Vicious circle diminishing trust in regulatory framework & bodies e.g. EFSA/COM

Consideration of impacts inc. ethical imimpacts
What would be helpful: Consideration of impacts inc. ethical impacts
What would be helpful:pf

of existing & new EU regulations on the other world regions
of existing & new EU regulations on the other world regionsonsons

108

Consumer polls
show increased confidence

consider
si

Eurobarome

EU
EU Eurobarometer survey published on 13/03/2008 shows

mete
20% of Eururope
20% of Europeans are worried about GMOs (24% in 2004)
26% consider lack of information relating to use of GM in farming (40% in 2004)
26%
GMOs classified as Issue of great lack of information + medium level of concern
GMOs classias fie
58% of Eururop
58% of Europeans declare they are opposed to GM (down from 70% in 2004)
support u
por
21%
21% support use of GM
9% say theyey
9% say they have never heard of it

sup

han

Ranking 5 out of 15 main environmental issues consumers are most worried about:
Ranking 5 out ofof 15
1. Climate change (increased from 47% to 57%).
1. Climate change
2. Water pollution (down from 47% to 42%),
2. Water pollutiotion
3. Air pollution (down to 40% from 45%)
3. Air pollution (dow
………
¨ ……
¨ ……………………………..
7. GMOs
7. GMOs

………

National
survey
eys
National surveys confirm the trend
! Italy, Fly, Fly
! Italy, Feb 08: Survey shows 67% maize growers in Lombardy ready to grow GM
0808:
, F
, Feb
eb
! UK, Feb 088: UK
! UK, Feb 08: UK ESRC study finds farmers consider GM crops as an innovation that
wo
would contribute to the profitability of their farms.
08:08: UK
am
among consumers is down 5% to 20%

! UK, FUK, FUK eb
! UK, Feb 08: UK Food Standards Agency annual survey shows concerns of GMOs
, F
, Feb

Population & income
drive the demand

+13%+13%

+36%+36%

The growth in world
population over the last
population
10 years

The growth in global
income over the last 10
income
years

+21%+21%

The growth in meatmeat
consumption (Beef +14%, Pork
+11%, Chicken +45%) over the
last decade

+34%+34%

+52%+52%

+6%+6%

The growth in world
corncorn consumption over
the last decade

The growth in world
soybean consumption over
soybean
the last decade

The growth in world cropcrop
areaarea harvested over the
last decade

Source: USDA/Pioneer Market Economics

109

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Increase raw materials

There are only 2 ways to increase the
availability of agricultural raw materials:

1) Increase the amount of land cultivated
But:

• Best land is already in use
• Increased competition for remaining

land (marginal lands/forests)

2) Increase productivity of existing land

more sustainable

Productivity increase is the result of:

• Sound farming policy +
Improved technology
•
dissemination to the farm

Produce predictably
more and cheaper in a
sustainable way

  With SAME AMOUNT of land

  With LESS water

  With LESS CO2
  With LESS erosion

  With LESS nitrogen fertiliser

  With LESS spraying

  Increased management

flexibility/convenience

  With BETTER quality

  With HIGHER nutritional value

Important role for
Agricultural Biotechnology

Ecological Sustainability

Economical Sustainability

Social Sustainability

110

Reduced spraying

Use of agbiotech crops has allowed:

• Reduced spraying by 286 million kg
(-7.8% globally or - 40% of a.i. sprays
in EU)

• Lower use of herbicide active
ingredients (minus 25-33%) in
herbicide-resistant crops (canola,
cotton, maize, soybean) compared to
conventional crops

• Decrease in insecticide sprays in

insect-resistant Bt crops

Source: Global impact of biotech crops: socio-
economic and environmental effects 1996-2006
www.pgeconomics.co.uk

Reduced Greenhouse Gas
Emissions

Use of agbiotech crops has allowed:

Reduced use of fossil-based fuels:
-1.2 billion kg of CO2
+
Conservation tillage for biotech crops:
additional soil carbon sequestration
equivalent to
- 13.6 billion kg of CO2

=

Total reduction through the use of
biotech crops amounted to
-14.8 billion kg of CO2 or
removing 6.6 million cars from the
road for 1 year
(= 25% of the cars registered in the UK)

(Figures for 2006)

Source: Global impact of biotech crops:
socio-economic and environmental effects 1996-2006
www.pgeconomics.co.uk

111

Yield conservation

  Diseases and pests still reduce global production of food by > 35%
  Resistant biotech crops are helping to:

– reduce yield losses
– ensure stable food production by making harvests more predictable
– lower mycotoxin levels (health benefit)

Conventional
Corn from
infested area

Insect-resistant
Bt corn
from same area

Yield gains greatest in developing countries where losses would have been highest

Without access to agricultural biotechnology
an extra 6.85 million additional hectares in conventional agriculture would have been
required globally to deliver the same quantity of plant products

Source: Global impact of biotech crops:socio-economic and
environmental effects 1996-2006

Source pictures: Pioneer Hi-Bred

Farm income gains
1996-2006, million  

Canada
+  0.77 billion

United States
+  10.12 billion

Mexico
+  45.5 million

China
+  3.7 billion

India
+  0.83 billion

Brazil
+  1.22 billion
Paraguay
+  224 million

Argentina
+  4.23 billion

South Africa
+  100 million

Australia
+  118 million

Since 1996, biotech crops have increased farm income  21.6 billion

2006 farm income +  4.5 billion

Source: Global impact of biotech crops :socio-economic and environmental
effects 1996-2006 www.pgeconomics.co.uk

112

Breakdown of farm income
gains in 2006 by country type

in 2006, 54% of farm income gain was to farmers in developing countries

* Some crops such as canola are not
cultivated in developing countries

Source: Global impact of biotech crops :socio-
economic and environmental effects 1996-2006
www.pgeconomics.co.uk

*

Rapid Global Biotech Adoption

Industrial and Developing Countries

2007 Milestones
  114.3 million hectares of
biotech crops globally

  + 12.3 million hectares

(12%) in 2007

  23 countries

(12 dev + 11 industrialised)

  12 million farmers

  11 million (90%) are small
farmers from developing
countries

  > 10.3 million farmers

planted biotech crops for the
first time

More Farmers in Developing World Are Benefiting from Biotechnology

Source: ISAAA report 2007

113

Conclusions

Sustainability consists of 3 equally important pillars:

1. Ecological sustainability

2. Economical sustainability

3. Social sustainability

Agricultural Biotechnology contributes
to all 3 factors

Given the challenges of food security and
sustainable production, is it ethical for
Europe to renounce agricultural biotech
as part of the solution?

TThhaannkk yyoouu!!

More info on http://www.europabio.org

Nathalie Moll
Executive Director, Green Biotechnology Europe
EuropaBio

114

Annex I

Participants

Ethics of modern developments in
agriculture technologies

115

Members of the European Group
on Ethics (EGE)

Göran HERMERÉN,
President
Philosopher, Professor of
Medical Ethics
Faculty of Medicine, Lund University
Lund, Sweden

Paula MARTINHO DA SILVA
Vice-President
Lawyer, President of the National
Council of Ethics for the Science of Life
Lisbon, Portugal

Emmanuel AGIUS
Professor of Moral Philosophy and Moral
Theology, Faculty of Theology
University of Malta
Malta

Diana BÁNÁTI
Professor of Food Safety,
Director-General of the Central Food
Research Institute
Budapest, Hungary

Inez de BEAUFORT
Professor of Health Care Ethics
Erasmus Medical Centre
Dept of Medical Ethics
Rotterdam, the Netherlands

Anne CAMBON-THOMSEN
Research Director, CNRS, Head of a
research team on genetics and public
health, Inserm U558
Faculté de Médecine
Institut Fédératif de Recherche 126:
«Santé, Société»
Toulouse, France

Rafael CAPURRO
Professor of Information Management
and Information Ethics at Fachhoch-
schule
Stuttgart, Hochschule der Medien
University of Media
Stuttgart, Germany

Jozef GLASA
Professor of Clinical Pharmacology
and Therapeutics, Hepatology and
Medical Ethics/Bioethics at the Slovak
Medical University in Bratislava
Institute of Medical Ethics
and Bioethics
Institute of Clinical Pharmacology
Central Ethics Committee Ministry
of Health
Bratislava, Slovakia

Hille HAKER
Professor of Moral Theology and
Social Ethics, Goethe University
Johann Wolfgang Goethe Universität
FB Kath Theologie
Frankfurt, Germany

Julian KINDERLERER
Professor, Sheffield Institute
of Biotechnological Law
and Ethics
Law Dept, University of Sheffield
Sheffield, United Kingdom

Wilhelm GRUISSEM
ETH Zürich, EPSO
Switzerland

Karsten Klint JENSEN
Life Sciences Dept.,
University of Copenhagen
Denmark

Erik MILLSTONE
Professor of Science and Technology
Policy, University of Sussex
United Kingdom

Krzysztof MARCZEWSKI
Professor, Head of Dept of Medical
Ethics, Zamość Hospital
Medical University of Lublin
Lublin, Poland

Nathalie MOLL
Executive Director
Green Biotechnology Europe,
EuropaBio
Belgium

Linda NIELSEN
Professor, University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark

Pere PUIGDOMÈNECH ROSELL
Research Professor of CSIC
Director of Plant Molecular Genetics
Laboratory
CSIC-IRIA
Barcelona, Spain

Rajeswari RAINA
Senior research fellow
Centre for Policy Research, New Delhi
India

Christoph THEN
Consultant for Greenpeace
Belgium

Günter VIRT
Professor of Moral Theology
University of Vienna
Vienna, Austria

European Commission

DG BEPA — Bureau of European
Policy Advisers

Graça CARVALHO
Principal Adviser
DG BEPA

Paola COLOMBO
Head of coordination unit
DG BEPA

Pierre-Etienne MALLET
DG BEPA

Elena SARACENO
DG BEPA

DG JRC — Joint Research Centre

Elena STROE
Research Programme Officer
Unit A.1 — Work programme EC

Sigrid WEILAND
Research Programme Officer
Unit A.1 — Work programme EC

Secretariat of the EGE

Maurizio SALVI
DG BEPA
Head of the EGE Secretariat

Alessandra FERRARI
BEPA, EGE Secretariat

Franziska FEITEN
DG BEPA, EGE Secretariat

Mariana GONÇALVES
DG BEPA, EGE Secretariat

Speakers

Eric DRÉSIN
Food and Water Watch Europe
Belgium

Günther EBERZ
Bayer CropScience
Germany

116

DG MARKT — Internal Market and
services

Jean-Philippe MULLER
Policy Officer
Unit D.2 — Industrial property

DG RTD — Research

Peteris ZILGALVIS
Head of Unit
Unit L.3 — Governance and ethics

Lino PAULA
Policy Officer
Unit L.3 — Governance and ethics

DG SANCO — Health and Consumers

Rui CAVALEIRO AZEVEDO
Deputy Head of Unit
Unit E.4 — Food law,
nutrition and labelling

Päivi MANNERKORPI
Policy Officer
Unit E.1 — Biotechnology and
plant health

DG TAXUD — Taxation and
Customs Union

Maria GOUVEIA
Unit D.2 — Excise duties and trans-
port, environment and energy taxes

EESC — European Economic and
Social Committee

Gaia ANGELINI
Belgium

NECS

Cinzia CAPORALE
Professor
Comitato Nazionale per la Bioetica
Italy

Ariadne Loukia HAGER-THEODORIDES
Hellenic National Bioethics Commission
Greece

Harald SCHMIDT
Assistant Director
Nuffield Council on Bioethics
United Kingdom

Doris WOLFSLEHNER
Head of the Secretariat of the Austrian
Bioethics Commission; Deputy Head
of the EU Coordination Unit for Agri-
culture, Environment Policy, Transport
and Health
Federal Chancellery
Austria

EPSO — European Plant Science
Organisation
Belgium

Anne-Marie NEETSON VAN
NIEUWENHOVEN
EFFAB — European Forum of Farm
Animal Breeders
The Netherlands

Sabine OHM
European Policy Officer
PROHVIEH — VgtM e.V.
Belgium

Ana PEREZ MENDEZ
Policy Officer
COFACE — Confederation of Family
Organisations in the EU
Belgium

Aleksandra SCHINDLER
World Young Alliance
Belgium

Hans Peter SCHONS
ADT — German Animal Breeders
Federation
Germany

Birgit SCHULZE
Deutscher Bauernverband e.V. — Büro
Brüssel
Belgium

Laura STREET
Food Policy Officer
EURO COOP
Belgium

Nico VAN BELZEN
Executive Director
ILSI Europe AISBL
Belgium

Guido VAN STEENDAM
Professor
International Forum for Biophilosophy
Belgium

Garlich VON ESSEN
General Secretary
ESA — European Seed Association
Belgium

Marlene WARTENBERG
Director of European Policy
VIER PFOTEN — Stiftung für Tierschutz
Belgium

International Organisations,
NGOs, Agencies and Associations

Gerard CHOPLIN
Coordinator
CPE — European Farmers Coordination
Belgium

Marco CONTIERO
GMO Policy Adviser
Greenpeace European Unit
Belgium

Alexander DORING
Secretary General
FEFAC — European Feed Manufacturers
Federation
Belgium

Joyce D’SILVA
Ambassador
Compassion in World Farming
United Kingdom

James EDE
Assistant Director
UK National Farmers Union
Belgium

Roxane FELLER
Senior Policy Adviser
COPA-COGECA
Belgium

Hazel GOEDHART
FairFood
The Netherlands

Thorsten GUTHKE
Regulatory Manager
FEFANA — EU Feed Additives and
Premixtures Association
Belgium

Euros JONES
Director, Regulatory Affairs
ECAP — European Crop Protection
Association
Belgium

Karin METZLAFF
Executive Director

117

National and regional Instances

Dirk BERGEN
Senior Policy Adviser
Flemish Government — Department of Agriculture and
Fisheries
Belgium

Lucette FLANDROY
Federal Public Service Health, Food Chain Safety and Envi-
ronment
Belgium

Wim HAENTJENS
Policy Officer
Flemish Government — Department of Agriculture and
Fisheries
Belgium

Johanna HOELZL
Head of Office
Liaison Office Of Upper Austria
Belgium

Ingrid RIYDBERG
Federation of Swedish Farmers
Sweden

Madeleine MARTIN
Representation of the Land of Hessen at the EU
Belgium

Karel MATOUSER
Representative
Agrarian Chamber CZ
Belgium

Jussi TAMMISOLA
Assoc. Professor; Senior Research Officer
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry; University of Helsinki
Finland

John Barrie WILLIAMS
Senior Agriculture Specialist
USDA / FAS (U.S. Mission to the EU) — U.S. Department of
Agriculture / Foreign Agricultural Service
Belgium

George Macy MERRIMAN
Manager, Government and Public Affairs
Pioneer Overseas Corporation
Belgium

Pete RILEY
Director
GM FREEZE
United Kingdom

Representatives of Religion

Ignace BERTEN
Director
Espaces — Spiritualités, Cultures et Société en Europe
Belgium

Katrin HATZINGER
Head of Office
Büro Brüssel des Bevollmächtigten des Rates der EKD
Belgium

Ross MATTHEW
Executive Secretary
Conference of European Churches
Belgium

Katharina SCHAUER
COMECE — Commission Bishops’ Conference of the
European Community
Belgium

Karin ULMER
Policy Officer (Trade and Gender)
APRODEV — Association of World Council of Churches
related Development Organisations in Europe
Belgium

Academia

Stefan AERTS
Boerenbond Chair ‘Agriculture and Society’, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven
Belgium

Representatives of Industry

Ana Maria BRAVO-ANGEL
Genencor
Belgium

Filip CNUDDE
EuropaBio
Belgium

Paul LEONARD
BASF SE
Belgium

Klaus AMMANN
Prof. Dr.
Delft University of Technology
The Netherlands

Eleonora SIRSI
Professor
Universita di Pisa
Italy

Media / Press / Consultancies

Outi ALAPEKKALA, EurActiv.com
Belgium

118

(updated 18/06/2008*)

* In accordance with Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2000 on the protec-
tion of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data
by the Community institutions and bodies and on the free move-
ment of such data, this data will be used only for the purpose of
mailing EGE publications and will be strictly managed by the EGE
Secretariat. The storing of the data expires at each EGE mandate,
or is renewed within the updating of the database. You have the
right of access to, and the right to rectify, your data by contacting
the EGE Secretariat via email (bepa_ethics_group@ec.europa.eu).

119

Annex II

Secretariat
of the European Group
On Ethics (EGE)

Ethics of modern developments in
agriculture technologies

121

Secretariat of the European
Group On Ethics

Dr Maurizio Salvi
Head of the EGE Secretariat

Tel. 32 (0) 2 299 11 79
Fax 32 (0) 2 299 45 65
E-mail: maurizio.salvi@ec.europa.eu

Dr Alessandra Ferrari

Tel. 32 (0) 2 295 43 29
Fax 32 (0) 2 299 45 65
E-mail: alessandra.ferrari@ec.europa.eu

Mrs Franziska Feiten

Tel. 32 (0) 2 296 19 48
Fax 32 (0) 2 299 45 65

Mrs Mariana Gonçalves

Tel. 32 (0) 2 297 26 28
Fax 32 (0) 2 299 45 65

122

Mail address

European Commission

Secretariat of the European Group
on Ethics in Science
and New Technologies

Berlaymont Building, Rue de la Loi 200
BERL 8/143
B-1049 Brussels
Belgium

Office

European Commission
Berlaymont Building, Rue de la Loi 200
B-1049 Brussels
Belgium

Website

http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm

123

European Commission

Ethics of modern developments in agriculture technologies –
Proceedings of the round-table debate

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities

2008 — 123 pp. — 21 x 29.7 cm

ISBN 978-92-79-09414-9

DOI 10.2796/11315

How to obtain EU publications

Our priced publications are available from EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu),
where you can place an order with the sales agent of your choice.

The Publications Ofﬁce has a worldwide network of sales agents. You can obtain their
contact details by sending a fax to (352) 29 29-42758.

K
A

-
8
1
-
0
8
-
3
2
6
-
E
N

-
C

