K
A
-
A
I
-
0
8
-
0
0
9
-
E
N
-
C

The European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies
to the European Commission

A Newsletter providing information
on the activities of the National Ethics Committees
compiled by the Secretariat of the European Group 
on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 
to the European Commission

ISSN 1725-5562

EUROPEAN
COMMISSION

issue

9

Janvier 2008

COVER.indd   1

7/25/07   9:32:06 AM

 
The European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies 
to the European Commission 

Ethically Speaking 

Issue No 9 
January 2008 

Chief Editor 
Maurizio SALVI 

EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

 
 
 
Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers 
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11 

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers or these calls 

may be billed.

More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu). 

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication. 

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, 2007 
ISSN 1725-5562 

© European Communities, 2007 
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. 

Printed in Belgium 

PRINTED ON WHITE CHLORINE-FREE PAPER

CONTENTS 

(cid:1)

Editorial 

Göran Hermerén, President of the EGE,  

Ethically Speaking .................................................................................................................................3 

Contributions from Members of the EGE 

Anne Cambon-Thomsen, Directrice de recherche au CNRS 
Inserm et Université Toulouse III, U 558  ......................................................................................

.7 

National and Regional Ethics Committees 

Austria: Austrian Bioethics Comm

Belgium: Belgian Advisory Comm

Canada – Québec: Commission de l'éthique de la science et de la technologie – CEST – 

ittee on Bioethics .........................................................................15 

ission ............................................................................................11 

                               National Council on Ethics in Human Research ..................................................19 

Denmark: Danish Council of Ethics & Danish Ethical Council for Animals .....................................21 

Estonia: Estonian Council on Bioethics ..............................................................................................25 
France: National Consultative Ethics Commit

tee for Health and Life Science ..................................27 

Germany: German National Ethics Council ........................................................................................31 

Greece: Greek National Bioethics Committee ....................................................................................35 

Ireland:  Irish Council for Bioethics ....................................................................................................37 

United Kingdom: Nuffield Council on Bioethics................................................................................39 

European Commission 

DG Bureau of European Policy Advisers – BEPA .............................................................................43 

DG Research – RTD.L.3 - Governance and Ethics Unit ....................................................................43 

International Ethics Committees 

Task Force on Ethics and Law of the European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology 

(ESHRE) ..............................................................................................................................................51 

World Health Organization (WHO) ....................................................................................................55 

1

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(cid:1)

PH_711807_CEE

 
(cid:1)

Editorial 

As  readers  of  this  Newsletter  no  doubt  will  know,  the joint  meetings  with  the  EGE  and the 
NEC Forum take place once each term in the country holding the presidency of the European 
Union.  
The  so  far  latest  –  very  successful  and  well  organized  –  meeting  took  place  in  Lisbon  in 
October,  and  it  will  be  described  elsewhere in  this  Newsletter.  It  seems  that  these  meetings 
now  have  found  an  ideal  form.  There  is  a  joint  EGE-NEC  Forum  meeting,  with  a  common 
dinner, and in addition the EGE and the NEC Forum hold internal, separate meetings before 
and after this joint meeting. 

There  are  well-known  historical,  political  and  religious  differences  between  European 
countries,  reflected  in  legislation  and  in  views  on  what  is  ethically  acceptable.  These 
differences are the subject of an on-going debate within and between member states. During 
the meeting in Lisbon an important issue was discussed, which I believe will continue to be 
discussed for some time, given on the one hand the subsidiarity principle and on the other the 
need to cooperate, promote exchange of knowledge and learn from each other.  

In describing bioethics in Europe against that background, one may focus on local traditions, 
such as Scandinavian or Latin bioethics.  
Instead, using basic European declarations and conventions as a starting point, one may also 
investigate  if  there  are  any  common  values  in  Europe,  which  are  recognized,  promoted  and 
practiced  in  the  member  states,  from  North  to  South,  from  East  to  West.  There  is  clearly  a 
need for more basic research into European traditions in bioethics. Finally, given a list of such 
European values, one may also ask whether they are specific to Europe or whether they also 
are promoted and practiced in other parts of the world. 

At  this  point,  it  is  necessary  to  warn  against  a  doctrine  that  has  been  called  “semantic 
naivism”. The basic theses of this doctrine are (a) that when somebody uses a particular term, 
such as ‘solidarity’ or ‘autonomy’, they are always clear about the meaning of this term, (b) 
when such a term is used in a particular document in different places or contexts, it is always 
used in the same sense, and (c) when two persons or documents use the same term, the term is 
always used in the same sense. 

Thus, a list of words referring to different values can be interpreted in many ways. Suppose a 
list  of  European  values  could  be  identified,  including  for  instance  human  dignity,  integrity, 
freedom,  autonomy,  health,  safety  and  security,  justice,  prosperity,  equity  and  equality,  and 
solidarity.  Even  so,  it  is  far  from  certain  that  these  terms  are  interpreted  and  applied  in  the 
same way. In other words, proponents of different ethical standards may appear to agree, but 
on a closer analysis of how their key terms are used, it will be apparent that they do not. Also 
the opposite is possible. Two parties may appear to disagree but on closer analysis this turns 
out not to be the case. 

At the joint meeting of the EGE and the NEC Forum an important debate started that raised 
issues about similarities and differences between various local traditions in bioethics and the 

3

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possibility to identify and characterize a European approach to bioethics. Should we focus on 
the differences and the local traditions? How local should we then be? As to what is ethically 
acceptable,  there  are  differences  between  Spain  and  Italy  as  well  as  between  Norway  and 
Denmark. Or would we focus on what we may have in common as to basic European values? 
If so, what would these common values be? Or should we go a step even further and examine 
the similarities and differences between the starting points and conclusions of ethical debates 
in different parts of the world? 

What  speaks  against  the  local  approaches  and  for  the  latter  is  not  only  that  there  are 
differences also within countries and regions as to what is ethically acceptable, but obviously 
also that the globalization process – whether we like it or not – makes a dialogue on ethical 
and  regulatory  issues  necessary,  not  only  within  Europe  but  also  between  Europe,  America 
and Asia as well as Africa, including the developing countries.  

EU will need to establish a dialogue with US and Asia, for instance, concerning patentability 
of  biotechnological  inventions,  on  GMOs  in  food  production,  on  medical  and  non-medical 
applications  of  information  technologies  and  similar  areas.  European  declarations  and 
conventions  can  serve  as  a  basis  for  dialogue,  along  with  the  UN  Millennium  goals  and 
declarations from the UNESCO.  

At the same time, such dialogues raise enormous difficulties, and they have  to be seen as a 
long  range  project  where  progress  may  be  slow.  Anyway,  progress  will  require  time  and 
concerted  efforts,  as  well  as  trust  and  good  will  by  everybody  involved.  In  fact,  such  inter-
continental dialogues have already started, and will have to be reflected later also in coming 
issues of this Newsletter. 

Göran Hermerén 
President, 
European Group on Ethics in Science 
 and New Technologies 

Further information 

Dr Maurizio Salvi 
Head of the EGE Secretariat   
Editor, Ethically Speaking 

Alessandra Ferrari, Assistant   

Joëlle Bezzan   
Editorial Assistant 

EGE Secretariat 
Tel: +32(0)2 296.19.48 
Fax: +32 (0)2.299.45.65 
Email: bepa-ethics-group@ec.europa.eu 
European Commission 

Office: BERL 8/143, B-1049 Brussels 

Website: http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm 

4

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PH_711807_CEE

 
(cid:1) The  French  parliamentary  office  for  the  evaluation  of  scientific  and  technological 
choices has started the consultations and debates in view of the evaluation report on the 
bioethics law of August 6, 2004 as a preparatory step for the revision of this law, due in 
2009. A public hearing was held in Paris the 29th of November 2007: 
 http://www.senat.fr/opecst/audition_publique/programme_bioethique_2007.pdf 

(cid:1) A workshop is organised  on  “Translational medicine and public health policy: lessons 
from  biobanks  Ethical,  Legal,  Social  Issues  (ELSI)”  on  December  5-7,  2007  at  the 
Brocher Foundation ( http://www.brocher.ch/) in Switzerland,(by the Lake of Geneva. 

The organisors are Anne Cambon-Thomsen (Toulouse), Jennifer Harris (Oslo) and Bartka 
Maria Knoppers (Montreal). A number of young investigators (typically advanced PhD 
students and  Post-doctoral 
the  various  relevant  disciplines 
(epidemiology,  genetics  and  genomics,  bioinformatics,  social  sciences,  law  and 
humanities) will have the possibility to present their work and discuss with the senior 
lecturers. 

fellows), 

from 

This  workshop  builds  on  the  consensus  that  combining  knowledge  and  methodologies 
from  genomics  with  data  from  population  biobanks  is  critical  to  elucidate  the  causes  of 
common complex diseases. The approach is based on the assumption that experience from 
population  biobanking  initiatives  prospectively  can  inform  the  creation  of  large  tissue 
collections for various diseases; and conversely, research findings documenting different 
impacts  of  psychosocial  and  societal  factors  for  specific  diseases  will  bring  valuable 
information  to  bear  on  the  ELSI  issues  in  population  biobanks.  This  bi-directional 
approach is illustrated in this workshop through the examination of common diseases in 
three areas of medicine: cancer, dementia, and immune disorders. This work will help to 
frame  common  and  specific  socio-ethical,  and  legal  issues  (ELSI)  relevant  to  complex 
disorders. This event is linked to several international activities and networks in the field 
of Population Health Genomics and Biobanks. 

The audience will include 40 - 50 people, representing clinical and research expertise and 
young  scholars  in  the  fields  of  ELSI,  population  biobanking,  epidemiology  and   the 
genomics  of  cancer,  Alzheimer’s  and  immune  diseases.  Geographical  coverage  will 
include  participants  from  several  continents.  The  workshop  is  planned  for  2  days: 
December  6  -7,  with  participants  arriving  the  day  before  in  the  afternoon/evening. 

7

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
Interactions between junior and more senior participants are essential. The programme is 
indicated below. 

The final programme is available on: http://www.brocher.ch/archives6/schedule_en.htm. 

Anne Cambon-Thomsen          
GenPoS Coordinator         
P3G/PHOEBE member          

Jennifer Harris              
PHOEBE Coordinator           P3G Chair 
 P3G member                        GenPoS/PHOEBE member 

Bartha Maria Knoppers 

Further Information 

Dr Anne Cambon-Thomsen, Directrice de recherche au CNRS 
UMR Inserm, Université Paul Sabatier - Toulouse III, U 558  
Epidémiologie et analyses en santé publique : risques, maladies chroniques et handicaps 
Département d'épidémiologie et de santé publique -Faculté de médecine. 

Address 
37 allées Jules Guesde 
F-31073 Toulouse Cedex 
Tel : +33 (0)5 61 14 59 59 (secrétariat U558 : 59 63) - Portable : +33 6 79 41 13 48 
Fax : +33 (0)5 61 14 56 23 
E-mail : cambon@cict.fr 

Equipe : "Génomique et santé publique : approche interdisciplinaire" www.u558.toulouse.inserm.fr 
« Plateforme Génétique et Société », Toulouse Midi-Pyrénées Genopole® http://genopole-
toulouse.prd.fr/  

8

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PH_711807_CEE

 
 
The Austrian Bioethics Commission 

 Legal basis 

 Acting  on  instructions  issued  by  the  Federal  Chancellor  on  29  June  2001,  the  Austrian  Bioethics 
Commission first convened on 2 July 2001. Consisting of up to 25 experts representing the fields of 
medicine,  genetics,  sociology,  law,  philosophy  and  theology,  the  Commission  provides  a  forum  for 
interdisciplinary discourse on human medicine and human biology. . Its members are appointed by the 
Federal  Chancellor  for  a  period  of  two  years.  Meetings  are  convened  monthly  between  October  and 
July in Vienna. 

The Austrian Bioethics Commission is an independent, self-organising body. It puts great emphasis on 
publicising its work in order to stimulate public discussion on ethical questions, and cooperates with 
comparable institutions in the European Union and international bodies in the field of Bioethics. 

The Secretariat of the Austrian Bioethics Commission is at the Austrian Federal Chancellery. 

Opinions, recommendation and reports 

Between 2001 and 2006 the Austrian Bioethics Commission worked on issues such as preimplantation 
genetic diagnosis,  reproductive  medicine, reproductive  cloning,  stem cell  research,  and protection of 
biotechnological inventions. It has recommended the ratification of the Oviedo Convention. 

Recent Opinions 

Nanotechnology, a Catalogue of Ethical Problems and Recommendations (13 June 2007) 

The  ruling  contains  a  definition  of  nanotechnology  and  the  challenges  arising  from  the  fact  that 
particles  on  the  nanoscale  can  have  different  characteristics  to  larger  particles  of  the  same  material. 
The ethical challenge arises from the rare opportunity that, as nanotechnology is in an early stage of 
development,  the  results  of  ethical  reflection  on  the  subject  can  help  to  shape  developments  in  the 
field.  

The  ethical  discourse  is  based  on  issues  concerning  protection  of  the  individual  (drug  delivery 
systems),  distributive  justice  (the  nano-divide),  privacy  protection  (lab-on-a-chip  systems),  the 
discrepancy between diagnostic knowledge and  therapeutic ability, and human  self-perception (body 
and neuro enhancement). 

11

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As nanotechnology is a new technology which does not raise any fundamentally new ethical questions 
requiring more than an appraisal of the technology’s consequences, the Bioethics Commission sees no 
need  for  a  specific  legal  framework.  It  does,  however  recommend  stepping  up  risk  assessment  and 
accompanying  research,  including  research  on  ethical  issues,  within  the  scope  of  publicly  funded 
research policy. 

Biobanks for Medical Research (9 May 2007) 

The  opinion  on  Biobanks  for  Medical  Research  contains  a  definition  of  biobanks,  discusses  the 
problems  involved  in  terms  of  donor’s  rights,  gives  an  overview  of  large-scale  biobank  projects  in 
Iceland,  Estonia  and  the  UK  and  discusses  the  constitutional  and  legal  aspects  involved.  It  also 
describes the cultural aspects of a country’s attitude towards biobanking. 

While  the  Bioethics  Commission  recognises  the  importance  of  samples  and  collections  of  data  for 
medical research, it highlights the ethical and legal questions involved. On the one hand, there is the 
individual’s right to self-determination as an expression of human dignity. On the other, society has a 
duty to further scientific knowledge by means of scientific research. These conflicting demands must 
be weighed against each other and brought into an appropriate balance. 

Thus the Bioethics Commission elaborates on the concept of informed consent for obtaining and using 
the  sample,  and  on  data  protection.  The  opinion  gives  clear  guidelines  on  withdrawing  consent  and 
discusses  such  questions  as  samples  from  donors  incapable  of  giving  consent  and  from  deceased 
donors. 

Arguments concerning the Debate “The Child as a case of damage” (18 April 2007) 

Majority ruling: 

The  majority  ruling  of  the  Austrian  Bioethics  Committee  is based  on  the  public  debate  surrounding 
Supreme Court rulings. In two recent court cases, damages had been awarded for the birth of a child 
with a disability due to the doctor’s alleged failure to provide sufficient information. In the case of an 
unwanted healthy child born as a result of inefficient sterilisation, the claim had been rejected. 

The Bioethics Commission took up the issue, feeling that these Supreme Court rulings had created a 
discriminatory valuation of children with and without disability. 

The majority ruling discusses whether the issue should be dealt under the law of damages, underlining 
that the informed consent discussion needs to be seen as a process, and highlighting the fact that it is 
extremely  difficult  to  standardise  the  requirements  on  the  information  which  must  be  provided  to  a 
patient.  Thus  the  Bioethics  Commission  describes  the  ethically  problematic  tendency  towards 
defensive medicine. 

Dissenting Opinion: 

The dissenting opinion disagrees with the wording of the heading “the child as a case of damage”. It 
argues that the question at issue is whether a wrongful birth as a consequence of medical malpractice 
can  result  in  an  obligation  to  provide  compensation  for  maintenance  costs.  It  is  not  a  question  of 
whether the child itself is a “case of damage”. 

12

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The dissenting opinion argues that the rulings of the Supreme Court have clearly not been consistent. 
This  divergence  is  unsatisfactory  from  an  ethical  perspective  because  it  frustrates  legitimate 
expectations of predictable and consistent court rulings. 

Further Information 

Dr. Doris Wolfslehner 
Head of the Secretariat of the 
Austrian Bioethics Commission 

Federal Chancellery 
Ballhausplatz 2  
A-1010 Wien 

Tel.: ++43/1/53115-2987 
Fax: ++43/1/53209-2987 

mailto:doris.wolfslehner@bka.gv.at 
www.bundeskanzleramt.at/bioethik/ 
www.bundeskanzleramt.at/bioethics 

13

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PH_711807_CEE

 
 
OPINION NO 42  of 16 April 2007 concerning umbilical cord blood banks 

In its Opinion No 42 of 16 April 2007 concerning umbilical cord blood banks, the committee 
decided to focus on the specific questions arising from: 

-

-

on  the  one  hand,  the  setting  up  of  essentially  private  blood  banks  for  autologous  (i.e. 
destined  for  the  same  person)  umbilical  cord  blood  with  a  possible  deferred  personal 
therapeutic purpose;   
on  the  other  hand,  the  development  and  support  of  public  banks  aimed  at  storing  the 
umbilical cord blood of as many people as possible for allogeneic use (i.e. blood destined 
for other people) with a joint and several (altruistic) therapeutic purpose. 

In  the  present  opinion,  the  committee  has  simultaneously  reviewed  the  recent  scientific 
literature  and  consulted  experts  in  order  to  provide  clear  answers  to  a  series  of  clinical, 
technical and scientific questions (chapter 1). Indeed, the deferred use of stem cells of stored 
umbilical cord blood may serve two purposes, a therapeutic and a research purpose, and two 
uses,  autologous  or  allogeneic.  It  is  quite  clear  that  there  are  as  yet  no  pertinent  scientific 
data on whether autologous use offers a significant advantage over allogeneic use, with the 
possible exception of autologous use in the context of a family at high risk of diseases, certain 
members of which might benefit from a later transplantation of stem cells of umbilical cord 
blood.  

In chapter II, the committee has analysed all the texts addressing this problem from a legal 
perspective  at  the  national  and  European  level.  This  analysis  reveals  once  again  the  current 
gap  between  legal  text  and  scientific  reality,  bearing  in  mind  the  continuous  evolution  of 
research  and  the  sometimes  imprecise  and  often  misunderstood  and/or  deliberately 
manipulated techno-scientific semantics. 

Bearing in mind the latest scientific facts, the committee goes on to look at the ethical aspects 
concerning allogeneic or autologous use of umbilical cord blood, as well as the arguments in 
favour of or against the development of private commercial banks (chapter III). In the light 
of  these  arguments,  an  analysis  of  the  ethical,  logistical  and  legal  implications  of  the 
collection of umbilical cord blood is elaborated in chapter IV. 

In conclusion, the committee issues a series of recommendations (chapter V) summarised as 
follows: 

1. Urgent  need  for  a  coherent  legislative  framework  taking  into  account  the  status  of 

umbilical cord blood. 

2. On  the  conceptual  level,  the  legislator  could  draw  inspiration  from  the  well-
established model for the donation and pre-donation of blood for transfusion in order 

15

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to regulate the use of umbilical cord blood. 

3.

In  the  absence  of  any  current  persuasive  scientific  grounds  for  setting  up  umbilical 
cord blood banks for autologous use for low-risk families, the committee recommends 
that  the  authorities  only  offer  their  support  for  the  establishment  and  operation  of 
banks for allogeneic use that are accessible to everyone, and banks for autologous use 
for at-risk families. 

4. Should  the  principle  of  banning  private  commercial  banks  not  be  adopted,  all 
members  of  the  committee  recommend  nevertheless  that  the  collection  of  umbilical 
cord blood should meet the applicable safety standards at all times and the impact of 
this  type  of  collection  in logistical  and  financial  terms  on  the  obstetrics  departments 
where these births take place should be considered. 

5. First  and  foremost  the  government  is  advised  to  offer  people  comprehensive 
information concerning the collection of umbilical cord blood and the various possible 
intended uses thereof, highlighting the very low probability of low-risk families ever 
having  to  use  their  own  stored  umbilical  cord  blood.  Accurate  and  comprehensive 
information is also required regarding the cost for patients. 

6. The use of the term “biologic insurance” by a private firm – which directly advertises 
its  services  to  a  pregnant  woman,  offering  to  store  her  umbilical  cord  blood  in 
exchange  for  payment  –  is  misplaced  since  the  probability  of  using  the  autologous 
umbilical cord blood in a family at low risk of haematological diseases is practically 
nil.  It is therefore pointless and indefensible to put the blame on future parents who 
might refuse – or cannot afford – such “biologic insurance”.  
The  committee  therefore  recommends  that  the  content  of  this  kind  of  advertising  be 

strictly controlled by the competent authorities.  

7. Every hospital and every obstetrics department should clearly work out its own policy 
concerning  requests  by  a  private  commercial  firm  for  collection  and  storage  of 
umbilical  cord  blood,  from  both  a  financial  and  logistical  point  of  view,  bearing  in 
mind that the clinical and logistical conditions may be subject to change (emergency 
situation, opening hours, overworked staff, etc.). 
Given  that  certain  patients  may  have  entered  into  financial  and  contractual 
commitments  with  commercial  firms  before  even  speaking  about  it  to  their 
obstetrician,  the  policy  of  the  institution  where  the  delivery  takes  place  should  be 
explained to the patients and their partners beforehand and in good time.   

8. The legal character of the relationships between all parties involved in the collection 
of  umbilical  cord  blood  during  delivery  (bank,  patient,  doctor  collecting  the  blood, 
obstetrician) should be specified. 
The collection of umbilical cord blood may not be invoked as a reason for absolving 
the obstetrician, even temporarily or partially, from his/her professional responsibility. 
This  is  the  case  when  the  doctor  collecting  the  umbilical  cord  blood  works 
independently of the bank or acts as a temporary contractual representative of it. The 
same applies when the prior consent of the patient has been obtained by a bank in the 
context of a previous contract. 

16

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. Allowing  a  private  profit-making  firm  which  has  contractually  become  the  owner  of 
umbilical cord blood samples to sell them on for therapeutic use in the event of non-
payment  could  lead  to  conflicts  of  interest  between  the  firm  and  the  potential 
“recipient/buyer”. The latter might request clinical data on the donor, with all the risks 
this  entails  as  regards  respect  for  confidentiality  and  privacy  of  the  donor  or  her 
family. Confidentiality and privacy must also be guaranteed by public banks. 

The  committee  therefore  recommends  that  the  competent  authorities  lay  down  clear 
requirements in this respect. 

PUBLICATIONS OF THE BELGIAN ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON BIOETHICS 

During its third term of office, the Belgian advisory committee on bioethics issued the 
following opinions: 

Opinion No 33 of 7 November 2005
modifications with curative and/or enhancing purpose 

concerning the somatic or germinal gene 

OPINION NO 34 OF 13 MARCH 2006
TRANSSEXUALISM DEPOSITED BY MRS. HILDE VAUTMANS, VALÉRIE DÉOM, MARIE-
CHRISTINE MARGHEM AND MR. GUY SWENNEN 

ON A LEGISLATIVE PROPOSAL CONCERNING 

Opinion No 35 of 13 March 2006 on therapeutic exception 

Opinion No 36 of 11 September 2006 on the ethical evaluation of research in certain 
branches of human sciences  

Opinion No 37 of 13 November 2006 on the use of DNA tests in determining parentage 

Opinion No 38 of 8 to 13 November 2006 on genetic tests aimed at establishing parentage 
after death 

Opinion No 39 of 18 December 2006 on hormonal treatment of sexual offenders 

Opinion No 40 of 12 February 2007 on the field of application of the law of 7 May 2004 
on experiments on humans 

Opinion No 41 of 16 April 2007 on informed consent and “D.N.R.” Codes 

Opinion No 42 of 16 April 2007 on umbilical cord blood banks 

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

These opinions are available on the internet site in French and Dutch. 

Opinions 30-31-33-34-35-41-42 can be requested in English at  
Bioeth-info@health.fgov.be 

17

PH_711807_CEE

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Further information can be obtained from: 

Monique Bosson  

Tel.: + 32 2 525.09.07 
Fax: + 32.2 525.09.12 
Email: monique.bosson@health.fgov.be 

Website: www.health.fgov.be/bioeth 

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLICATIONS AND EVENTS 

SECOND ASSEMBLY OF THE YOUTH COMMISSION 

 The  second  assembly  of  the  Youth  Commission  took  place  in  April  2007,  with 
“Neuromarketing,  advertising,  and  youth”  as  its  theme.  The  resulting  position  statement, 
entitled  “Neuromarketing  and  Advertising,”  will  be  presented  on  3  November  2007  at  the 
Science and Society Forum to be held at Cégep de Limoilou in Québec City. 

After  defining  neuromarketing,  students  discussed  the  concerns  it  raises  and  the  values  that 
are at issue. They made four recommendations: 

1. That Québec granting agencies put in place a multidisciplinary research programme in 
order to better understand neuromarketing and, specifically, how it affects behaviour; 

2. That  the  Government  of  Québec  create  or  mandate  a  body  that  will  monitor 
neuromarketing  development,  ensure  that  Québec  societal  values  are  respected, 
disseminate relevant information, and recommend neuromarketing activity guidelines; 

3. That  Ministère  de  l'Éducation,  du  Loisir  et  du  Sport  promote  the  development  of 
critical  thinking  in  young  people  through  civics  and  ethics  education,  in  order  to 
prepare them to make wise consumer decisions; 

4. That the Government of Québec take advantage of its UNESCO presence to begin a 
debate  on  the  purposes  and  expectations  of  neuromarketing  in  order  to  establish 
guidelines for discussion and adoption by the international community as a whole. 

A  French-language  version  of  the  position  statement  will  be  made  available  on  the  CEST 
website in November. 

Seminar on the Body World 2 exhibition 

On 23 May the Commission invited some 30 people to take part in a seminar entitled “The 
human  body  and  how  we  use  it:  to  each  his  own?”  at  the  Montréal  Science  Centre.  After 
touring the exhibition, attendees had an opportunity to take part in a public forum on the topic 
“How  far  can  we  go?”  The  Commission  chairwoman  was  among  the  panellists  invited  to 
discuss  ethical  questions  arising  from  use  of  the  human  body  for  medical,  commercial  and 
artistic purposes. 

19

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CEST work in progress  

Position statement on new surveillance and control technologies  
After  publication  of  a  study  paper  on  ethical  questions  raised  by  the  use  of  biometrics  for 
security  purposes  and  a  public  forum  on  the  topic,  the  Commission  decided  to  broaden  the 
scope  of  its  work.  A  position  statement  on  ethical  issues  raised  by  new  surveillance  and 
control technologies is being prepared for anticipated release in March 2008.  

Supplement to the 2003 position statement on GMOs 
Following consultation with the interministerial committee on biodiversity in February 2007 
regarding ethical questions raised by  genetic use restrictive technologies in growing GMOs, 
the  Commission  concluded  that  the  issue  merited  in-depth  analysis.  To  shed  light  on  this 
subject, the Commission began preparing a supplement to its 2003 GMO position statement. 
The supplement will be issued in spring 2008. 

Position statement on neuropharmacology 
Based  on  results  of  a  preliminary  study  conducted  in  2005  on  ethical  questions  related  to 
development of the neurosciences, the Commission began preparing a position statement on 
the ethical issues of neuropharmacology. It is expected to be issued in autumn 2008. 

Position statement on assisted reproduction 
The Commission was tasked by Ministère de la Santé et des Services sociaux with examining 
a number of issues concerning assisted reproduction. Two subjects in particular attracted the 
Commission’s  attention,  namely  third-party  contributions  to  the  parenthood  process  and 
preimplantation diagnosis. This position statement is expected to be issued in autumn 2009. 

Third International Francophone Conference on Bioethics 
Meetings will take place in Québec City from 20 to 22 October 2008, during the XII Sommet 
de  la  Francophonie  and  the  400th  anniversary  of  the  founding  of  Québec  City.  Under  the 
aegis of UNESCO Director General Koïchiro Matsuura and Abdou Diouf, Secretary General 
of  La  Francophonie,  these  conferences  will  explore  “bioethics,  governance,  and  diversity.” 
National and international bioethics committee meetings will also be held. 

CEST website  
The  Commission  continues  to  make  improvements  to  its  website  and  to  ensure  that  the 
information it contains is up to date. 

Further Information 
Nicole Beaudry, notary MA 
Coordinator 
Commission de l’éthique de la science et de la technologie (Québec/Canada) 

Address 
1200 route de l’Église, 3rd Floor  
Office 3.45 
Québec (Québec) G1V 4Z2  
Tel.: + (418) 528-0965  
Fax: + (418) 646-0920  
Email:  ethique@ethique.gouv.qc.ca  

Website: www.ethique.gouv.qc.ca 

20

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Ethics of Human-Animal Hybrids and Chimera Research 

By Ole J. Hartling, Chairman of the Danish Council of Ethics, and Peter Sandøe, Chairman 
of the Danish Ethical Council for Animals 

Natural scientists are increasingly creating mixtures of human beings and animals. By way of 
example the British HFEA declared in a recent statement that, in principle, human cell nuclei 
can be reprogrammed in animal oocytes. Such research often serves noble purposes but also 
gives  rise  to  ethical  issues.  These  are  the  focus  of  a  publication  launched  by  the  Danish 
Council of Ethics and the Danish Ethical Council for Animals on 23 October 2007. 

The distinction between human and animal is under pressure – from a biological as well as an 
ethical point of view. 

When  the  classical  physiologists  –  for  instance,  Claude  Bernard  –  started  using  animals  for 
research,  experiments  were  conducted  with  great  brutality.  Dogs  howled  in  pain.  The 
perception at the time was that animals were not able to feel pain because they had no soul. 
Nowadays we no longer doubt that dogs and other higher animals are able to react to harmful 
stimuli and to feel pain. The fact that animals might not understand why they feel pain or what 
the pain is caused by does not make the pain any easier to bear. We know that ourselves. 

To realise that other living creatures are able to feel pain is a step forward. And when we turn 
to  human  beings’  ability  to  feel  and  think,  the  same  abilities  are  found  in  a  number  of 
animals—hence the use of animals in basic psychological research and research into pain and 
psychological disorders in humans. 

Biologically speaking, human beings are simply animals; like other animal species we have 
developed through biological evolution. Our body is an organism, which can be studied and 
understood in the same way as other organisms. Only a very small percentage of our genetic 
make-up differentiates us from certain other animals. 

For  the  ethicist,  on  the  other  hand,  human  beings  do  not  simply  constitute  another  animal 
species. We live in a culture where the distinction between humans and animals has decisive 
importance.  This  fact  is  reflected  in  Danish  legislation:  animals  can  be  owned  and  sold. 
Animals  can  be  used  in  harmful  research  with  no  benefit  to  the  animals  involved.  Healthy 
young  animals  can  be  put  down,  slaughtered  and  hunted.  We  trade  animals,  eat  them  and 
breed  them  to  obtain  specific  desirable  characteristics.  Human  beings,  of  course,  cannot  be 
submitted  to  any  such  acts.  We  consider  human  beings  as  having  a  purpose  in  themselves 
while animals can be treated as mere  means to other ends. Humans are protected by certain 
rights across borders and in national legislation. 

A number of philosophers, starting with the Englishman Jeremy Bentham in the late 1700s, 
have challenged the sharp ethical distinction between humans and animals by pointing to the 

21

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fact  that  the  differences  in  terms  of  the  capacity  for  thought  or  communication  are  not 
sufficiently decisive to justify human superiority over animals. 

An argument against this from supporters of the existing ethical order is that even if we accept 
that a human being is an animal, it is certainly an animal that possesses such special cognitive 
capabilities  as  to  render  any  parallel  regarding  rights  inapplicable.  The  human  being  is  the 
only animal aware of its own existence, time and the passage of time; the only animal to say 
“good-bye” and “see you again”; the only animal capable of acting immorally, etc. 

It  is  nevertheless  a  fact  that  the  distinction  between  human  beings  and  animals  has  been 
further undermined by biotechnological research over recent decades. And even if some insist 
that, biologically, an animal is an animal, and a human being is a human being, they can no 
longer  be  so  certain.  An  increasing  body  of  research  is  preoccupied  with  mixing  human 
beings and animals on a cellular basis. In most ongoing cross-species research, of course, only 
human cells of various kinds are transplanted to animals. But the pace of development is rapid 
and this calls for consideration as to where ethical boundaries should be drawn. 

Examples of research where scientists are trying to mix human beings and animals: 

•

In  Great  Britain  the  national  authority,  HFEA,  found  in  a  recent  statement  no 
fundamental  reason  to  prevent  cytoplasmic  hybrid  research  where  stem  cells  are 
derived  from  human  embryos,  created  by  nuclear  transfer  of  human  somatic  nuclei 
into rabbit oocytes.1 The same technique was employed to create Dolly the sheep, but 
in this case the oocyte stems from another species and the purpose will be to produce 
human embryos from which scientists can derive stem cells for research purposes.2 
• Other  scientists  have  transplanted  neural  stem  cells  from  a  human  embryo  into  non-
human  primate  brains.  In  other  experiments  neural  stem  cells  from  human  embryos 
have  been  transplanted  to  living  primates  with  Parkinson’s  disease  and  successfully 
integrated in the primate brains. 

• Finally,  in  xenotransplantation  (transplanting  cells,  tissues  and  organs  from  one 
species  to  another),  research  is  being  done  primarily  to  create  pigs  suitable as  organ 
donors for humans. Scientists are trying to modify the pigs’ genes in order to prevent 
the recipient from rejecting the organ. Most scientists agree, however, that it will take 
years  before  pigs  can  be  used  as  organ  donors,  not  least  because  the  problem  of 
transmitting disease has not yet been solved. 

In  the  short  term  the  above-mentioned  research  will  not  produce  creatures  that  cannot  be 
characterised either as humans or as non-human animals. The ape carrying human stem cells 
is  clearly  still  an  ape.  And  the  human  being  with  a  pig’s  heart  is  still  a  human  being,  of 
course. 

The challenge lies in the fact that our ethical distinctions between human beings and animals 
will  be  put  under  even  more  pressure.  Our  report  points  to  a  number  of  challenges  to  the 
legislation that serves to uphold the distinction between human and animal. In the 1980s and 
1990s the Danish Folketing (Parliament) passed laws banning the creation of a human being 
that  is  part  animal.  However,  the  legislation  gives  no  indication  of  how  to  define  human 
being. 

“HFEA statement on its decision regarding hybrid embryos”, 5 September 2007 http://www.hfea.gov.uk/en/-

1
1581.html 
2 Strictly speaking, the resulting embryo will be a hybrid, since all its cells will have the same genome as 
opposed to the chimera, which has different cells and thus different genomes side by side in its body. 
Nevertheless, both creatures will be human-nonhuman mixtures. 

22

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
  
This must be made clearer. The report suggests amending legislation to facilitate assessment 
of  research  where  human–animal  mixtures  are  created  by  a  research  ethics  committee  on  a 
case-by-case basis. Such committees should be given a mandate to decline research projects 
that  will  potentially  lead  to  the  creation  of  human–non-human  chimeras  (including  fetuses) 
which are altered to an unacceptable degree from an ethical point of view.  

The remaining challenge to be addressed comes from philosophers who argue that the ethical 
distinction  between  human  beings  and  animals  is  no  longer  relevant.  Our  councils  are  in 
agreement  that  the  theoretical  distinction  between  human  beings  and  non-human  animals 
must  be  maintained.  Biologically,  the  human  being  is  one  animal  among  others  –  ethically, 
however, we are unique. Human beings have and should have the right to life and freedom. 
Animals do not have the same right and should not be given this right. 

Animals  in  human  care  have  and  should  have  the  right  to  be  protected  and  cared  for  in  an 
appropriate way. An effort should be made to give animals better living conditions – domestic 
animals as well as those used in research. But most people still accept animals being killed for 
consumption  and  animals  being  used  in  research  in  order  to  discover  new  ways  to  prevent, 
cure or relieve human diseases. 

Our  answer  to  the  challenge  from  philosophy  is  that  a  world  without  human  rights  is  not  a 
world where human beings live a dignified life. Animals, however, can live suitable lives as 
domestic  animals  and  pets.  Banning  this  use  of  animals  will  not  improve  their  living 
conditions but rather will cause them to vanish. In an ethical sense a human being is a human 
being  and  an  animal  is  an  animal;  to  try  to  change  that  would  benefit  neither  human  nor 
animal. 

Further information 

Prof. Ole J. Hartling, Chairman of the Danish Council of Ethics  
Peter Sandøe, Chairman of the Danish Ethical Council for Animals 

Address 
Ravnsborggade 2-4 
DK - 2200 Copenhagen 
Denmark 
Phone: (+45) 3537 5833 
Fax: (+45) 3537 5755 
e-mail: info@etiskraad.dk 
Website: http://www.etiskraad.dk/sw293.asp 

23

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PH_711807_CEE

 
The Estonian Council on Bioethics was set up as the national committee by a Decree of the 
Minister of Social Affairs in 1998. Before this (from 1990), the Research Ethics Committee of 
the University of Tartu acted as a national committee to some extent. 

The Council consists of 13 members appointed for three-year terms by the Minister of Social 
Affairs.  They  represent  various  medical  specialities,  ethics  and  law.  There  are  some  lay 
members  as  well.  To  improve  cooperation  with  lawmakers,  one  place  is  reserved  for  a 
member  of  the  Estonian  Parliament  (Riigikogu).  The  Council  is  an  advisory  body  to  the 
Minister of Social Affairs, but it is also a coordinating institution for all activities in the field 
of  bioethics  in  Estonia.  For  instance,  the  Council  holds  seminars  for  research  ethics 
committees, sometimes in cooperation with the other Baltic states. 

 Unfortunately,  the  Council  functions  as  a  public  institution  without  substantial  financial 
support, which limits its activity to some extent. Despite this, it has set up working groups and 
has  presented  several  written  opinions,  mainly  about  different  data  protection  problems  in 
health  care.  These  opinions  are  published  on  the  website  of  the  Ministry  of  Social  Affairs. 
One of these opinions presents a thorough analysis of the ethical and medical aspects of the 
new draft version of the Estonian Data Protection Act. 

 Estonia is planning to introduce centralised digital health records in 2009. This is connected 
on  one  hand  with  the  ideology  of  the  e-state  and  on  other  hand  with  the  progress  in 
information  technology  in  Estonia.  The  central  database  of  health  records  will  contain  the 
basic  health  data  of  the  whole  population  of  Estonia.  Most  members  of  the  Council  on 
Bioethics have taken part in the process of drafting the basic rules for the database over the 
last  18  months.  A  special  working  group  was  set  up  to  discuss  the  ethical  and  practical 
problems raised by this project. The Council working group has submitted three reports to the 
Ministry  of  Social  Affairs  in  2007  giving  Council  members’  views  and  proposing  ways  of 
improving execution of the project. 

Council  members  have  also  analysed  the  ethical  aspects  of  amendments  proposed  to  the 
Estonian  Health  Services  Organisation  Act.  One  new  chapter  of  this  Act  will  serve  as  the 
legal basis for the introduction of the central database for health records. 

Further information 

Prof. Arvo Tikk, MD, PhD 

Address 
Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery 
University of Tartu 
2 L.Puusepp Street 
Tartu 51014 
Estonia 
Tel 3727318538 
Fax 3727318509 
Email arvo.tikk@kliinikum.ee 

25

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PH_711807_CEE

 
LEGAL BASIS AND MANDATE 

The National Consultative Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (CCNE) was set up by 
presidential decree on 23 February 1983, as an independent authority linked to the Ministries of 
Research  and  Health.  Revised  according  to  the  law  of  29  July  1994,  the  CCNE  now  operates 
under the law of 6 August 2004. 

♦ Taking an ethical view of health and life sciences 

The CCNE’s mission is to “provide opinions on the ethical problems and societal questions 
raised  by  the  progress  in  the  fields  of  biology,  medicine  and  health,  and  to  publish 
recommendations on these issues.”3  

♦ The CCNE at work 

Decree  No  2005-390  of  28 August  2005,  established  the  composition,  organisation  and 
operating methods of the committee. A purely consultative body, the CCNE receives requests 
from  presidents  of  parliamentary  assemblies,  government  representatives,  higher  learning 
establishments, public institutions and officially recognised foundations working in research, 
technological  development  or  the  promotion  and  protection  of  health.  The  committee  may 
also address various issues raised by people other than those listed above. 

The CCNE’s highest decision-making authority is the plenary committee, composed of all its 
members. Cases are investigated by the technical section, which includes 12 members chosen 
by the committee on the basis of nominations by the CCNE president. Each issue is handled 
by  a  working  group  made  up  of  committee  members,  who  may  request  help  from  outside 
experts in order to shed new light on a subject. The technical section then examines the case 
and presents it to the plenary committee. Meetings of the plenary committee and the technical 
session  are  closed  to  the  public.  After  the  case  is  examined,  a  final  report  is  published, 
including recommendations or opinions.  

♦

COMPOSITION  
-  The  CCNE  president  and  two  honorary  presidents  are  designated  by  the  President  of  the 

French Republic. 

-  Five  key  figures  from  the  main  philosophies  and  religious  faiths  are  appointed  by  the 

President of the French Republic. 

3 Article 1412 of law No 2004-800 of 6 August 2004. 

27

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
-  Nineteen  members  are  chosen  for  their  expertise  and  interest  in  ethical  issues,  fifteen  are 
designated  by  various  ministers  concerned  by  biology  and  health  issues,  and  the  four 
remaining members are named respectively by the presidents of France’s two parliamentary 
chambers,  the  vice-president  of  the  Conseil  d’Etat  (France’s  highest  administrative  court) 
and the president of the Cour de Cassation (supreme court of appeal). 

- Fifteen representatives from the research sector are designated by their peers. 

CURRENT MEMBERSHIP  

♦ President: 

Didier Sicard 

Honorary President:
Jean-Pierre Changeux 

♦ The Committee is being renewed since 20 members’ terms of office expired on 19 February 2007. 

The National Consultative Ethics Committee on the international scene 
♦  The  Committee  is  in  charge  of  organising  the  next  Global  Summit  of  National  Bioethics 
Advisory Bodies, to be held in Paris on 1 and 2 September 2008. 

♦  The  Committee  will  hold  the  10th  European  Conference  of  National  Ethics  Committees 
(COMETH)  during  the  French  Presidency  of  the  European  Union,  in  partnership  with  the 
Council of Europe and the European Commission. 

CURRENT WORK 

♦  Health,  ethics  and  money:  ethical  issues  concerning  budgetary  restrictions  on  health 
expenditure in hospitals 
♦ Ethics  and  deafness:  information  on  systematic  screening  and  management  of  deafness  in 
children 
♦ Disparities in access to health care for people with autism, both young and adult 

SOME RECENT PUBLICATIONS 

♦

Opinion No 94: Health and Medicine in Prison 

♦  Opinion  No  95:  Ethical  issues  raised  by  prediction  based  on  detection  of  early  behavioural 
  disorders in children 

♦ Opinion No 96: Ethical issues raised by nanosciences, nanotechnologies and health  

♦ Opinion No 98: Biometrics, identifying data and human rights 

♦ Opinion No 100: Migration, filiation and identification by genetic testing  

28

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Further Information 

Mrs. Marie-Hélène MOUNEYRAT 
Secretary General 
The National Consultative Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences 

Address 

7, rue Saint-Georges 
F — 75009 PARIS 
Tel.: (33) 01 53 86 11 49 / 52. 
Fax: (33) 01 53 86 11 40 
Email: contact@comite-ethique.fr 

Website: www.ccne-ethique.fr 

29

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PH_711807_CEE

 
FUNCTION 

Following  the  German  Federal  Government’s  decision  of  2  May  2001,  the  National  Ethics 
Council (NER) was set up on 8 June 2001 as a national forum for dialogue on ethical issues in 
the  life  sciences.  It  provides  an  umbrella  for  interdisciplinary  discourse  relating  to  science, 
medicine, theology, philosophy and the social and legal sciences, expressing its views on both 
the ethical aspects of new developments in the life sciences and their impact on individuals 
and society as a whole. The NER consists of up to 25 members, who represent the fields of 
science,  medicine,  theology,  philosophy,  society,  law,  ecology  and  economy  and  are 
appointed  by  the  Federal  Chancellor  for  a  period  of  four  years.  The  Members  generally 
convene once a month in Berlin. 

The NER is an independent body, bound only by its purpose as stipulated in the Government 
decision that set it up. It decides the scope and organisation of its work independently. It puts 
great emphasis on its work with the community and makes its opinions, recommendations and 
reports  public.  The  NER  cooperates  with  other  ethics  bodies  in  Germany  as  well  as  with 
comparable institutions of other countries and international organisations. 

The  General  Secretariat  of  the  NER  is  located  on  the  premises  of  the  Berlin  Brandenburg 
Academy of Sciences and Humanities. The Council and its General Secretariat are funded by 
the German Federal Government. 

In  April  2007  the  Bundestag  passed  the  Ethics  Council  Act,  which  came  into  force  on  1 
August. The Act set up the German Ethics Council as the successor to the NER, which met 
for the last time in September. The members of the new body have yet to be named. 

OPINIONS IN 2007 

Predictive health information in the conclusion of insurance contracts (2007-02-01) 

The  subject  of  this  Opinion  is  how  far  insurance  companies  should  be  allowed  to  make  the 
conclusion  of  private  personal  insurance  contracts  and  the  relevant  premiums  dependent  on 
the  collection  and  use  of  predictive  health  information  concerning  proposers.  Statutory 
insurance schemes, such as statutory health and pension insurance, fall outside the scope of 
the Opinion.  

Both genetic tests and other modern medical diagnostic procedures can predict health risks or 
diseases  long  before  these  become  manifest.  The  NER  therefore  recommends  that  the 
principles set out below for the protection of proposers’ personal rights should be applied to 
the results not only of genetic tests but also to those of other predictive examinations, such as 
imaging techniques or biochemical and electrophysiological methods.  

31

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insurers should be allowed to collect information on a proposer’s health only to the extent that 
it  is  necessary  for  an  individual  contract  and  where  the  details  furnished  by  the  proposer 
specifically suggest the existence of risks stemming from earlier or current medical conditions 
or, where applicable, of lifestyle issues with possible health implications.  

the  German 

Insurance  Association 

The NER favours the continuation of the voluntary formal commitment whereby the member 
(Gesamtverband  der  Deutschen 
companies  of 
Versicherungswirtschaft e. V.) have agreed — for the time being until 31 December 2011 — 
not to require disclosure, and not to take account, of results of predictive genetic tests that are 
known  to  the  proposer.  However,  the  moratorium  should  be  extended  to  predictive  genetic 
information  obtained  by  the  proposer  otherwise  than  from  molecular  genetic  or  cytogenetic 
tests — for instance, from biochemical tests or family history.  

General  questioning  of  attending  physicians  in  the  absence  of  concrete  indications  of  a 
disease or of the risk of a disease should not be permissible. Where attending physicians are 
released  from  their  obligation  of  confidentiality  and  provide  information,  this  should  be 
restricted to a specific situation on which the insurer may request information for the purposes 
of risk calculation.  

The  right  of  insurers  to  require  proposers  to  undergo  a  medical  examination  should  be 
significantly limited. In the case of “ordinary” insurance contracts (i.e. where the sum insured 
is  not  unusually  high),  screening  for  existing  medical  conditions  and  health  risks  that  are 
unknown to the proposer and for which neither the clinical history nor the present condition 
of  the  proposer  afford  concrete  indications  should  never  be  permissible.  This  applies 
particularly to questions on family history. “Ordinary” insurance contracts should be deemed 
to comprise contracts to cover the cost of medical treatment and other therapeutic measures in 
the  event  of  illness,  as  well  as  contracts  under  which  the  benefit  comprises  a  single  capital 
payment,  an  old-age  pension,  occupational  incapacity  or  permanent  disability  benefit  or 
dependency annuity insurance up to a stated limit.  

The restrictions demanded here on the right of insurers to question proposers and to require 
medical examinations in the case of an “ordinary” policy should not apply to contracts where 
the benefit exceeds the usual levels.  

A  comprehensive  statutory  basis  for  enforcement  of  the  restrictions  recommended  in  this 
Opinion on the collection and use of predictive health information in the conclusion of private 
personal  insurance  contracts  is  not  considered  essential.  The  courts  can  make  judgements 
consistent  with  the  recommendations  by  interpreting  existing  law  as  appropriate.  The 
insurance industry, too, can implement the recommendations de facto and ensure that they can 
be  relied  upon  by  means  of  specimen  contractual  conditions  and  voluntary  formal 
commitments.  

Increasing  the  number  of  organ  donations:  a  burning  issue  for  transplant  medicine  in 
Germany (2007-04-24) 

The  shortage  of  organs  is  a  chronic  problem  for  transplant medicine in  many  countries,  but 
particularly  so  in  Germany.  When  the  Transplantation  Law  came  into  force  in  1997,  it  was 
hoped  that  organ  donation  would  increase,  but  this  has  not  happened.  There  are  indications 
that  this  state  of  affairs  is  due  not  only  to  shortcomings  in  the  organisation  of  the  health 
system but also to the relevant legislation, which provides that organ donation after death is 
conditional on an explicit declaration of consent by the donor or his or her relatives. 

This Opinion considers whether a change in the current law to relieve the shortage of organs 
would  be  ethically  and  constitutionally  justifiable.  It  discusses  various  proposals  directed 

32

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
towards achieving a balance between the right of self-determination of potential donors, the 
desire to save lives and to reduce suffering in others, and established principles of the health 
system such as equal access to care. 

The  NER  proposes  a  graduated  model  combining  elements  of  a  system  of  declared  consent 
with aspects of a system of presumed consent with provision for refusal. This would require 
the State to ensure that its citizens: 
1. are called upon by a formal procedure to make a personal declaration as to whether they 

agree to organ donation, and 

2. are  made  aware  that  in  the  absence  of  a  declaration  organ  removal  is  legal  unless  the 

relatives refuse consent. 

The  NER  further  recommends  the  introduction  of  appropriate  legislation  to  ensure  that 
hospitals  comply  to  a  greater  extent  than  hitherto  with  their  obligation  to  give  notice  of 
potential non-living organ donors. Provision must also be made for adequate reimbursement 
to hospitals of the cost of notification and of treatment of potential organ donors. 

Should the Stem Cell Law be amended? (2007-07-16) 

In  this  Opinion  the  NER  discusses  whether  the  emerging  international  trends  in  stem  cell 
research, coupled with the experience so far gained with the Stem Cell Law, indicate a need 
for the provisions in force since 2002 to be amended. 

On the basis of the compromise arrived at in 2002, 14 of the 24 members of the NER consider 
that the Stem Cell Law should be amended. In their view: 

The protective aim set out in Section 1 No 2 of the Law — namely, that of preventing actions 
in Germany from giving rise to the derivation of embryonic stem cells — should in future be 
achieved  by  practicable  and  reliable  case-by-case  consideration  as  a  part  of  the  approval 
procedure  for  the  import  and  use  of  embryonic  stem  cells.  For  this  purpose,  the  central 
approval authority established under the Stem Cell Law must be satisfied that the production 
of the relevant cell lines was neither instigated by the applicant itself nor otherwise effected 
by  virtue of actions in Germany. The case-by-case consideration should replace the cut-off-
date criterion. 

To preclude even the prospect that possible demand in Germany might constitute an incentive 
for  the  production  of  embryonic  stem  cells  in  other  countries,  it  should  be  permissible  to 
import  and  use  only  embryonic  stem  cells  obtained  from  universally  accessible  stem  cell 
banks  on  a  non-profit  basis.  The  use  of  embryonic  stem  cells  produced  for  commercial 
purposes should be prohibited. 

The criminal provisions of the Stem Cell Law should be repealed. Any German involvement 
in the consumption of extracorporeally derived embryos is in any case punishable under the 
Embryo Protection Law. The Stem Cell Law should merely determine the action to be taken 
in  the  event  of  infringements  of  the  approval  requirements;  the  appropriate  instrument  for 
such matters is the law governing regulatory offences. 

The import and use of embryonic stem cells should be permissible not only for research but 
also for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases. 

In  the  view  of  nine  members  of  the  NER,  an  amendment  of  the  Stem  Cell  Law  would 
constitute  not  a  continuation  of  the  existing  compromise  but  a  substantial  modification  and 
abandonment of it: 

33

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
The  erosion  of  the  ethical  and  moral  foundations  of  the  Stem  Cell  Law  resulting  from 
dropping  the  cut-off-date  criterion  and  adding  new  permitted  uses  would,  if  the  Embryo 
Protection Law remained in force, be ethically contradictory and not readily defensible to the 
public. 

Again, it is still unclear whether, and if so when, effective therapies can be developed from 
embryonic or pluripotent stem cells. A review of the ethical considerations is not, therefore, 
justified on these grounds. 

In  this  situation,  the  members  concerned  hold  that  two  alternative  options  would  be 
compatible  with  this  second  position:  (a)  leaving  the  cut-off-date  system  unchanged;  or  (b) 
reopening  the  debate  on  the  normative  fundamentals  and  hence  on  the  Embryo  Protection 
Law  itself.  In  this  case,  another  point  to  be  considered  is  whether  it  would  not  after  all  be 
preferable  for  the  embryos  and  fertilised  pronuclei  available  in  Germany  to  be  used  for 
research  rather  than  for  new  HES  cells  to  be  constantly  imported  from  other  countries.  The 
supporters of the second position have contrasting views with regard to the above alternatives. 
However, for different reasons they all consider the extension or abandonment of the cut-off 
date and the resulting possibility of additional uses to be so problematic that they are unable 
to associate themselves with the proposals contained in the position statement in favour of an 
amendment of the Stem Cell Law. 

Another  member  of  the  NER  favours  the  compromise  underlying  the  Stem  Cell  Law  but 
considers that, while there should still be a cut-off date in the past, this date should be made 
more recent. 

CONFERENCES IN 2007 

• Bioethics: expert advice and public debates (2007-04-19) 

• Under  the  German  Presidency  of  the  European  Council,  from  23  to  25  May  2007  the 
National  Ethics  Council  hosted  the  meetings  of  the  European  Conference  of  National 
Ethics  Committees  (COMETH),  and  Forum  of  National  Ethics  Councils  (NEC  Forum), 
and  the  joint  sessions  with  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Sciences  and  New 
Technologies (EGE). 

Further Information 

Dr Rudolf Teuwsen 
Head of Office 
German National Ethics Council 

Address 
Jaegerstrasse 22/23 – 10117 Berlin 
Tel.: +49/30/20370-612  
Fax:+49/30/20370-252 
Email: rteuwsen@ethikrat.org 

Website: www.ethikrat.org

Ulrike Florian 
Press and public relations officer 

+49/30/20370-246 

florian@ethikrat.org 

34

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Most recently issued opinions 

March  2007 : Opinion on PD, PGD and embryo selection 

Abstract 

that 

the  implications  of  prenatal  diagnosis  (PD)  and 
The  Commission  recognises 
preimplantation  genetic  diagnosis  (PGD)  are  relevant  to  an  increasing  number  of  expectant 
parents.  Such  diagnosis  can  identify  serious  conditions  in  the  embryo,  most  of  which  are 
untreatable.  The  expectant  parents  are  therefore  confronted  with  the  dilemma  of  whether  to 
continue  or  interrupt  a  pregnancy  when  the  embryo  is  diagnosed  positive  for  a  serious 
untreatable  condition.  In  this  opinion the  Commission  considers  the  ethical issues  of  choice 
based  on  PD/PGD  and  suggests  a  number  of  guidelines  and  conditions  to  be  considered 
before a choice is made. The Commission believes that (1) parents are entitled to the right of 
choice following PD/PGD; (2) the responsibility of choice lies with the parents alone, having 
been fully informed by the physician; (3) the sole purpose of the diagnosis should be to detect 
serious  health  conditions  manifested  upon  or  soon  after  birth;  (4)  choice  for  the  purpose  of 
saving  a  sibling  is  acceptable;  (5)  choice  of  gender,  unless  intended  to  prevent  sex-linked 
conditions,  is  unacceptable.  The  Commission  has  proposed  the  professional  recognition  of 
geneticists,  recognising  the  importance  of  expert  counselling  regarding  PD/PGD  and  the 
supervision  of  genetic  laboratories.  Finally,  the  Commission  believes  that  the  cost  of  the 
diagnosis should be borne by the national healthcare system. 

 Please  note  that  the  full  text  (in  pdf  format)  of  all  opinions  and  reports  issued  by  the 
Commission, 
http://www.bioethics.gr/category.php?category_id=55  or  requested  from  the  Secretariat,   
Secretariat@bioethics.gr 

in  an  English  version,  can  be 

found  at 

following  URL:          

the 

B.

CURRENT WORK 

 The Commission is currently discussing the “Use of genetic information in private health  
and life insurance”. 
 An opinion on this subject is expected to be issued by the end of November 2007 and   
 its English translation should be available by the end of the year. 

C. Hearings 

Following  the  successful  and  very  productive  two  (2)  previous  hearings  arranged  by  the 
Commission  on  the  issues  of  clinical  trials  and  RECs,  the  Commission  sought  to  consult 

35

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
experts (from the field of private insurance) for a third time (in October 2007) in its effort to 
investigate  thoroughly  the  various  bioethical  dilemmas  arising  from  the  use  of  genetic 
information in private health and life insurance. 

D.

FUTURE WORK 

The Commission is exploring the possibility of giving priority in the future to the following 
issues :  - Research ethics and 

 - Environmental ethics. 

E. PRESENTATIONS  

Members  of  the  Commission  and  scientific  officers  regularly  give  presentations  at  International 
Conferences and Meetings. 

Highlights of presentations during 2007 

                 DATE 

23-24 May 2007 

CONFERENCE/MEETING 
9th NEC Forum, Berlin 

11-13 June 2007 

6th Lŏsinj Days of 
Bioethics, Croatia 

13-15 September 
2007 

21st Annual Conference of 
European Association of 
Centres of Medical Ethics, 
Zurich 

        TITLE 

         SPEAKER 

“Enhancement : 
the human body as 
property” 

“Does global 
bioethics mark a 
new epoch for 
ethics?” 

“Policy-making in 
Bioethics: the 
Gradual 
Emergence of 
Biolaw” 

Professor  
G. Maniatis 
(Deputy Chairman 
of the 
Commission) 
Professor  
M. Dragona-
Monachou 
(member of the 
Commission) 
Dr. Takis Vidalis 
(scientific assistant 
of the 
Commission) 

Further Information 

Mrs Marianna Dracopoulou 
Executive Head Secretary 
Hellenic National Bioethics Commission 

Address 
47, Evelpidon str. 
11362- Athens- Greece 
Tel.: +30-210-88.47.700 
Fax : +30-210-88.47.701 
Email: Secretariat@bioethics.gr 

Website: www.bioethics.gr

36

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
  
 
 
            
 
 
Bioethics Radio Series. The Big Science Debate: Exploring the Ethical Issues 

The Irish Council for Bioethics (ICB) has a dual role, as an advisory body for policy-makers 
that  produces  reports  and  opinion  documents,  which  consider  ethical  questions  raised  by 
biomedicine, and in the promotion of public understanding and dialogue of complex scientific 
and ethical issues. 

Bioethical issues attract widespread public attention and the media increasingly covers debate 
about  such  issues.  Media  coverage  of  scientific  developments  can  be  fraught  with 
misinterpretations,  unjustified  extrapolations  and  unwarranted  conclusions  and  this  can 
alienate  the  general  public  who,  to  some  extent  expect  science  to  provide  it  with  absolute 
certainties. The ICB provides a forum for bridging the gap between the general public and the 
scientific  community.  A  key  function  of  the  ICB  is  to  promote  open  dialogue  in  the  public 
domain  on  contentious  questions  involving  the  benefits  and  risks  of  biotechnology  and 
biomedicine. 

In  the  interests  of  promoting  reasoned  debate  and  discussion  on  the  implications  for  Irish 
society  of  scientific  advances,  the  ICB  approached  the  national  Broadcaster,  RTÉ  with  a 
proposal  to  record  a  series  of  six  50  minute  radio  programmes  on  the  ethics  of  diverse 
scientific  topics,  ranging  from  euthanasia  to  human  enhancement.  The  Council  then 
approached  Science  Foundation  Ireland  (SFI),  the  national  foundation  for  excellence  in 
scientific research, who agreed to part fund for the radio series.  

The  Big  Science  Debate:  Exploring  the  Ethical  Issues  consisted  of  a  number  of  moderated 
town  meetings  at  six  locations  nationwide  at  which  members  of  the  general  public  had  the 
opportunity to question a panel of experts holding a variety of views on various topics. The 
discussion was then open to the floor for the public to express their views.  The radio series 
covered the following topics and debated the following questions: 

Human Enhancement: Making People Better or Making Better People? Examined ethical 
questions, such as whether it is fair to fund the enhancement of healthy people when so many 
lack access to basic healthcare, whether human enhancement will change what it means to be 
human, whether we should try to improve society as opposed to ourselves and whether human 
enhancement will widen the gap between the “haves” and the “have-nots”? 

In  your  Blood:  Forensic  DNA  Databases  Considered  ethical  questions,  including  from 
whom samples should be taken, for what crimes they should be taken, for how long samples 
or profiles should be retained on file and who shall have access to this information? 

Environmental  Ethics:  Whose  Planet  is  it  Anyway?  Considered  ethical  issues,  including 
who  should  be  responsible  for  combating  climate  change  i.e.  individuals,  governments, 
developed  or  developing  countries,  whether  there  are  sustainable  alternatives  to  fossil  fuels 
and whether nuclear energy should be used? 

Stem Cell Research: Hope or Hype? Examined ethical questions, such as what is the moral 
status of the embryo, whether embryos produced but not used during IVF should be used for 

37

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
research, whether embryos should be specifically created for research purposes and what are 
the differences between adult and embryonic stem cell research? 

Organ Donation: The Gift of Life? Considered ethical questions, including what solutions 
are proposed to decrease the shortfall in donor organs, whether or not Ireland should initiate a 
live organ donor programme and whether or not people should be paid to donate their organs? 

EUTHANASIA: YOUR BODY, YOUR DEATH, YOUR CHOICE? EXAMINED ETHICAL QUESTIONS, 
SUCH AS WHETHER AN INDIVIDUAL HAS THE RIGHT TO CHOOSE WHEN AND HOW TO DIE, 
WHETHER EUTHANASIA DEVALUES LIFE AND WHETHER EUTHANASIA SHOULD BE ALLOWED IN 
THE CASE OF EXTREMELY PREMATURE BABIES? 

The ICB produced a set of information leaflets to accompany the show.  The information      
leaflets  considered  a  number  of  ethical  questions  in  relation  to  the  six  topics  and  are 
available  in  hardcopy  by  contacting  the  secretariat  or  can  be downloaded  from  the  ICB’s 
website www.bioethics.ie.  Podcasts of the shows will also be made available  in  the  near 
future 

  The  Big  Science  Debate:  Exploring  the  Ethical  issues  was  supported  by  a  dedicated   
website www.rte.ie/bioethics where interested parties were able to find information on each 
of the topics discussed in the series and to record their own opinions in an online forum. 

Further Information 

Ms Emily de Grae 
Communications and Outreach Manager 
Irish Council for Bioethics 

Address 
Regus House, Block 4, Harcourt Centre, 
Harcourt Road, Dublin 2, Ireland. 
Tel.: +353 1 477 3216 
Fax: +353 1 402 9590 
Email: e.degrae@bioethics.ie    

Website: www.bioethics.ie

38

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
Introduction 

The  Nuffield  Council  on  Bioethics  was  established  by  the  Nuffield  Foundation  in  1991  to 
identify, examine and report on the ethical questions raised by recent advances in biological 
and medical research. Since 1994, it has been funded jointly by The Nuffield Foundation, the 
Medical  Research  Council  and  The  Wellcome  Trust.  The  Council’s  independence  of 
government  has  become  increasingly  important,  particularly  as  a  result  of  growing  public 
unease  about  aspects  of  biomedicine  and  biotechnology.  The  Council  provides  independent 
advice to policy makers and aims to stimulate debate in bioethics. 

The forensic use of bioinformation: ethical issues  

The  Council  published  its  report  The  forensic  use  of  bioinformation:  ethical  issues  in  
September  2007.  The  report  concluded  that  fingerprinting  and  DNA  profiling  are  valuable 
tools in the detection and prosecution of offenders, but more safeguards are needed to protect 
the liberty and privacy of the innocent. 

For  example,  the  Council  recommended  that  the  police  should  only  be  allowed  to  keep  the 
DNA  of  people  who  are  convicted  of  a  crime.  Currently,  the  police  can  permanently  store 
DNA taken from people who have been arrested even if they are later found to be innocent. 
The exception would be people charged with serious violent or sexual offences, whose DNA 
could be kept for up to five years even if they are not convicted. These changes would bring 
the law in England, Wales and Northern Ireland into line with that in Scotland. 

Further recommendations are made in the following areas:  

(cid:1)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)

the storage of bioinformation taken from witnesses, victims and children; 
the use of the National DNA Database for familial searching, ethnic inferencing and 
research; 
the possibility of a population-wide DNA database; 
the use of bioinformation in court; and  
the governance and ethical oversight of forensic databases. 

In each case, the Council weighed up whether the need to protect public safety was sufficient 
to justify interfering with innocent people’s liberty and privacy. 

Public health: ethical issues 

The  report  Public  health:  ethical  issues  was  published  in  November  2007.  It  considers  the 
responsibilities  of  governments,  individuals  and  others  in  promoting  the  health  of  the 
population. The Council concluded that the state has a duty to help everyone lead a healthy 
life  and  reduce  inequalities  in  health.  A  ‘stewardship  model’  sets  out  guiding  principles  for 

39

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
making decisions about public health policies, and an ‘intervention ladder’ provides a way of 
thinking about the acceptability of different public health measures.  

The  report  uses  four  case  studies  to  illustrate  the  ethical  issues:  infectious  disease;  obesity; 
alcohol and smoking; and water fluoridation. Recommendations for policy makers are made 
in each of these areas.

For example:  

• The  Government  should  implement  tougher  measures  to  tackle  excessive  alcohol 

consumption, such as increasing tax on alcohol and restricting hours of sale. 

• Policies on selling and advertising tobacco and alcohol that provide the greatest protection 

to consumers should be adopted by tobacco and alcohol companies worldwide.  

• The food industry should adopt the food labelling scheme that is most effective in helping 
people  make  healthy  choices.  Where  industry  fails  to  do  this,  there  is  an  ethical 
justification for introducing legislation. 

•

Introducing more stringent policies for childhood vaccination (for example, penalties for 
those who do not comply) would not be justified at present in the UK. 

• The most appropriate way of deciding whether fluoride should be added to water supplies 

is through democratic decision-making procedures at the local and regional level.  

Neurodegenerative diseases: ethical issues 

Following  a  Workshop  on  the  ethical  issues  raised  by  neuroscience  held  in  May  2006,  the 
Council  has  decided  to  set  up  a  Working  Party  to  consider  the  ethical  issues  raised  by 
neurodegenerative diseases. The group will be chaired by Tony Hope, Professor of Medical 
Ethics at the University of Oxford and an Honorary Consultant Psychiatrist. The issues to be 
considered include: change or loss of personality and identity; the implications of a ‘life plan’ 
or ‘living will’; and the adequacy of support for patients from different sectors of society. A 
report will be published in summer 2009. 

All  the  Council’s  publications  are  available  to  download  from  the  Council’s  website  at: 
www.nuffieldbioethics.org/publications  

Further Information 

Hugh Whittall 
Nuffield Council on Bioethics 

Address 
28 Bedford Square 
London  WC1B 3JS 

Tel.: +44 207 681 9619 
Fax: +44 207 637 1712 
Email: bioethics@nuffieldbioethics.org 

Website: www. nuffieldbioethics.org

40

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PH_711807_CEE

 
ETHICS ACTIVITIES AT THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

 THE BUREAU OF EUROPEAN POLICY ADVISORS (BEPA) 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE) 

The EGE issued an Opinion on the ethical aspects of Nanomedicine in December 2006. The 
Group  also  issued  in  July  2007  an  Opinion  on the  ethical  review  of  human  embryonic  stem 
cell research projects financed by the European Union and worked on an Opinion on Ethics 
of  animal  cloning  for  food  supply  to  be  adopted  in  December  2007.  In  September  2007  the 
EGE held a roundtable on ethics of animal cloning followed by the publication of its minutes, 
in  order  to  raise  the  profile  of  the  group’s  work  and  to  increase  the  participation  of  civil 
society.  To  provide  the  EGE  with  additional  contributions  for  the  finalisation  of  the  above 
Opinion and promote public debates in the fields of animal cloning for food supply a public 
consultation4[1] (on the EGE website) was organised by the EGE Secretariat (more than 800 
contributions received). 

The  Group  met  the  German  National  Ethics  Councils  (NEC)  and  the  Forum  of  EU27  NEC 
under  the  premises  of  the  German  Presidency  in  May  2007,  and  held  a  similar  meeting  PT 
NEC and EGE-NEC Forum under the PT Presidency in October 2007. For the preparation of 
the  Opinions  above  in  2007  11  EGE  meetings  (and  two  Rapporteurs  meetings)  were 
organised,  with  also  expert  hearings  to  allow  the  Group  to  be  equipped  with  proper 
information on the ethical, legal and social aspects of the topics covered in the EGE Opinions. 
The EGE met President Barroso in December 2006, Commissioner Potocnik in April 2007, as 
well as several political personalities during the meetings hosted by the Rotation Presidencies 
(e.g.  DE  Parliamentary  State  Secretary  at  the  Ministry  of  Education  and  Research  and  the 
Permanent Secretary at the Federal Ministry of Justice, and PT DE President of the Republic 
and PT Minister for science and education). 

Additional BEPA activities on ethics: 

The Inter-service platform on ethics and EU policies: 

The  EC  platform  serves  to  rationalise  and  coordinate  Commission  activities  in  the  fields  of 
bioethics  and  ethics  of  science  and  new  technologies.  In  2007  the  platform  met  three  times 
(15 Commission services represented) and discussed a number of Commission initiatives5[2], 

4

http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/public_consultation_form.htm

[1]
[2] The discussions aimed to inform relevant Commission services and identify areas where synergies between 

5
services may be needed (for example actions on capacity building on research ethics carried out by RTD and 
implementing measures on human right protection and public health in Africa foreseen in the EU-Africa strategy 

43

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
such  as:  Animal  cloning  for  food  market  (DG  SANCO);  Radio  Frequency  Identification 
Devices: ethical and policy issues (DG INFSO); Scientific Integrity (DG RTD); EGE Opinion 
on  Ethics  of  Nanomedicine  (BEPA)  Privacy  Enhancing  Technologies  (DG  JLS);  Data 
Profiling  and  Personal  Data  Matching  (DG  INFSO);  Towards  a  European  Union  –  Africa 
Strategic  Partnership  (DG  DEV);  Ethics,  Research  and  Globalisation  (DG  RTD);  EGE 
Opinion on the Ethical Review of FP7 hESC Projects (BEPA) etc.  

The United Nations Inter-Agency Committee on Bioethics: 

On November 27 and 28 the Bureau of European Policy Advisors (BEPA), on behalf of the 
Commission,  has  hosted  the  7th  meeting  of  the  United  Nations  Inter-Agency  Committee  on 
Bioethics6. Participants at the event included representatives of the United Nations Agencies 
(Unesco,  WHO;  FAO,  WIPO,  ILO,  OHCHR),  International  Organisations  (Council  of 
Europe, OECD,  WTO and African Union), the Commission services (BEPA, DG Research, 
Enterprise, SANCO) and representative of the European Group on Ethics (EGE). 
The  topics  discussed  at  the  meeting  included,  inter  alia:  1)  intellectual  property  rights  and 
benefit sharing; 2) capacity-building in research ethics; 3) dual use, bio-security and ethics of 
science.  

 Further Information 

 DG Bureau of European Policy Advisors (BEPA) – The Secretariat of the European Group 
 on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE) 

  Policy Adviser in Ethics and EU Policies - Head of EGE Secretariat: Maurizio SALVI 
 Tel +32-2- 299 11 79 
 Fax + 32-2-299 45 65 
 Email: maurizio.salvi@ec.europa.eu 

Website: http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/policy_advisers/index_en.htm 

   http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm 

–DG DEV); or links between BEPA (EGE Opinion on Animal cloning and SANCO and RTD activities in this 
domain)
6
members'. 

In  the  above  Committee  the  Commission  is  an  'associated'  member  (with  CoE  and  WTO);  while  UN  Agencies  are  'full 

44

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                                                                                                                                                         
 
 
DG

RTD

GOVERNANCE AND ETHICS UNIT 

Science in Society Call 2007 (FP7-SiS-2007-1) and 2008 Work Programme 

The  evaluations  for  the  2007  Science  in  Society  (SiS)  call  for  proposals  (FP7-SiS-2007-1)  
took place over summer 2007. For ethics, 6 projects have been selected for funding and, after 
finalising the contract negations, projects are expected to start early 2008.  
The 2008 Work Programme will be published at the end of 2007 and will respect continuity 
while introducing new elements. In the 2008 call for proposals the main ethics topics are on 
ethics and new and emerging fields of science and technology, and on the promotion of pan-
European  and  international  awareness  of  the  ethical  aspects  of  security  technologies.  Other 
activities in the 2008 Work Programme include the establishment of an expert group 'Animals 
for  experimental  and  other  scientific  purposes',  in  light  of  the  forthcoming  revision  of  the 
Directive  on  the  protection  of  animals  used  for  experimental  and  other  scientific  purposes 
(86/609/EEC). From 2010 onwards, the SiS budget will increase significantly and open new 
opportunities  for  action  at  Community  level.  Activities  will  therefore  also  prepare  the 
transition towards more ambitious goals. 

Research Integrity 

Research  Integrity  is  a  very  important  issue  for  the  sound  development  of  the  European 
Research Area. It is essential for maintaining the highest standards of research excellence as 
well  as  for  maintaining  public  support  for  research  funding.  The  2007  Science  in  Society 
Work  Programme  provided  financial  support  to  the  first  World  Conference  on  Research 
Integrity,  in  September  2007  in  Lisbon.  The  conference  was  organised  jointly  by  European 
Science Foundation and Office for Research Integrity (US). The Commission was represented 
in  the  Steering  Committee  and  participated  actively  to  the  conference,  chairing  various 
sessions.  The  Commission  also  convened  an  Expert  Meeting,  which  reflected  on  the 
challenges that individual researchers but also the European scientific system as such face in 
relation to Research Integrity.  

Based  on  these  reflection  and  the  outcomes  of  the  Lisbon  conference,  the  Commission  will 
further support activities on research integrity in 2008. Among others, it will contribute to the 
discussion  at  European  level  by  supporting  networking  between  national  offices  and 
structures  in  charge  of  Research  Integrity  in  Europe.  The  aim  is  to  further  exchange  of 
information and best practices on standards, potential sanctions and responses to breaches to 
Research  Integrity.  It  will  also  examine  efficient  ways  to  monitor  the  integrity  of  research 
funded by the Framework Programme. 

Forum of National Ethics Councils 

The Forum of National Ethics Councils is an independent informal platform for exchange of 
information, experience and best practices on issues of common interest in the field of ethics 
and  science.  The  NEC  Forum  contributes  to  the  coordination  of  ethics  policies  in  Europe, 
following  the  "open  method  of  coordination”.  It  meets  twice  a  year,  hosted by  the  National 
Ethics Council of the country that holds the current EU Presidency. In 2007, the Forum met 
for  its  9th  meeting  in  Berlin,  23-25  May,  with  joint  meetings  with  the  Council  of  Europe 
Conference  of  National  Ethics  Committees  and  the  European  Group  on  Ethics.  Themes 

45

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussed were, among others, brain research, scientific integrity, scientific publishing and the 
regulation of artificial procreation. It held its tenth meeting in Lisbon, 11-12 October, with a 
joint meeting with the European Group on Ethics (EGE). Main theme was the role of ethics 
and fundamental values in future EU policy. The challenges facing developing countries and 
the influence of mobility in the EU on fundamental values were also discussed. 
The Commission will continue to support the NEC Forum in 2008. In addition to facilitating 
its full meetings, it will support additional 'troika' meetings of the countries that hold the past, 
present and future EU presidency, so as to further coordinate cooperation and streamlining the 
agenda  of  its  full  meetings.  Both  full  and  troika  meetings  will  take  place  in  synergy  with  a 
dedicated  e-community  of  the  NEC  Forum,  provided  by  the  Commission  on  its  SINAPSE 
network. Part of the information is available to the public: 
http://europa.eu/sinapse/directaccess/NEC/Public-Library/ 

Capacity building in research ethics 

On  14  and  15  May  2007,  the  European  Commission  hosted  an  international  conference  in 
Brussels  on  capacity  building  in  research  ethics.    The  conference "Ethics,  Research  and 
Globalisation" gathered 150 policy makers, opinion leaders, academics and researchers from 
four continents.  The main goal was to bring together stakeholders from developed countries, 
emerging economies and developing countries, in an effort to identify policy options together 
and  to  encourage  the  development  of  support  actions  under  FP7  in  the  European  Research 
Area and world-wide.  The overall ambition of the conference was to contribute to fostering a 
responsible  governance  of  research  in  a  sector  that  is  becoming  always  more  globalised.  
is  available  on  http://ec.europa.eu/research/science-society/  (under 
More 
"Conferences  and  Workshops").   Capacity  building  was  also  a  topic  in  the  2007  call  for 
proposals and two  grants  are proposed in the 2008 SiS  Work Programme, to UNESCO and 
the  Council  of  Europe,  for  joint  conferences  focusing  on  specific  aspects  of  ethics  research 
with international partners. 

information 

Ethical Review 

In  the  6th  Framework  Programme,  the  number  of  proposals  reviewed  for  ethical  issues  was 
834 over a five year period (average of 167 per year). For the first year of the 7th Framework 
Programme, the number of proposals to be reviewed is estimated to rise to around 950. This 
increase  is  due,  in  particular,  to  the  large  number  of  individual  grants  that  are  made  by  the 
European  Research  Council  (ERC)  and  the  Marie  Curie  Programmes.  In  light  of  the 
importance  of,  and  awareness  about,  the  Commission's  ethical  review  procedures,  the 
Commission  has  published  a  brochure  'Ethics  for  Researchers'.  This  brochure  describes  the 
rationale, objectives, procedures and areas of the Commission's ethical review. The brochure 
can be downloaded at: 
http://ec.europa.eu/research/science-
society/index.cfm?fuseaction=public.topic&id=130&lang=1 

46

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Further Information 

 DG RTD Directorate L - Science, economy and society 
 Director: Jean-Michel Baer 
 Governance and Ethics Unit - L.3: Governance and ethics 
 Head of Unit: Pěteris Zilgalvis 
Tel +32-2- 2950935 
 Fax + 32-2-2984694 
 Email: peteris.zilgalvis@ec.europa.eu 

47

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PH_711807_CEE

 
Surrogacy 

I. Introduction 

A ‘surrogate’ is a woman who becomes pregnant, and carries and delivers a child on behalf of 
another  couple  (intended  or  commissioning  parents).  The  term  surrogacy  covers  several 
situations. In the first situation (full surrogacy), the gestating woman has no genetic link to the 
child.  In  that  case,  either  (i)  the  gametes  of  both  commissioning  parents  are  used,  (ii)  both 
gametes  come  from  donors  (donation  of  either  supernumerary  embryos  or  de  novo-created 
embryos), or (iii) the gametes are provided by one of the commissioning parents and a gamete 
donor. In the second situation (partial surrogacy), the surrogate mother has a genetic link by 
providing the oocyte. In either case, the gestating woman intends to relinquish the child to the 
commissioning parents, who want to assume parental responsibility.  
Surrogacy  presents  several  problems  in  the  context  of  treatments  involving  third  parties 
(collaborative  treatments),  e.g.  the  intended  relinquishment  by  the  gestating  woman  of  the 
child  she  has  carried;  the  relationship  of  the  commissioning  parents  towards  that  child  and 
towards the surrogate; and potential commercialisation. 

II

SPECIFIC ETHICAL PRINCIPLES 

1. Pregnancy 

1.1 Antenatal screening. A mutual agreement should ideally be reached along the lines of the 
usual  recommendations  for  antenatal  screening,  unless  all  parties  decide  otherwise 
consensually. 

1.2  Preconception  and  prenatal  care.  The  surrogate  undertakes  the  pregnancy  freely  and 
deliberately. As a consequence, she should behave as a reasonable pregnant woman by taking 
all the precautions advised in modern antenatal care (vitamins, no smoking, moderate alcohol 
intake, etc.).  

1.3  Termination  of  pregnancy.  A  termination  of  pregnancy  can  be  justified  for  medical 
reasons  (for  the  surrogate).  From  an  ethical  point of  view,  it  is  inappropriate  to  terminate  a 
healthy pregnancy against the wishes of the commissioning parents. However, the surrogate 
has  a  legal  right  to  do  so  and  this  risk  should  be  taken  into  account  by  the  commissioning 
couple when entering into the agreement. Given the principle of respect for the autonomy and 
bodily integrity of a pregnant woman, it is impossible either to prevent the gestating woman 
from  terminating  the  pregnancy  or  to  force  a  termination  upon  her.  Nevertheless,  since  she 
freely accepted this project, she has a prima facie obligation to continue the pregnancy. 

51

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.4 Mode of delivery. Taking into account the principle of autonomy of the pregnant woman, 
she cannot be forced to accept the advice of the obstetric team, but she still has a prima facie 
obligation to accept the advice which will ensure the best outcome for the child as well as for 
herself. 

2.  Enforceability  of  the  agreement.  Legal  enforcement  of  a  surrogate’s  behaviour  is  not 
possible before delivery. Therefore counselling should raise all the points detailed above, and 
the  parties  should  reach  a  mutual  agreement  on  all  foreseeable  hazards.  Since  the 
commissioning  parents  are  fully  responsible  for  the  born  child,  a  surrogate  has  no  right  to 
keep the child. Like a gamete donor, she will never acquire parental rights or responsibilities. 
On the other hand, the agreement is also binding on the commissioning parents in the event 
that  the  child  is  handicapped  or  if  a  multiple  pregnancy  occurs.  Regardless  of  what  is 
stipulated in the agreement, the child or children born are their responsibility. 

3. The welfare of the future child born from surrogacy. There is little empirical evidence and 
no long-term follow-up studies regarding the social and psychological consequences of such 
an  arrangement.  No  information  is  available,  for  instance,  on  the  potential  confusion  about 
maternal  roles.  Long-term  consequences  if  the  surrogate  woman  keeps  in  contact  with  the 
resulting family have not been studied either. The possibility of conflicts cannot be excluded. 

Openness  by  the  parents  towards  the  child  about  its  mode  of  conception  is  advisable.  The 
wish of the child to know its genetic origin should be taken into consideration by the parents 
in cases where donor gametes or the oocyte of the surrogate have been used. 

4. The duty and responsibility of the doctor. There is neither a moral nor a legal obligation on 
the part of the doctor to collaborate in a surrogacy project. If he or she decides to collaborate, 
he  or  she  has  a  duty:  (i)  to  inform  all  parties  about  the  medical,  social,  psychological, 
emotional, moral and legal issues involved in surrogacy; (ii) to make sure that they fulfil the 
requirements; and (iii) to ensure that the parties receive appropriate screening and counselling 
in order to reduce risk and promote free and well-informed decision-making. The practitioner 
has the same obligation of care towards the pregnant surrogate as is afforded to any pregnant 
woman, although additional counselling and emotional support may be necessary. 

5.  Intrafamilial  surrogacy.  Different  types  of  intrafamilial  surrogacy  can  be  distinguished: 
between sisters and intergenerational, either of mother for daughter or vice versa. The main 
concerns  in  the  literature  are  moral  coercion  and  relational  bewilderment  for  the  offspring. 
There is no principled objection to known surrogacy either by mother or by sister. There is at 
present no evidence that such arrangements have  generated additional problems, but careful 
counselling of both parties is indispensable. In cases where a daughter serves as surrogate for 
her mother, there may be an increased risk of dependency and undue pressure. 

III. Recommendations 

Surrogacy  is  a  morally  acceptable  method  of  assisted  reproduction  of  last  resort.  The  least 
problematic  indication  is  the  absence  of  the  uterus  regardless  of  aetiology  (absolute 
indication).  Other  indications  may  include  serious  health  risks  for  the  intended  mother  and 
difficulties in becoming pregnant (relative indication). Because of the risks and uncertainties 
for all parties involved, reluctance to broaden relative indications is advisable. 

Payment  for  services  is  unacceptable;  only  reimbursement  of  reasonable  expenses  and 
compensation for loss of actual income should be considered. 

All parties involved should be counselled and screened separately by independent specialists.  

52

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
The surrogate should be less than 35  years of age  for partial surrogacy and  less than 45 for 
full surrogacy. In order to ensure free and well-considered decision-making by the surrogate 
/gestating woman, it is required that the woman has at least one child.  
A “cooling-off period” is recommended so that all parties can think through their decision. 

It  is  strongly  recommended  that  only  one  embryo  should  be  replaced  in  order  to  prevent 
multiple pregnancies and to avoid unnecessary endangerment of the surrogate’s and the future 
child’s  health.  For  special  conditions,  the  replacement  of  two  embryos  at  the  most  can  be 
considered. 

Long-term  follow-up  studies  both  of  the  resulting  family  and  of  the  family  of  the  gestating 
woman  should  be  conducted, especially  to  gain  insight  into  the  psychological  impact  of  the 
arrangement on the child(ren). 

The  commissioning  parents  should  be  well  aware  that  the  surrogate  has  the  legal  right  to 
make decisions about her pregnancy against their will and against the original agreement. 

For  the  full  statement,  see  ESHRE  Task  Force  on  Ethics  and  Law  (2005)  Taskforce  10: 
Surrogacy. Human Reproduction 20 (10): 2705-2707. 

Further Information 

Mr Guido Pennings 
President of the 

 (ESHRE) 

Task Force on Ethics and Law of the European Society of Human Reproduction and 

Embryology
Professor of Ethics and Bioethics, Ghent University 

Address 
Bioethics Institute Ghent 
Dpt of Philosophy and Moral Science 
Ghent University 
Blandijnberg 2 
B – 9000 Gent 
Belgium 
Tel./Fax: + 32 (16) 620767 
Email: Guido.Pennings@Ugent.be 
Website: http://allserv.ugent.be/~gpenning

53

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
PH_711807_CEE

 
Ethics and Health at WHO 

- November 2007 -

HIV/AIDS 

• Ethics and Health continues to contribute to policy development regarding the scaling-up 
of  prevention,  testing,  treatment  and  care  for  HIV/AIDS  patients,  advising  the  HIV 
department  on  related  ethical issues,  notably  in  clinical care and  research  (including  the 
standard of care) and equitable access to antiretroviral treatment. A new UNAIDS/WHO 
"Guidance on provider-initiated HIV testing and counselling in health facilities" document 
has recently been jointly published. (Available at 
 http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2007/9789241595568_eng.pdf) 

• Ethics  and  Health  has  also  been  involved  in  analysing  the  issues  around  the 
criminalisation  of  HIV  transmission.  An  international  consultation,  organized  by 
UNAIDS,  took  place  in  Geneva  on  October  30  -  1  November  2007.  Among  the  main 
ethical  issues  discussed  were  the  moral  responsibility  in  cases  of  HIV  transmission, 
informed  consent  to  unprotected  sex,  and  obligations  of  mothers  to  prevent  mother-to-
child transmission. 

Pandemic Preparedness 

•

In  collaboration  with  WHO's  department  of  Epidemic  and  Pandemic  Alert  and 
Response  (EPR/CDS),  the  Ethics  and  Health  team  organized  an  international 
consultation  "Addressing  Ethical  Issues  in  Influenza  Pandemic  Planning"  which 
took place in Geneva on 24-25 October 2006. The report of the consultation has been 
published (available at: 
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2007/9789241595568_eng.pdf). 

• A  WHO  guidance document, entitled, "Ethical considerations in developing a public 
health  response  to  pandemic  influenza"  is  in  its  final  stage  (publication  expected 
January 2008). 
In 2007, regional and national workshops have been held in France, Cambodia, Saudi 
Arabia, Kazakhstan, and Democratic Republic of Congo.  Further information can be 
found at http://www.who.int/ethics/influenza_project/en/index.html. 

•

Ethics of Research  

• Training activities 

In  July  2007,  Ethics  and  Health  organized  a  training  workshop  which  took  take  place  in 
Ouagadougou,  Burkina  Faso.  Sixty  participants  and  facilitators  from  francophone  sub-
Saharan African countries, Canada, Switzerland, France and Belgium participated in  this 
activity. Facilitators will now work on the publication of a manual, which aims to provide 
material which could be used for local trainings on ethics review of research proposals.  
In  September  2007,  Ethics  and  Health contributed to  the  2nd  African  Vaccine  Regulatory 
Forum  (AVAREF)  organized  in  Ouagadougou,  Burkina  Faso,  organized  by  the  WHO's 
department of Immunization, Vaccine and Biological. The purpose of this meeting was to 

55

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
promote  communication  and  collaboration  between  National  Regulatory  Authorities 
(NRAs) and research ethics committees. Following the recommendations, a plan of work 
was prepared for next three years with an aim to strengthen ethical review of vaccine trials. 

• Ethics and Health is part of the steering committee of the Global Forum on Bioethics in 
Research and contributed to the last forum hosted by Vilnius University in Lithuania in 
June  2007.  The  discussions  focussed  on  two  main  issues:  "building  the  infrastructure 
needed  for  ethics  review"  and,  as  a  sub-topic,  the  "ethical  aspects  of  mental  health 
research". 
at 
http://www.gfbronline.com/eighth_report.htm  .  The  2008  forum  will  take  place  in 
Auckland,  New  Zealand,  and  will  focus  on  ethics  and  cultural  responsibility  in 
research  with  indigenous  and  migrant  populations.  More  information  is  available  in 
http://www.gfbronline.com/gfbr9th.htm  

available 

forum 

report 

The 

this 

of 

is 

• Ethics  and  Health  is  currently  taking  part  in  three  projects  funded  by  EDCTP.7  One  of 
them, TRREE (Training and Resources in Research Ethics Evaluation) for Africa is co-
ordinated by the University of Neuchatel, Switzerland, and will provide African countries 
with tools for distance learning in research ethics. Participants of this project from Mali, 
Cameroon,  Senegal,  South  Africa,  Tanzania  as  well  as  Canada  and  Switzerland  met  in 
Neuchatel  (Switzerland)  on  16-17  September.  The  first  phase  of  the  project,  needs 
assessment, is being completed, training material will be prepared with an aim to answer 
the  specific  needs  identified,  focussing  on  ethics  committees  members.  A  preliminary 
draft  module  will  be  ready  in  December  2007.  More  information  is  available  in  
http://www.trree.org/site/en_trree_home.phtml   
Modalities  of  collaboration  with  EDCTP  were  recently  discussed  at  two  occasions:  a)  a 
meeting  between  EDCTP  and  WHO-HQ  departments  involved  in  the  field  of  research 
ethics,  b) 
in  Ouagadougou,  Burkina  Faso  (see 
http://www.edctp.org/forum2007 ) 

the  4th  annual  EDCT  forum 

Collaboration with other organizations 

• WHO is working with UNESCO and COHRED8 on the preparation of a session dedicated 
to research ethics for the ministerial forum on research for health which will take place in 
Bamako, Mali, in November 2008. 

• Ethics and Health provides the permanent secretariat for the Global Summit of National 
Bioethics Commissions.  The next summit will take place in Paris, France, in September 
2008 just before the World Congress which will be hosted by Croatia.  

• Collaborating centers 

In addition to the collaboration with the six WHO regional offices, ETH is in the process of 
designation  of  several  collaborating  centers.  Collaboration  with  the  Joint  Center  for 
bioethics of the University of Toronto (  http://www.utoronto.ca/jcb/home/main.htm ) was 
formally established several years ago, recently the Center of Bioethics of the University of 
Chile  (http://www.uchile.cl/bioetica/  )  has  been  recognized  as  WHO  collaborating  center 
for ethics. Three other institutions are in the process of designation. 

European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials Partnership 

7
8 Council on Health Research for Development  

56

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
• External scientific working group 

ETH  will  also  strengthen  its  collaboration  with  experts  from  different  countries, 
establishing a scientific working group which major task will be to advise on potentially 
new initiatives to be taken in the field of ethics and health and to contribute to papers and 
policy documents of WHO. 

Special issue of WHO bulletin on ethics 

A  call  for  papers  was  published  in  July  2007  inviting  potential  authors  to  submit  papers 
addressing a large range of ethical issues related to public health, such as ethical consideration 
related to priority setting, national transplant policies, ethical aspects of AIDS prevention and 
treatment,  and  obligations  for  research  sponsors  to  provide  treatment  to  participants.  The 
special  issue  will  be  published  in  August  2008,  deadline  for  submission  is  11  January  2008. 
More information is available at: 
 http://www.who.int/bulletin/contributors/submit/en/index.html  

Organizational changes 

On  1st  November  2007,  the  department  of  Ethics,  Trade,  Human  Rights  and  Health  Law 
merged with the department of Equity in Health; the new structure Ethics, Equity, Trade and 
Human Rights (ETH) is part of the cluster of Information, Evidence and Research (IER). 

Contact 

Dr Marie-Charlotte Bouësseau, bouesseaum@who.int  

Dr Andreas Reis, reisa@who.int   

Further information 

Dr Marie-Charlotte Bouësseau 
Technical Officer, bouesseaum@who.int 

Dr Andreas Reis 
Technical officer, reisa@who.int 

Tel: +41 22 791 1207 | Fax: +41 22 791 1399 
Email: ethics@who.int  

Address 
WHO/SDE/ETH - World Health Organization 
20 Avenue Appia 
CH-1211 Genève 27 

Website: http://www.who.int/ethics 

57

PH_711807_CEE

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Commission 

Ethically speaking — Issue No 9 

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities 

2007 — I –II, 57 pp. — 21 x 29.7 cm 

ISSN 1725-5562 

K
A
-
A
I
-
0
8
-
0
0
9
-
E
N
-
C

The European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies
to the European Commission

A Newsletter providing information
on the activities of the National Ethics Committees
compiled by the Secretariat of the European Group 
on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 
to the European Commission

ISSN 1725-5562

EUROPEAN
COMMISSION

issue

9

Janvier 2008

COVER.indd   1

7/25/07   9:32:06 AM

 
