K
A
-
A
J
-
0
7
-
0
2
3
-
3
A
-
C

European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies
to the European Commission

Ethical aspects 
of animal cloning 
for food supply

16 January 2008

opinion n°23

ISBN 978-92-79-07145-4

How to obtain EU publications

Our priced publications are available from EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu), where you can place an 
order with the sales agent of your choice.

The Publications Office has a worldwide network of sales agents. You can obtain their contact details by sending 
a fax to (352) 29 29-42758.

European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies
to the European Commission

23opinion no

Ethical aspects 
of animal cloning 
for food supply

16 January 2008

Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers 
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers 
or these calls may be billed.

More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu).

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication.

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, 2008

ISBN 978-92-79-07145-4

© European Communities, 2008
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Printed in Italy

Printed on white chlorine-free PaPer

Table of contents

ABSTRACT 
I.  HAVING REGARD TO 

1.  PREAMBLE 

2.  SciEntiFic BAckgRound to AniMAL cLoning 

2.1.  Definitions 
2.2.  Historical background 
2.3.  Somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) 
2.4.  Dolly  

2.4.1.  Biological implications 

2.5.  Animal health and welfare problems related to cloning 

2.5.1.  Animal health 
2.5.2.  Animal welfare 

2.6.  Potential applications of animal cloning  

for the food supply 

2.7.  Long-term future applications of animal cloning 
2.8.  Safety and risk assessment of cloning for food 

2.8.1.  Report by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) on the  
health of cloned animals and safety of their food products 

2.9.  Biodiversity, epidemics 
2.10. Farm animal cloning at international level 

3.  LEgAL ASPEctS  

3.1.  EU Regulatory Framework 
3.1.1.  EU food regulations 
3.1.2.  Other existing relevant EU legislation: 

zootechnics, animal welfare, animal health  

3.2.  National legislation in the EU Member States 
3.3.  World Trade Organisation (WTO), GATT  

and SPS agreements 

3.4.  WHO-FAO Codex Alimentarius 
3.5.  Intellectual Property (IP) regulation  

4.  EtHicAL iSSuES  

4.1.  The moral status of animals  
4.2.  Sustainability and animal farming 
4.3.  Religious considerations 
4.4.  Public perception and public acceptance 
4.5.  The consumer’s right to know, free choice and labelling 

5.  oPinion 

5.1.  Scope of the Opinion 
5.2.  Arguments over animal cloning for food 
5.3.  Food safety 

5

9

11

11

11

11

12

12

13

13

13

14

14

16

16

16

17

17

18

18

19

20

21

22

22

23

23

24

25

25

25

26

26

26

26

27

 
 
 
 
5.4.  Animal welfare and health 
5.5.  Farm animal biodiversity and sustainability 
5.6.  Societal aspects 

5.6.1.  Public participation 
5.6.2.  Public perception 
5.7.  Traceability and labelling 
5.8.  Intellectual property issues 
5.9.  Global trade 
5.10. Conclusions 
5.11. The need for revision of this Opinion 

APPENDIX 

27

28

28

28

28

28

29

29

29

30

49

Ethical aspects 
of animal cloning for food supply

Abstract

In  February  2007,  following  the  announcement  by  the 
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) concerning pos-
sible authorisation of food products derived from cloned 
cattle, pigs and goats on the market, President Barroso 
asked the European Group on Ethics of science and new 
technologies (EGE) to issue an Opinion on ethical impli-
cations of cloning animals for food supply.

At the same time, the European Food and Safety Agency 
(EFSA), was asked to produce an Opinion on food safety, 
animal  health,  and  environmental  implications  of  live 
cloned  animals  obtained  through  somatic  cell  nuclear 
transfer technique (SCNT), their offspring and the prod-
ucts obtained from them.  

After  several  months  of  internal  working  meetings,  ex-
pert hearings, a public consultation launched in the Eu-
ropa web site (800 contributions received) and a round 
table  with  representatives  from  academia,  industry, 
NGOs,  civil  society,  International  organisations  and  in-
dustry1, on January 16, 2008, the EGE has adopted its lat-
est  Opinion  on  ethical  aspects  of  animal  cloning  for 
food supply. The Group is aware of the EFSA draft Opin-
ion  and  the  FDA  Report  published  the  day  before  the 
adoption of the Opinion.

Considering  the  current  level  of  suffering  and  health 
problems of surrogate dams and animal clones, the EGE 
has doubts as to whether cloning animals for food sup-
ply  is  ethically  justified.  Whether  this  applies  also  to 
progeny is open to further scientific research.

At present, the EGE does not see convincing arguments 
to justify the production of food from clones and their 
offspring2.  If  in  the  future  food  products  derived  from 
cloned animals were to be introduced to the European 
market, the EGE recommends that the following require-
ments are met:

Food safety - The safety of food products for human 
consumption as a pre-condition for their marketing 

1 

2 

http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/activities/index_en.htm
The conclusion in this paragraph was dissented by K. Marczewski.

5

must  be guaranteed and scientific updates  and fol-
low up research into progeny should be carried out.
Animal  welfare  and  health  -  In  accordance  with  the 
Amsterdam Treaty  (animals  as  sentient  beings)  and 
the Lisbon Treaty, additional requirements should be 
met in intensive animal breeding, with the aim of fol-
lowing the guidance on animal welfare provided by 
the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE), e.g. 
the five freedoms: from hunger, thirst and malnutri-
tion;  from fear and distress; from physical and ther-
mal discomfort;  from pain, injury and disease; and to 
express normal patterns of behaviour.
Traceability - Current EU legislation on food regarding 
traceability of animals and their food products should 
be enforced. It should be ensured that EU legislation 
provides for the ability to identify individual animals 
where necessary.
Global trade - The import of cloned animals, their off-
spring  and  materials  derived  from  cloned  animals 
(e.g. semen and food products) should be condition-
al  on  proper  documentation,  in  particular  with  re-
gard to traceability provisions and animal welfare. 

In addition the EGE recommends that: 

Animal welfare - Further studies and analyses on long-
term  animal  welfare  and  health  implications  for 
clones and their offspring, as well as more compara-
tive  analyses  with  other  assisted  and  traditional  re-
productive  technologies  in  animal  farming,  should 
be carried out for a proper assessment of this issue, in 
line with EFSA draft opinion. The Commission should 
take initiatives to prepare a Code of Conduct on re-
sponsible  farm  animal  breeding,  including  animal 
cloning.
Farm animal biodiversity and sustainability – The Com-
mission should take proper measures to preserve the 
genetic heritage of farm animal species, for example 
by  funding  projects  that  aim  to  preserve  domesti-
cated breeds in Europe and to promote sustainable 
agriculture.
Public participation - Public debates should be promot-
ed on the impact of farm animal cloning on agricul-
ture and environment, on societal impact of increas-
ing meat consumption and rearing of bovines, as well 

as on the fair distribution of food resources. The Com-
mission  should  take  a  pro-active  role  in  promoting 
public discussion on the use of animal cloning, and 
its  potential  implications,  by  financing  a  number  of 
ad hoc initiatives aimed at promoting public debate 
on the marketing of food products derived from ani-
mal cloning. 
Public perception - The Commission should launch a 
thematic Eurobarometer survey and qualitative stud-
ies on animal cloning for food supply, in order to col-
lect indicators on public perception concerning the 
introduction of such products to the food market as 
is being done in other countries. 
Labelling – The EGE is aware of the technical difficul-
ties  of  labelling  products  from  offspring,  neverthe-
less  it  recommends  that  the  Commission  takes  the 
initiative to devise targeted procedures prior to the 
marketing of such food in the EU.  

Intellectual  property  issues  –  It  should  be  clarified 
whether the exclusion clauses in Directive 98/44/EC 
(Art. 6d) on patentability of biological inventions and 
the EPO rules (23 d) to animal cloning for food apply.
Global  trade  and  consumer’s  freedom  –  The  EGE  is 
aware  that  import  issues  of  food  products  derived 
from  cloned  animals,  including  compliance  with 
World  Trade  Organisations  provisions,  may  compli-
cate the market situation, however, the EGE recom-
mends  that  the  Commission  takes  initiatives  to  en-
sure consumers’ freedom and rights.
Research  -  Further  research  is  needed,  in  particular 
basic  research  on  animal  cloning,  as  well  as  impact 
on human health, animal welfare for farmed species 
other than those covered by EFSA. Similarly, further 
ethical, legal and social implications of animal clon-
ing for food supply as well as qualitative studies on 
public perception should be carried out.

The EGE Opinion has been issued 
to Commission President Barroso 
on 16.01.2008, the Opinion is accessible at 
http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm

For further information, 
please contact the Secretariat of the EGE: 
BEPA-ETHICS-GROUP@ec.europa.eu
or
maurizio.salvi@ec.europa.eu

6

OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP  
ON ETHICS IN SCIENCE  
AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES  
TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION

23opinion n°

Ethics  
of animal cloning  
for food supply

Reference: 
Rapporteurs: 

Request from President Barroso
i. de Beaufort, P. Puigdomenech-Rosell, J. glasa

European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies
to the European Commission

7

I.  Having regard to

Having regard to the Treaty on European Union, and in 
particular Article F. 2 of the Common Provisions and the 
annexed Declaration n° 24 on the Protection of Animals,

Having regard to The Food and Agriculture Organization 
of the United Nations (FAO) and the World Health Organ-
ization (WHO) Codex Alimentarius of 1963 as a reference 
document for consumers, food producers, manufactur-
ers and national food control agencies,

Having  regard  to  Council  Directive  77/504/EEC  of  25 
July 1977 on pure-bred breeding animals of the bovine 
species,

Having  regard  to  Council  Directive  86/609/EEC  regard-
ing the protection of animals used for experimental and 
other scientific purposes,

Having regard to the European Conventions of the Coun-
cil of Europe for the protection of animals kept for farm-
ing purposes (1976-EST 87) and in particular the Protocol 
of Amendment thereto, and for the protection of verte-
brate  animals  used  for  experimental  or  other  scientific 
purposes (1986-EST 123),

Having  regard  to  Council  Directive  88/407/EEC,  laying 
down the animal health requirements applicable to in-
tra-community trade in and imports of and imports of, 
deep-frozen  semen  of  domestic  animals  of  the  bovine 
species;  amended  by  Council  Directives  90/120/EEC, 
90/425/EEC, 93/60/EEC, Decision 95/1/EEC,

Having regard to Council Directive 88/661/EEC of 19 De-
cember 1988 on the zootechnical standards applicable 
to breeding animals of the porcine species,

Having regard to Council Directive 89/361/EEC of 30 May 
1989 concerning pure-bred breeding sheep and goats,

Having regard to Council Directive 89/556/EEC, on ani-
mal health conditions governing intra-Community trade 
in  and  importation  from  third  countries  of  embryos  of 
domestic animals of the bovine species,

Having regard to Directive 90/219/EEC of 23 April 1990 
on  the  contained  use  of  genetically  modified  microor-
ganisms (OJEC L 117, 8 May 1990, pp. 1 et seq., as amend-
ed) and Directive 98/81/EC, which amended it,

Having regard to Council Directive 90/220/EEC, regard-
ing  the  deliberate  release  into  the  environment  of  ge-
netically modified organisms, and Directive 2001/18/EC 
on the deliberate release into the environment of genet-
ically modified organisms,

Having  regard  to  Council  Directive  90/427/EEC  of  26 
June 1990 on the zootechnical and genealogical condi-
tions governing intra-Community trade in equidae,

Having  regard  to  Council  Directive  91/629/EEC  and 
91/630/EEC,  laying  down  minimum  standards  for  the 
protection of calves and of pigs,

Having regard to the United Nations Convention on Bio-
diversity of 6 June 1992, ratified by the European Union 
on 25 October 1993,

Having  regard  to  Council  Directive  94/28/EEC,  Art.  4-7, 
laying down the principles relating to. the zootechnical 
and genealogical conditions applicable to imports from 
third  countries  of  animals,  semen,  ova  and  embryos 
which are covered by European Union Council Directives 
77/504/EEC,  88/661/EEC,  89/361/EEC,  90/427/EEC  and 
91/174/EEC and by the European Community decisions 
implementing these Directives,

Having regard to the Protocol on protection and welfare 
of animals, annexed to the Amsterdam Treaty1,

Having  regard  to  the  World  Trade  Organisation  (WTO) 
Sanitary and Phyto-sanitary (SPS) agreements of 1995, in 
particular  to  Art.  5.1,  5.2  and  5.3  on  health  risk  assess-
ments,

Having  regard  to  Regulation  No  258/97/EC  concerning 
novel foods and novel food ingredients,

Having regard to Council Directive 98/44/EC on the pat-
entability  of  biological  inventions,  specifically  Article  6 
thereof,

Having  regard  to  Council  Directive  99/74/EEC,  laying 
down  minimum  standards  for  the  protection  of  laying 
hens,

Having regard to Directive 2000/13/EC, on the approxi-
mation of the laws of the Member States relating to the 
labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs,

Having regard to Directive 2001/18/EC of 12 March 2001 
on the deliberate release into the environment of genet-
ically modified organisms and repealing Council Direc-
tive 90/220/EEC2,

Having regard to the General Food Law, Regulation (EC) 
No 178/2002, for ‘the protection of human life and health, 
taking account of, where appropriate, the protection of 
animal health and welfare, plant health and the environ-
ment’,

1  OJ C340, 10 November 1997
2  OJEC L 106, 17 April 2001

9

Having  regard  to  Regulation  (EC)  No  1829/2003  of  the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 22 Septem-
ber 2003 on genetically modified food and feed3,

Having  regard  to  Regulation  (EC)  No  1830/2003  of  22 
September 2003 concerning the traceability and label-
ling of genetically modified organisms and the tracea-
bility of food and feed products produced from geneti-
cally  modified  organisms  and  amending  Directive 
2001/18/EC4,

Having  regard  to  Regulation  (EC)  No  1946/2003  of  15 
July  2003  on  transboundary  movements  of  genetically 
modified organisms5,

Having regard to the Treaty of Lisbon, signed on 13 De-
cember 2007 and currently open for ratification,

Having  regard  to  Article  6  of  the  Seventh  Framework 
Programme (FP7, 2007-2013): ‘All the research activities 
carried  out  under  the  Seventh  Framework  Programme 
shall  be  carried  out  in  compliance  with  fundamental 
ethical principles’,

Having regard to the EGE Opinion Nr. 9 ‘Ethical Aspects 
of Cloning Techniques’, published on 28 May 1997,

Having heard the rapporteurs I. de Beaufort, P. Puigdo-
menech-Rosell, J. Glasa

3  OJEU L 268, 18 October 2003
4  OJEU L 268, 18 October 2003, pp. 24 et seq.
5  OJEU L 287, 5 November 2003, pp. 1 et seq.

10

Whereas:

1.  Preamble

Given that the issue of cloning animals for food supply is 
a new and complex topic, the Commission is considering 
it carefully in the context of the existing legal framework, 
bearing in mind food safety, the desire of consumers for 
information, animal health and welfare, and other rele-
vant factors such as ethical considerations.

In  February  2007,  following  the  announcement  by  the 
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) concerning pos-
sible authorisation of food products derived from cloned 
cattle, pigs and goats on the market, President Barroso 
asked the EGE to issue an Opinion on the ethical implica-
tions of cloning animals for food.

At the same time, the European Food and Safety Agency 
(EFSA6), was asked to produce an Opinion on food safety, 
animal  health,  and  environmental  implications  of  live 
cloned  animals  obtained  through  somatic  cell  nuclear 
transfer technique (SCNT), their offspring and the prod-
ucts obtained from them7.

replicas (clones) from adult animals that ‘share the same 
nuclear gene set’ as another organism.9

Cloning: The word ‘cloning’ derives from the Greek word 
for ‘twin’ and was originally used in microbiology and in 
agriculture for the process of multiplying single organ-
isms by means of asexual reproduction to create a popu-
lation of identical individuals.

Embryo splitting involves the division of embryos at an 
early  stage  of  development  to  produce  two  embryos, 
and usually can only be performed once or twice, achiev-
ing a maximum of four genetically identical organisms. 
Experiments on embryo splitting date back to 1891 with 
sea urchins and later on with salamanders (1902).

Cloning by somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) involves 
replacing an egg’s nucleus with the nucleus of an adult 
cell  (or  that  derived  from  an  embryo  or  foetus)  to  be 
cloned,  and  then  activating  the  egg’s  further  develop-
ment  without  fertilisation.  The  egg  genetically  re-pro-
grammes the transferred nucleus, enabling it to develop 
directly into a whole new organism.

2.2. Historical background

The  EGE  previously  issued  an  Opinion  on  the  ethics  of 
animal cloning in 1997, but owing to the state of the art 
of the technology at that time, it did not address the eth-
ics  of  animal  cloning  specifically  for  food  supply.  The 
present EGE Opinion complements and updates the pre-
vious one and is intended to be complementary to that 
of  the  EFSA. The  ethical  considerations  in  this  Opinion 
will therefore refer to the use of animal cloning in breed-
ing  establishments  in  order  to  produce  progeny  that 
could enter the food chain.

In  nature,  the  normal  reproductive  process  in  bacteria 
and in the simpler animals may be considered a form of 
cloning.  Amoebas  are  single-celled  protozoa  which  re-
produce by binary fission, resulting in two offspring with 
identical genes. In more complex animals, cloning occurs 
when a fertilised egg splits to give identical twins. In the 
case of humans these are homozygous twins. This natural 
phenomenon  has  been  studied  over  a  long  period  of 
time, and biologists have started to develop techniques 
to induce or reproduce the cloning of living organisms.

2.  Scientific background to animal cloning

Examples of natural cloning

2.1. Definitions

1  Parent cell

2  nucleus divides

The term ‘cloning’ is applied to different activities in life 
sciences8, but for the purposes of this Opinion the word 
‘cloning’  will  refer  to  cloning  by  somatic  cell  nuclear 
transfer  (SCNT)  that  allows  scientists  to  create  genetic 

6 

7 

8 

The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) is the keystone Euro-
pean Union Agency on risk assessment regarding food and feed 
safety. EFSA provides independent scientific advice and communi-
cation on existing and emerging risks. http://www.efsa.eu.int
Animal species covered: Captive large ruminants (cattle); Captive 
small  ruminants  (goats,  sheep);  Pigs;  Oviparous  animals  (birds, 
chicken). 
For  example,  molecular  cloning  involves  different  techniques  to 
multiply DNA sequences either in-vitro or in vivo, related to recom-
binant DNA techniques. Cellular cloning is the process of isolating 
single cells in culture and propagating them in order to obtain a 
cell population. It is the basic procedure for produceingclonal cell 
lines, for example for the production of monoclonal antibodies.

3  cytoplasm divides

4  two daughter cells

Contrary to the general perception, cloning is not a new 
technology. The first experiments of nuclear transfer with 
amphibians (Rana pipiens and Xenopus laevis) were per-
formed in the United States and Britain during the 1950s 
to study the irreversibility of the modification of genetic 
material of differentiated cells from adult animals (1952, 

9 

In  their  phenotype  there  seem  to  be  differences  due  epigenetic 
effects influencing gene expression. ‘Epigenetics’ aims to describe 
the inheritance of information on the basis of gene expression in 
contrast to ‘Genetics’, which aims to describe the inheritance of in-
formation on the basis of DNA sequence.

11

cloning of tadpoles). Cloning experiments were then per-
formed in amphibians in the 1960s (fish were cloned in 
1963), in sheep in the 1980s, in monkeys in the 1990s, and 
in a range of animal species during the last 10 years (from 
primates, to cattle, to swine in the early 2000’s).

During  the  last  decade  (1997-2007)  only  non-primate 
mammals were reported to be cloned. Most recently, in 
2007 a US-based research group reported the creation of 
several embryos cloned from an adult rhesus monkey10.

table 1. domestic animal species cloned so far:

Year of first cloning
1963
1996
1998
2000
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

Species
Carp
Sheep
Cow, Mouse
Pig, Goat
Rat, Rabbit
Mule, Horse
Cat
Dog
Ferret

2.3. Somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT)

At present, the most commonly used technique for ani-
mal cloning is Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer (SCNT). SCNT 
can be achieved via three main steps:

2) 

1)  enucleation  of  an  oocyte,  performed  mechani-
cally by fixing the oocyte and aspirating the nu-
cleus by using a sharp glass pipette.
transfer of the nucleus from the donor cell11 into 
the fertilized enucleated oocyte12; most common-
ly, the somatic cell’s nucleus is injected under the 
zona pellucida of the egg cell by using a micro-
manipulator  and  a  microscope. To  induce  mem-
brane  fusion  of  the  two  cells,  a  short  electrical 
impulse is applied.

3)  activation  and  reprogramming  of  the  recon-
structed embryo. In order to kick start develop-
ment,  reprogramming  of  the  donor  nucleus  is 
needed; this seems to happen via factors present 
in the recipient’s cytoplasm, but the exact mecha-
nisms are still unknown. A necessary step in this 

10  The  Independent,  12  November  2007,  http://news.independent.

co.uk/sci_tech/article3152325.ece

11  Donor somatic cells can now be derived from a variety of different 
tissues.  Interestingly,  some  tissues  seem  to  be  more  suitable  for 
SCNT than others, giving higher rates of pregnancy and live births, 
the reason thereof still being unclear. At present, cloned offspring 
has been born from a dozen of differentiated donor cells, out of 
roughly 200 existing cell types.

12  Recipient oocytes are often obtained from slaughterhouses (as for 
cows, pigs, sometimes sheep), so that material is abundant even if 
of lower quality, and extremely inexpensive. They are cultured in 
vitro and treated with hormones for a variable length of time be-
fore they can differentiate and be used for SCNT.

process  is  to  mimic  the  cellular  conditions  after 
physiological fertilisation13.

When the cloned embryo resulting from SCNT starts to de-
velop it is transferred to a surrogate mother, which carries 
out the pregnancy. The transfer to the surrogate mother is 
species specific, both in terms of timing and procedure. In 
some species, like pigs, the transfer has to be done by sur-
gical procedures, and it is usually carried out one day after 
the nuclear injection and embryo activation (a single one-
cell stage). In other species, like cattle, transfer can be done 
without surgical procedure, and embryos are usually trans-
ferred at a later stage, one week after embryo reconstruc-
tion14.  So  far,  around  a  dozen  animal  species  have  been 
cloned  via  SCNT.  Animal  clones  that  are  relevant  for  the 
food market include sheep, goats, bovines and pigs.

As  the  commercial  interest  in  cloning  farm  animals  has 
grown, the cloning technique has been refined and suc-
cess rates are improving. A step in this process is the es-
tablishment of alternative and simplified procedures for 
the production of cloned animals. For example, in order 
to reduce the need for expensive equipment such as mi-
cromanipulators  for  nuclear  transfer,  scientists  have  re-
cently discovered so called ‘handmade’ cloning15. This nu-
clear transfer technology might also make the techniques 
available to less developed countries, where it would not 
otherwise be possible to implement it successfully.

2.4. Dolly

The attention of the general public was attracted when 
the  birth  of  the  first  cloned  mammal,  Dolly,  was  an-
nounced in 1996. Its embryo was derived from cells that 
had been taken from the udder of a 6-year old Finn Dor-
set ewe and cultured for several weeks in the laboratory. 
These cells were then fused with unfertilised eggs from 
which the genetic material had been removed and then 
successfully  implanted  in  a  surrogate  mother  sheep16. 
Dolly’s birth provided a revolutionary method of produc-
ing animals identical to an adult one17.

13  Some of these conditions include: increase of the intra-cellular cal-
cium, which usually follows the penetration of the spermatozoa, 
and  subsequent  decrease  of  the  maturation  promoting  factor 
(MPF). Both conditions can be artificially achieved by treating the 
reconstructed embryo after SCNT briefly with a chemical agent to 
block protein synthesis, or by applying a brief electrical shock.
In  cattle,  initially  1-4  embryos  were  transferred,  but  nowadays 
there is a tendency towards single transfer, to avoid problems with 
multiple pregnancies.

14 

15  Vajta  G. ‘Handmade  cloning:  the  future  way  of  nuclear  transfer? 

Trends Biotech, 25:250-253 (2007)

16  Biologists cultured 276 of these reconstructed eggs for 6 days in 
temporary  recipients. Twenty-nine  of  the  eggs  that  appeared  to 
have  developed  normally  up  until  the  blastocyst  stage  were  im-
planted into surrogate Scottish Blackface ewes.

17  The  innovatiove  feature  of  the  nuclear  transfer  technique  (NTT) 
was the use of unfertilised eggs and their fusion with a cell that 
contained the genetic endowment of only one organism.

12

Figure 2 Scheme of the cloning technique

After  the  successful  experiment  that  produced  Dolly, 
several laboratories18 began to work on applications of 
animal cloning using somatic cell nuclear transfer. Biolo-
gists  successively  cloned  other  animals,  such  as  goats 
and cattle (see Revel, 2000:43-59). In 1997, the cloning of 
a  transgenic  lamb  (Polly)  cloned  from  cells  engineered 
with a marker gene and a human gene19 was announced. 
In this way, the genetic modification of a lamb was com-
bined with the techniques of cloning, thereby generat-
ing animals that produce a new protein.

2.4.1. Biological implications

small  RNAs.  These  mechanisms  are  the  basis  of 
epigenetic mechanisms and it is not known how 
they are reprogrammed in the cloned embryo;
3)  The whole new organism develops from a single 
cell  that  multiplies  several  million  times  giving 
origin to multiple organs and allowing for sponta-
neous DNA mutations in single somatic cells and 
phenotypical differences;

4)  Several organs including the immune system and 
the brain are not fully developed at the embryo-
nal stage, hence clones may have multiple differ-
ences from their nucleus donor.

Contrary to the common perception, a number of bio-
logical factors contradict to the claim that clones are car-
bon copies of their ancestors:

2.5. Animal health and welfare problems related  
to cloning

1)  The mitochondrial DNA comes from the egg and 
is therefore different from that in the cells of the 
donor of the nucleus;

2)  Gene  expression  depends  not  only  on  the  se-
quence of naked DNA, but also on DNA modifica-
tions,  chromatin  structure  and  the  presence  of 

As already stated, cloning is not a new technology, but it 
still has relatively low efficiency and leads to high perina-
tal and postnatal disease and mortality of cloned organ-
isms. Animal health and welfare issues are therefore ex-
tremely  important  when  assessing  the  implications  of 
this  technology  and  its  industrial  use  in  terms  of  both 
efficacy and safety.

2.5.1. Animal health

18 

‘In  cloning  procedures  generally,  nuclei  are  extracted  from  cul-
tured cells that might have come originally from an embryo, a foe-
tus  or  an  adult  organism.  The  nuclei  are  inserted  into  egg  cells 
which have had their original nucleus removed, a process called 
nuclear transfer. In the initial work at the Roslin Institute, the egg 
cells along with their transplanted nuclei were then implanted di-
rectly into a foster mother, where they developed and, in the case 
of  Dolly,  resulted  in  a  viable  offspring.’  (http://www.sciam.com/
explorations/090297clone/beardsley.html). 

19  Human  clotting  factor  IX  (see:  http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/

content/abstract/278/5346/2130)

The  mechanical  stress  exercised  on  the  donor  egg  cell 
and  in  vitro  conditions  for  the  embryonic  culture  are 
critical aspects of the cloning techniques. A high degree 
of  technical  skill  and  quality  equipments  are  needed, 
otherwise the ‘quality’ (viability, health) of the clones, as 
well as the overall SCNT efficacy are compromised.

In cattle, at day 50 post transfer, pregnancy rates can be 
as high as 65% (and therefore similar to other assisted 

13

table 2. Abnormalities correlated with Scnt

Short-term 
abnormalities

These abnormalities include decreased rate of growth and chromosomal abnormalities. This usually leads to 
early embryonal death, within the first few weeks of gestation.

other abnormalities

Abnormalities can be observed later during gestation or even after birth. The major cause of such abnormalities 
is thought to be of epigenetic origin and can be correlated with inadequate reprogramming of the donor DNA.

Large offspring 
syndrome20 (LoS)

Post-natal Mortality

LOS comprises a large number of symptoms, often manifested as increased birth weight of offspring, due to 
foetal overgrowth and prolonged gestation. Also due to LOS, most of deliveries in cattle are performed via 
caesarean section. Following problems are related to LOS: placental abnormalities, stillbirth, malformations of 
several organs (liver, brain, uro-genital tract), immune dysfunction, infections. The pathological picture can vary 
considerably from case to case and among different species.

Postnatal mortality is observed in a biphasic modality: early neonatal mortality, usually within one week after 
birth, or later in life up to 6 months of age. In the first group, death is usually due to cardiovascular failure, 
whereas in the second group the majority of cases are related to immuno-deficiencies and / or liver failure. After 
six months of age, if the animal reaches adulthood, it is usually as healthy as control, non-cloned animals

reproduction technologies), but a continual loss is ob-
served up to delivery, leading to a live birth efficiency 
as low as 13% (a value, which is highly laboratory de-
pendent). After birth, around 20% of calves don’t sur-
vive  the  first  24h,  and  an  additional  15%  die  before 
weaning.20

Animal  cloning  induces  several  complications  with  re-
gard  to  the  pregnancy  and  developmental  anomalies 
appear  at  both  in  vitro  and  in  vivo  phases  (Table  2). 
Those comprise for example, missing embryo develop-
ment,  increased  foetal  loss,  placenta  inadequacy,  ab-
normal placenta and foetus size, increase in the average 
abortion rate.

For the cloned animals, following abnormalities are ob-
served  with  varying  frequencies:  an  increased  weight; 
malformations and reduced viability at birth; respiratory 
problems; enlarged foetal liver; epidermal haemorrhag-
es; kidney abnormalities; etc.

Epigenetic  changes  in  reprogramming  of  the  donor’s 
nucleus in SCNT have been implicated in causing many 
of these anomalies. Much of the ongoing research in this 
rapidly expanding field is focused on gathering and un-
derstanding  data  in  prospective  observation  studies  in 
cloned animals during their lifetime.

The  mentioned  phenotypic  abnormalities  are  docu-
mented in the first generation (F0) of cloned animals (i.e. 
in  the  clones  themselves),  while  their  offspring  (F1) 
seems to be apparently healthy. The available data, how-
ever,  are  still  limited  to  allow  at  present  any  definitive 
conclusions. Due to the long life cycle of the most of the 
farm animals in question, the data and information gath-
ering in order to respond to the questions regarding the 
SCNT cloned animals’ health may require a longer period 
of time than the one analysed so far.

20  The term used to describe some of these developmental anoma-

lies is ‘large offspring syndrome’ (LOS).

The EFSA Opinion will provide a more detailed analysis 
of  the  animal  health  implications  of  SCNT  based  upon 
the actually available data.

2.5.2. Animal welfare

The  animal  health  problems  related  to  SCNT  cloning 
techniques  (see  2.4.1.  for  details)  pose  multiple  and 
questions from the point of view of the animal welfare. 
When  considering  those  questions,  the  welfare  of  the 
clones  themselves  (F0  generation),  of  their  ‘surrogate 
mothers’, as well as of the next generations of the clones’ 
progeny  (F1,  F2  and  subsequent)  should  be  taken  into 
account, together with existing knowledge gaps in this 
area.

The  EFSA  draft  Opinion  provides  a  detailed  analysis  of 
the  animal  welfare  implications  of  SCNT  based  on  the 
actually available data.

2.6. Potential applications of animal cloning  
for the food supply

After 10 years of research activity the main planned ap-
plication of animal cloning for food production today is 
the propagation of a desirable genotype: individuals of 
high genetic merit, improved traits such as an increase in 
productivity,  animal  health  and/or  the  quality  of  food 
products. In this sense, cloning is seen as a way of ensur-
ing  a  continuum  supply  of  genetic  material  from  elite 
animals  to  be  used  in  breeding  programmes  for  farm 
animals. Thus, the animals to be cloned would be those 
having traits of interest for farming, such as resistance to 
diseases,  or  characteristics  of  interest  for  food  produc-
tion, such as quantity of milk, quality of meat or others.

Animal  cloning  is  therefore  seen  as  representing  a  fur-
ther technological process for animal breeding, in which 
reproduction occurs in an asexual manner and which al-
lows the propagation of desired traits more quickly than 
through standard mating schemes. At present a range of 
breeding techniques is employed in animal farming, in-

14

table 3. current Animal Breeding techniques

Artificial insemination 
(Ai)

in Vitro Fertilisation 
(iVF) 

Embryo splitting

Animal cloning for 
breeding purpose

Studies of AI for cattle breeding began as early as the 1900’s. By the 1940’s it had become a routine procedure. It 
allows mating between high quality livestock without the physical presence of the bull. The bull’s semen is 
collected, frozen and shipped worldwide, where female animals are inseminated. Nowadays AI represents nearly 
75% of all inseminations for cattle breeding and up to 85% for swine breeding. Breeders keep accurate records 
in order to avoid inbreeding problems.

IVF is employed in farm animal breeding in order to allow embryo selection and to increase productivity.

Each good quality embryo can be dissected by means of a stereoscopic microscope and a fine glass needle (or a 
razor) to give rise to twins. Using this procedure a 1.5 fold increase in productivity can be achieved, even in less 
developed countries, as the technology involved is not particularly complex. 

The extremely high fidelity in reproducing a particular genotype achieved by cloning could lead to ‘tailor-made’ 
strains of livestock. Biotechnology companies claim that the major potential benefit of cloning is the possibility 
of building up a herd of animals for breeding that will create genetically determined populations. Cloning of 
animals for mating would make it possible to respond more quickly than in traditional mating programmes to 
the needs of both animal breeding and the food industry. However, the relevance of SCNT to the long-term 
future applications for farm animal breeding and food production in Europe still needs to be explored. 

cluding:  artificial  insemination  (AI),  in  vitro  fertilization 
(IVF) and embryo splitting. SCNT may have an impact on 
classical farm animal breeding because it would be pos-
sible to duplicate animals with high genetic value to in-
crease  their  number  of  offspring  (e.g.  increasing  the 
number of valid males for artificial insemination; etc.).

The potential of cloning for animal breeding programmes 
has been boosted by the improvement in the efficacy of 
the technology involved. In fact, when Dolly was created 
the success rate was around 2%; now it is 10-20% in cat-
tle, although the data are highly species-dependent. As 
for other ART used in animal breeding programmes, the 
post-natal  success  rate  of  cloning  generally  remains 
quite low, regardless of the methodology used. In some 
cases, the low success rate - combined with the fact that 
cloned  animals  sometimes  differ  from  the  original  ani-
mal due to epigenetic effects, plus the high final cost of 
the technology - may make the possible applications of 
animal cloning in food and animal breeding industry a 
very  complex  issue,  and  cloning  might  become  unat-
tractive from an economic point of view.

Frozen semen from cattle is sold widely in the EU for arti-
ficial insemination purposes, and some companies in the 
US already offer semen from cloned bulls21, envisaging a 
rapid expansion of the market for cloned livestock from 
the US to the EU if this is commercialized.

meat  and  derivatives,  obtained  from  the  offspring  of 
clones.

The estimated timeline for the commercialization of food 
products derived from cloned animals has been indicat-
ed  for  the  USA  and  foresees  the  commercialization  of 
food  products  from  cloned  animals  within  a  couple  of 
years from now (see table 4 below).

table 4. indicative timetable for the commercialization  
of food products derived from cloned animals22

2005 → 2010:

2010 → 2015:

Semen and offspring from cloned 
cattle, and milk, meat and derivatives 
from offspring of cloned cattle; Semen 
and offspring from cloned pigs, and 
pig meat and derivatives from 
offspring of cloned pigs.

Cloned cattle and milk, beef and 
derivatives from cloned cattle; Cloned 
pigs, pig meat and derivatives from 
cloned pigs.

If authorised by the FDA (or EFSA in the EU), it may be 
hypothesised  that  it  will  take  at  least  3-5  years  before 
food from the offspring of clones becomes available to 
the consumer (earlier for swine, later for bovines). In the 
dairy industry, most clones will be breeding bulls used 
for semen collection.

This would suggest that the cloned animals have a low 
probability  of  entering  the  food  chain  by  themselves, 
and that only their progeny may be used for food pro-
duction. Offspring from cloned cattle and pigs are cur-
rently used for research purposes only, but may be ready 
to enter the food chain soon if this technique is commer-
cialized; the same applies to food products, such as milk, 

According  to  EU  experts,  no  cloned  animals  have  yet 
reached the food chain in Europe and no projects have 
yet been established to use bovine clones (or their prod-
ucts) for the food supply industry. However, an accurate 
forecast for the EU is still very difficult to make at present. 
The  EFSA  Opinion  may  provide  some  significant  infor-
mation on this question.

21  http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/life_and_style/food_and_

22 

drink/article1264944.ece

‘Dolly for dinner? Assessing commercial and regulatory trends in 
cloned livestock.’, Suk J. et al., Nature Biotechnology, 25(1), 2007. 

15

2.7. Long-term future applications of animal cloning

In  the  long  run,  the  cloning  of  farm  animals  could  be 
combined with genetic modifications so as to have live-
stock  with  specific  characteristics,  for  example,  genetic 
resistance to specific diseases (bovine BSE, mastitis, bru-
cellosis,  tropical  diseases  etc.)  or  producing  food  prod-
ucts  of  higher  value  than  natural  ones,  so-called  ‘nu-
traceuticals’, such as low-lactose milk, kappa casein rich 
milk,  better  beef  from  myostatin  TG  cattle  etc.  In  this 
way, cloning - in combination with transgenesis23 - may 
be  a  potentially  rich  source  of  edible  products  for  bio-
medical  purposes  (e.g.  production  of  proteins,  such  as 
milk  proteins,  to  be  used  for  therapeutic  purposes  at 
lower cost, or providing a source of organs or tissue for 
xenotransplantation).

In Europe, the most promising application still appears 
to be cloning for biomedical purpose, such as the pro-
duction of animal models for biomedical purposes (e.g. 
research in the field of Alzheimer’s disease24, models to 
improve the understanding of embryogenesis, bioreac-
tors etc.) or as sources of organs for transplantation. This 
use  of  animal  cloning,  however,  entails  completely  dif-
ferent aspects that need to be considered from the legal 
and ethical points of view, and so it is not addressed in 
this Opinion (see EGE Opinion on Cloning25).

2.8. Safety and risk assessment of cloning for food

To date, there has been no comprehensive scientific risk 
assessment  at  EU  level  on  the  use  of  products  from 
cloned animals or their offspring (e.g. meat and milk, se-
men, and embryos). EFSA is to produce a risk assessment 
that  will  cover  food  safety,  human  and  animal  health, 
animal welfare and the environmental implications that 
may flow from this use of biotechnology. The EFSA Opin-
ion,  due  to  be  published  in  early  2008,  will  cover  both 
cloned animals and their offspring.

2.8.1. Report by the US Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) on the health of cloned animals and safety of their 
food products

The US agency responsible for food safety (FDA) carried 
out  a  risk  assessment  of  cloned  animals  (cattle,  swine, 
sheep  and  goats),  their  offspring  and  their  food  prod-

23  As transgenic clones, the clones are derived from donor cells con-
taining exogenous DNA inserted by molecular biology techniques, 
they are subjected to risk assessments specific to the inserted con-
struct, its insertion site, and its subsequent expression. 

24  Vajta lab, Population Genetics and Embryology, Institute of Genet-
ics and Biotechnology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, University 
of Aarhus, DK-8830 Tjele, Denmark; Institute of Human Genetics, 
University of Aarhus, DK-8000 Aarhus, Denmark.

25  http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/docs/opinion9_

en.pdf

16

ucts26.  The  Opinion  of  the  FDA  has  been  adopted  on 
January 15, 2008.

The  FDA  attempted  first  of  all  to  identify  hazards  and 
risks on the basis of the available data and consideration 
of the biological processes involved in cloning. In order 
to  analyse  the  potential  risks  associated  with  food  de-
rived  from  animal  clones  and  their  progeny,  the  FDA 
asked whether such food posed any additional risk rela-
tive to that arising from sexually-derived animals or oth-
er kinds of ‘conventional’ animals27.

According  to  the  FDA  draft  report,  as  cloning  is  a  rela-
tively new technology, available data are still limited28,29. 
Data-set  size  will  therefore  increase  in  the  near  future, 
making risk assessment more and more significant30.

Because no additional genes are inserted, the FDA has 
concluded that the main hazard to which clones are ex-
posed  is  that  arising  from  incomplete  or  inappropriate 
nuclear reprogramming of the genetic information from 
the donor somatic nucleus (e.g. epigenetic effects31). This 
would  explain  the  low ‘success  rate’  of  cloning,  death, 
metabolic derangements, or other the perinatal difficul-
ties observed in some newborn clones, or occasional ex-
amples  of  altered  metabolic  pathways  in  very  young 
animals.  Those  clones  exhibiting  the  above  malforma-
tion will be excluded from the market; food hazard may 
remain  for  those  clones  that  have  apparently  normal 
functions,  but  with  sub-clinical  physiological  anoma-

26  http://www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/NEWS/2006/NEW01541.html
27 

In this context, ‘conventional animals’ were defined as ‘animals de-
rived by any reproductive means other than SCNT’, thus compris-
ing other ARTs such as artificial insemination and IVF.

28  Hazards  and  risks  are  being  identified,  as  well  as  the  degree  to 
which existing data (and their pool size) address questions of food 
safety.

29  At present, most of the research studies on animal cloning report 
on the success rates of this biotechnology from various donor cell 
sources and culture conditions; they also report on the frequency 
of abnormalities and other problems such as the large offspring 
syndrome (LOS), the nature and frequency of developmental de-
fects. 

30  The question arises as to whether enough data have been collect-
ed to draw confident conclusions regarding food products derived 
from animal clones. It is true that the cloning technology has not 
yet generated large, statistically strong datasets on clones. In this 
sense,  one  observation  made  by  the  FDA  concerning  Develop-
mental Study was that the data on the health of livestock clones 
were consistent across species, even if some anomalies appear to 
be species-specific. For example, although LOS seems to be more 
prevalent in cattle and sheep, surviving animals overcame initial 
anomalies and became ‘healthy and normal.’ According to the FDA, 
such consistency increases the value of even small datasets (e.g. 
goats), and contributes to the judgments regarding the health of 
these clones and their suitability as food sources. In addition, the 
FDA evaluated other reports on the composition of meat and milk 
from clones and their progeny. 

31  Epigenetics describes stable alterations in gene expression poten-
tials that arise during development and cell proliferation, or altera-
tions in DNA function without alterations in DNA sequence.

table 5. FdA study datasets

Source

Animals

number

group

Analysis

Cyagra

Cattle

67 clones
83 controls

1) Neonatal
2) 1-6 months
3) Up to 18 months

1) clinical chemistry and hematology
2) veterinary examination

Viagen

Swine

7 clones
15 controls

4 clones
3 controls

F1 progeny:
402 clones
300 controls

50 days to 6 months

Veterinary examination
Composition of meat

For fertility tests

Semen analysis, breeding capacity

Development up to ca. 6 
months

Abnormalities and weight at birth, physiology tests
Veterinary examination

Analysis was not performed in a double blind manner.

lies32. However, these effects are not transmitted to the 
offspring of the healthy animals that are those used for 
reproduction, as it is supposed that characteristics of an 
epigenetic nature are in general not transmitted to the 
descendance.

The  FDA  could  not  identify  any  toxicological  hazard  of 
concern for human consumers and, although they stated 
that additional data from other sets of animals would be 
useful in increasing confidence in food safety, the weight 
of  evidence  at  this  time  is  sufficient  for  the  agency  to 
draw the conclusions it has set out in its Draft Risk As-
sessment with reasonable certainty.

2.9. Biodiversity, epidemics.

Some have advocated that the multiplication of bioengi-
neered gene pools, in a repetitive number through clon-
ing,  could  interact  with  mechanisms  of  population  ge-
netics  and  may  seriously  damage  biodiversity33  and 
favour the consolidation of specific allelic frequencies at 
a population level34. It may therefore have a negative im-
pact on adaptive mechanisms35 of the species and sig-
nificant social and economic consequences for rural ar-

32  The preliminary FDA draft described the analysis of the composi-
tion of meat (from bovine and swine clones) and milk (from bovine 
clones) products from F0 generation. The above analysis has not 
shown  any  biologically  relevant  difference  with  the  control  ani-
mals, or food commonly consumed from these species on a daily 
basis.  Another  dataset  on  the  progeny  (F1)  of  swine  clones  also 
indicated that the composition of meat from those animals does 
not differ from that of traditionally bred animals (see Table 6).
33  An example in agriculture: the 1845 Irish potato famine was due to 
genetic  uniformity  of  potato  plants.  (http://www.centerforfood-
safety.org/pubs/fact%20sheet.pdf )

34  The  possibility  of  continuously  recombining  genetic  data  allows 
adaptive processes. The primary source of genetic variations in liv-
ing  beings  is  random  genetic  mutation  and  during  cell  division. 
The first one creates new genetic information that will be naturally 
selected over time, the second one reshuffles the random genetic 
changes created by mutations.

35  http://blog.greenparty.ca/en/node/461

17

eas,  agricultural  trade  and  public  perception36.  In  the 
long  run  it  may  cause  the  affirmation  of  specific  allelic 
frequencies,  which  may  lead  to  epidemics  due  to  the 
spread of breeds sensitive to a disease that may rapidly 
propagate. It may be a way to reduce diversity in species 
that are already suffering from a reduction of their ge-
netic base. Therefore, cloning may cause an increase in 
pathogenic gene frequencies at a population level or the 
loss of adaptive capacities.

Countering the arguments above, some have advocated 
that cloning cannot affect the incidence of given genes 
at  population  or  species  level  owing  to  the  limited 
number of cloned animals, and that cloning could be a 
useful tool to breed animals with specific gene lineage, 
such as cattle that are resistant to diseases or to specific 
environments37.

2.10. Farm animal cloning at international level

The first labs involved in mammal SCNT were in the USA, 
UK and Japan. However, over the last decade, and in par-
ticular between 1997 and 2003, SCNT research began to 
be  carried  out  in  different  regions  of  the  globe.  At 
present,  more  than  160  laboratories  in  about  37  coun-
tries are working on SCNT. Most of the resources are di-
rected towards livestock cloning (around 75% of cases), 
whereas less than 30% of the work is directed at labora-
tory animals. Cattle are most efficiently cloned by SCNT, 
which is practised in around 80 laboratories (50% of total 
cloning labs) in 24 countries.

European Union

At present, there are very few institutes working on the 
cloning of large animals, and fewer still that have an eco-
nomic  interest  in  doing  so  (mainly  for  racehorses  and 
other lucrative business, less for the food industry per se). 

36  http://www.soilassociation.org/
37  http://www.kirinholdings.co.jp/english/ir/news_release0601.html

In the EU there are currently roughly 120 cattle clones38: 
in France (ca. 80), Germany (ca. 30) and Italy (ca. 10).

Japan

Japan is the country with probably the highest number 
of cloned animals. Since the first cloned calves born in 
1990,  some  1  242  cloned  bovine  animals  have  been 
manufactured in Japan to date (status as of end March 
2007). As regards the cloning of pigs for biomedical re-
search purposes, the first third-generation pig was born 
in  August  2007  at  Meiji  University  in Tokyo39.  Reaching 
the fourth generation of clones has significant implica-
tions for the breeding and reproduction of valuable large 
cloned animals, such as racehorses and mating bulls.

United States of America (USA)

So far the USA is the country in which most of the compa-
nies have been established with the aim of animal clon-
ing for the food industry. The FDA report was based on a 
large  population  of  cloned  animals  derived  from  two 
such  companies:  ViaGen40  and  Cyagra41.  There  are  cur-
rently between 1 000 and 2 000 cloned cattle in the USA.

Argentina

The  first  cloned  calf  was  born  in  Argentina  in  summer 
2002.  Argentina  then  began  to  actively  invest  in  the 
cloning of large animals. Some of the US-based livestock 
cloning companies opened branches in South America, 
especially Argentina and Brazil.

China

Cloning research has been developing in China since the 
1990’s. The first company specialising in SCNT was found-
ed in 2001 and its focus is mainly on the cloning of domes-
tic animals. At the moment, China seems to represent a 
possible  market  for  cloned  livestock,  as  the  first  cloned 
calves of Australian origin were sold to China in early 2002. 
Chinese experts advocated a use of SCNT for the preserva-
tion of endangered species, such as the giant panda.

3.  Legal aspects

The framework of EU legislation on animal breeding, ani-
mal health and welfare and food is applicable to any fu-
ture  technologies  on  animals,  such  as  animal  cloning 
(SCNT). Most EU legislation may be applicable to animal 

38  Data from Agrobiogen (Germany). http://www.agrobiogen.com/
39  The pig is an important model in biomedical research, particularly 
for therapeutic purposes for diseases such as diabetes and trans-
plantation of the pancreatic Langerhans islets.
40  http://www.viagen.com/en/our-services/cloning/
41  http://www.cyagra.com/index.htm

cloning under specific circumstances, as there is currently 
no dedicated regulation on food products derived from 
cloned animals or animal cloning as such in the EU.

EU  legislation  on  animals  for  food  production  requires 
EU competence in the following sectors:

1. 

Internal  market  for  foodstuffs:  National  laws 
hinder the free movement of foodstuffs and cre-
ate unfair competition, thereby directly affecting 
the functioning of the internal market.

2.  Food  safety  and  consumer  health  protection: 
In order to protect public health, certain foods are 
subject to a safety assessment via a Community 
procedure before being marketed in the EU (har-
monised  safety  approach  at  EU  level).  Labelling 
measures are also desirable, in order for the con-
sumer to make an informed choice.

3.  Animal welfare and health: protection of animal 
health  and  welfare  is  an  animal  husbandry  re-
quirement in the EU.

4.  Zootechnics: regulation of the breeding aspects 

of animal husbandry.

Other  relevant  regulatory  aspects  to  be  taken  into  ac-
count  include:  1)  National  legislation  on  cloning  (EU 
Member States); (2) International trade agreements, (3) 
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR).

3.1. EU Regulatory Framework.

The EU Treaty lays down a number of principles (which 
are properly reflected in the European Charter of Funda-
mental  Rights42)  that  may  apply  to  animal  cloning  for 
food production, namely:

Article 14 (‘Free movement of goods, persons, serv-
ices and capital’); Article 94 (‘EU legislation for the ap-
proximation of such legislation of the Member States 
as directly affects the establishment or functioning 
of  the  common  market.’)  Article  95  (‘The  Commis-
sion, in its proposals, concerning health, safety, envi-
ronmental  protection  and  consumer  protection, 
will take as a base a high level of protection, taking 
account in particular of any new development based 
on scientific facts.)

The  Additional  Protocol  to  the  Amsterdam  Treaty  also 
states that EU Member States desire to ensure improved 

42  Charter of Fundamental Rights: ‘Conscious of its spiritual and mor-
al heritage, the Union is founded on the indivisible, universal val-
ues of human dignity, freedom, equality and solidarity; it is based 
on the principles of democracy and the rule of law. It places the 
individual at the heart of its activities, by establishing the citizen-
ship of the Union and by creating an area of freedom, security and 
justice.’ (…) It seeks to promote balanced and sustainable develop-
ment and ensures free movement of persons, goods, services and 
capital, and the freedom of establishment.

18

protection and respect for the welfare of ‘animals as sen-
tient beings’ and that

‘the European Community, in formulating and imple-
menting  the  Community’s  agricultural,  transport,  in-
ternal market and research policies, the Community 
and the Member States shall pay full regard to the 
welfare  requirements  of  animals,  while  respecting 
the  legislative  or  administrative  provisions  and  cus-
toms of the Member States relating in particular to re-
ligious rites, cultural traditions and regional heritage.’

3.1.1. EU food regulations

Regulation  (EC)  N°  178/2002  lays  down  the  general 
principles of EU food law43 with regard to protection of 
human life and health and the protection of consumers’ 
interests, taking account of, where appropriate, the pro-
tection  of  animal  health  and  welfare,  plant  health  and 
the environment. It entails in particular an obligation on 
operators  to  place  on  the  market  only  food  for  which 
they have an assurance of safety. According to the above 
Regulation, food that complies with Community provi-
sions governing food safety shall be deemed to be safe 
insofar  as  the  aspects  covered  by  specific  Community 
provisions  are  concerned44. The  general  principles  and 
provisions of food law apply to all foods, including food 
derived from clones and their offspring.

EU Directive 2000/13/EC on the labelling of food prod-
ucts lays down rules for the labelling of foodstuffs to en-
able European consumers to obtain comprehensive in-
formation on the content and the composition of food 
products. Labelling helps consumers make an informed 
choice  when  purchasing  their  foodstuffs.  Under  the 
terms of the above Directive, it is not necessary to label a 
production technique or process ‘as such’, e.g. a cloning 
technique, used in the production of the foodstuff.

Regulation  (EC)  No  258/97  on  novel  foods  and  novel 
food ingredients covers food that was not used to a sig-
nificant degree for human consumption before 15 May 
1997, and inter alia falls into category (e) of Article 1(2):

foods  and  food  ingredients  consisting  of  or  isolated 
from plants and food ingredients isolated from animals, 

43  General Food Law (Regulation 178/2002): Objectives: High level of 
protection of human life and health and the protection of consum-
ers’ interests, including fair practices in food trade, taking account 
of, where appropriate, the protection of animal health and welfare, 
plant health and the environment; Free movement of Food; Inter-
national standards taken into consideration; Science based deci-
sions-making.  In  some cases other legitimate factors need to be 
taken into account: e.g. societal, economic, traditional, ethical and 
environmental factors and the feasibility of controls.

44  When  there  are  no  specific  provisions  at  Community  level,  food 
products  have  to  conform  to  national  food  law  of  the  Member 
States in whose territory they are marketed (see also the Art. 28 
and 30 of the EU Treaty).

except for foods and food ingredients obtained by tradi-
tional propagating or breeding practices and having a 
history of safe food use.

Regulation (EC) No 258/97 may cover animal food prod-
ucts  (e.g.  meat,  milk)  produced  from  a  clone,  but  not 
food products derived from offspring of clones, since off-
spring are reproduced in a ‘conventional’ way45 (i.e. using 
a traditional breeding technique).

Regulation  (EC)  No  258/97  also  states  that,  in  order  to 
protect public health, novel foods are subject to a safety 
assessment and authorisation under a Community pro-
cedure before they are placed on the market (EFSA). Ad-
ditional specific labelling for novel foods may be required 
in  a  case  where  a  novel  food  or  food  ingredient  is  no 
longer equivalent to an existing food or food ingredient. 
The comparison, based on a scientific assessment, must 
have regard to the accepted limits of natural variations 
for characteristics of food.

GMO legislation  would  apply  only if  the  cloning  tech-
nique were to be combined with genetic modification. 
Whilst  cloned  animals  are  not  necessarily  genetically 
modified,  one  of  the  reasons  for  using  cloned  animals 
may be the rapid extension of inserted genetic material.

Directive  2001/18/EC  regulates  the  deliberate  release 
into  the  environment  of  genetically  modified  organ-
isms and therefore has environmental and human health 
protection purposes as stated under Article 1 of the Di-
rective46.  According  to  Directive  2001/18/EC47,  ‘geneti-
cally  modified  organism’  (GMO)  means  an  organism, 
with  the  exception  of  human  beings,  in  which  the  ge-
netic  material  has  been  altered  in  a  way  that  does  not 
occur naturally by mating and/or natural recombination. 
Within  the  terms  of  this  definition,  a  genetic  modifica-
tion occurs at least through the use of one of the tech-
niques listed in Annex I A of the above Directive48.

EU  legislation  on  GMOs  (Directive  2001/18/EC,  Regula-
tions  (EC)  1829/2003  and  1830/200349)  therefore  seem 

45  EFSA will clarify in its Opinion the applicability of EC/258/97 provi-

46 

sions to products from clones and offspring.
In accordance with the precautionary principle, the objective of 
this Directive is to approximate the laws, regulations and adminis-
trative  provisions  of  the  Member  States  and  to  protect  human 
health and the environment when: 1) carrying out the deliberate 
release  into  the  environment  of  genetically  modified  organisms 
for  any  other  purposes  than  placing  on  the  market  within  the 
Community, 2) placing on the market genetically modified organ-
isms as or in products within the Community.

47  Directive  2001/18/EC  on  the  deliberate  release  into  the  environ-

ment of genetically modified organisms; Scope:  Article 2

48  Regulations (EC) No 1829/2003 and 1830/2003 refer to the defini-

tion of GMO laid down in Directive 2001/18/EC.

49  Directive 2001/18/EC on the deliberate release of GMOs into the 
environment  and  Regulations  1829/2003  on  GM  food  and  feed 
and 1830/2003 on labelling and traceability of GMOs.

19

not to be applicable to cloning techniques unless SCNT 
is combined with genetic modification50. The applicabil-
ity of this legal framework will need to be explored on a 
case-by-case basis as regards the technique used to pro-
duce the clones.

Genetically modified foods or food ingredients may be 
exempt from the requirements of Regulation 258/97 as 
they are separately covered by Regulation 1829/2003 on 
genetically modified food and feed.

3.1.2. Other existing relevant EU legislation: zootechnics, 
animal welfare, animal health

The breeding aspects of animal cloning are covered by 
Community 
(Directives 
legislation  on  zootechnics 
77/504/EEC, 88/661/EEC, 89/361/EEC, 90/427EEC, 94/28/
EC), which has as its aim the need to avoid trade restric-
tions for purebred animals.

Zootechnical  rules  have  harmonised  the  EU  marketing 
and  import  of  animals,  semen,  ova  and  embryos 
whether they have been bred by natural mating or pro-
duced using biotechnological techniques such as artifi-
cial  insemination,  embryo  transfer,  in-vitro-fertilisation 
or SCNT. The relevant provisions are the following:

‘Member States shall ensure that the following shall 
not  be  prohibited,  restricted  or 
impeded  on 
zootechnical grounds: 1) intra-Community trade in 
pure-bred breeding animals of the bovine species, 
2) intra-Community trade in the semen and embry-
os  of  pure-bred  breeding  animals  of  the  bovine 
species  (…)  intra-Community  trade  in  bulls  used 
for  artificial  insemination’.  (Directive  77/504/EEC, 
Article 2)

Some  EU  regulations  are  designed  to  regulate  specific 
animal  species,  for  example  Dir.  88/661/EEC  concerns 
swine species, Dir. 89/361/EEC sheep and goats, and Dir. 
90/427 equidae.

Council Directive 94/28/EC amending Directive 77/504/
EEC: Articles 4 – 7 inclusive refer to the import of animals, 
semen, ova and embryos respectively:

‘To be imported, the (animals, semen, ova) embryos 
referred to in Article 1 must: 1) come from an animal 
which is entered or registered in a herd book or reg-
ister kept by an authority shown on one of the lists 
referred to in Article 3 (1); 2) be accompanied by a 
pedigree  and  zootechnical  certificate  to  be  drawn 
up  in  accordance  with  the  procedure  laid  down  in 
Article 12.

50  The  above  Directive  would  therefore  apply  to  animal  cloning  if 
manipulation of the gene sequence of the cloned animal were to 
be carried out.

Trade in food products or animal farming is therefore al-
ready regulated at EU level.

Animal  welfare  aspects  are  covered  by  the  Council  of 
Europe’s  European Conventions on the Protection of Ani-
mals51  and  several  Council  Directives.  Council  Directive 
98/58, in particular, deals with the protection of animals 
kept for farming purposes, and states that natural, artifi-
cial breeding or other breeding procedures which cause, 
or are likely to cause, suffering or injury to any of the ani-
mals concerned must not be practised.

The more recent Council Directive 1999/74/EC52 defines 
the minimum welfare criteria and addresses alternative 
forms of rearing for laying hens, such as free range and 
enriched  environment  to  allow  animals  a  more  natural 
behaviour53.

In the case of cattle and pig rearing, Council Directives 
91/629/EEC  and  91/630/EEC  opened  the  debate  about 
the  most  appropriate  farming  techniques  to  achieve 
better health and welfare results to improve the quality 
of the meat; as a consequence, sow stalls were banned 
and other measures were adopted54, such as investing in 
research to find alternative solutions to castration of pig-
lets.

EU animal health rules are applicable to intra-Commu-
nity trade in and imports of live animals, semen, ova and 
embryos,  irrespective  of  whether  they  have  been  bred 
by  natural  mating  or  produced  using  biotechnological 
techniques such as artificial insemination, embryo trans-
fer, and in vitro fertilisation.

Moreover,  the  framework  of  the  present  EU  legislation 
on animal health is also applicable to the movement of 
live  animals  and  their  products  resulting  from  future 
technologies such as SCNT.

Council Directive 89/556/EEC of 25 September 1989 on 
animal  health  conditions  governing  intra-Community 
trade in and importation from third countries of embry-

51  http://ec.europa.eu/food/animal/welfare/references/farmspc/

jour323_en.pdf
Article  1: ‘This  Convention  shall  apply  to  the  keeping,  care  and 
housing of animals, and in particular to animals in modern inten-
sive stock-farming systems’.

52  1999/74/EC of 19 July 1999 laying down minimum standards for 

the protection of laying hens. 

53  Since then, investments have been increasing for research into the 
correlation  between  hen  farming  methodology,  animal  welfare 
and public health. Simultaneously, the market quota of ‘free range’ 
eggs has been increasing steadily in many EU countries, showing 
European consumers’ interest in welfare friendly food products, as 
reported by two Eurobarometers surveys on ‘Consumers attitudes 
towards welfare friendly products’ in 2005 and 2006 http://ec.eu-
ropa.eu/food/animal/welfare/euro_barometer25_en.pdf 

54  91/629/EC and 91/630/EC of 19 November 1991 laying down min-

imum standards for the protection of cattle and pigs.

20

 
os of domestic animals of the bovine species and Coun-
cil Directive 88/407/EEC of 14 June 1988 laying down the 
animal health requirements applicable to intra-Commu-
nity trade in and imports of semen of domestic bovine 
species  regulate  the  import  of  bovine  semen  and  em-
bryos55, subject to the exceptions set out in Article 1(2) 
of Directive 89/556/EEC: ‘This Directive shall not apply to 
embryos derived by transfer of nuclei’. However, to date, 
no  EU  Member  States  have  taken  action  on  this  exclu-
sion area, and therefore harmonised EU rules apply56.

In addition, there are numerous directives and decisions 
laying down animal health requirements relating to the 
movement of semen, ova and embryos of other animal 
species,  but  none  of  the  other  pieces  of  legislation  in-
clude any such exception. Cloned embryos from animal 
species other than bovines are therefore covered by EU 
animal health legislation.

The legal framework that regulates animal cloning for 
research purposes is Directive 86/609/EEC on the pro-
tection of animals used for experimental and other sci-
entific  purposes.  The  scope  of  that  Directive  is  deter-
mined  by  the  likelihood  of  an  animal  being  subject  to 
pain,  suffering,  distress  or  lasting  harm,  including  any 
course of action intended, or liable, to result in the birth 
of an animal in any such condition.

Article 2 (d) ‘experiment’ means any use of an animal for 
experimental  or  other  scientific  purposes  which  may 
cause it pain, suffering, distress or lasting harm, includ-
ing any course of action intended, or liable, to result in 
the birth of an animal in any such condition, …57

The Council of Europe Convention ETS 123, on the same 
subject, was adopted in 1986. The Community is a party 
to this Convention, with Directive 86/609/EEC as the im-
plementing instrument. With reference to genetically al-
tered  animals,  the  Parties  to  the  Convention  agreed  to 
interpret the Convention as follows:

(1)  For the purpose of the Convention, Parties under-
stand  the  expression  ‘animals  carrying  harmful 
genetic  modifications’  as  referring  to  genetically 
engineered animals and mutant animals capable 
of producing as a consequence offspring likely to 
suffer significantly.

(2)  Generating  a  transgenic  strain  is  considered  as 
constituting a procedure under Article 1, sub-par-
agraph 2 c.

(3)  The breeding of animals carrying harmful genetic 
modifications may be considered on certain con-
ditions to be determined by each Party as a pro-
cedure  under  Article  1,  sub-paragraph  2  c.  Such 
procedure must be carried out in accordance with 
the Convention.
If  the  breeding  of  animals  carrying  harmful  ge-
netic modifications is not considered to be a pro-
cedure, Articles 14, 15 and 16 shall apply. 58

(4) 

3.2. National legislation in the EU Member States

Denmark is the only EU Member State that has specific 
legislation  on  cloning  and  genetic  modification  of  ani-
mals. The law was passed in Denmark in June 2005 (Act 
no. 550 of 24 June 2005) and it allowed the cloning and 
genetic modification of vertebrate animals after approv-
al from the Animal Research Inspectorate (§ 1) for:

•	
•	

•	

•	

Basic	research	(studies	of	biological	mechanisms)
Applied	research	aiming	at	considerable	improve-
ment of health or environment.
Breeding	 of	 animals	 producing	 substances	 of	
considerable  benefit  to  health  and  the  environ-
ment or
Teaching	and	education	at	universities	and	simi-
lar or other teaching at the same level and teach-
ing of persons who are dealing with cloning and 
gene modification.

According  to  Danish  law,  the  Animal  Experiments  In-
spectorate may refuse approval if the cloning, the gene 
modification  or  the  use  of  cloned  or  genetically  modi-
fied  vertebrates  is  not  evaluated  to  be  of  considerable 
benefit. The same applies to breeding of cloned and ge-
netically modified animals used for experiments. Animal 
cloning is therefore not allowed if the expected benefit 
deriving  therefore  is  not  relevant59. The  Animal  Experi-
ments Inspectorate will authorise cloning practice on a 
case-by-case basis and take the decision for approval fol-
lowing  an  assessment  based,  inter  alia,  on  scientific  is-
sues, animal welfare, integrity of the cloned animals, en-
vironmental  risks  compared  to  the  benefits  of  such 
technology, etc.

Possible  cloning  applications,  which  are  subject  to  ap-
proval, include the use of this animal biotechnology for 
the production of human proteins (therapeutic use, e.g. 
producing milk with a special composition), but not ani-
mals  with  special  characteristics  for  food  production 
purposes (meat aimed at a special market). The law is si-

55  For  bovine  embryos  derived  by  transfer  of  nuclei,  which  are  ex-
cluded from the scope of Directive 89/556/EEC [OJ L 302, 19.10.89, 
p.1], Member States are allowed to set national import conditions.
56  There  are  plans  for  an  amendment  to  Council  Directive  89/556/

EEC in the near future to close this gap.

57  Council  Directive  86/609/EEC  of  24  November,  OJ  L  358, 
18.12.1986,  p.  1–28  -http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexU-
riServ.do?uri=CELEX:31986L0609:EN:NOT

58  http://www.coe.int/t/e/legal_affairs/legal_co-operation/biologi-
cal_safety,_use_of_animals/laboratory_animals/Res%20interpre-
tation.asp#TopOfPage

59  The Animal Experiment Inspectorate is not in possession of suffi-
cient knowledge to make the evaluation; it may obtain the opin-
ion of a competent authority institution or the like before making 
the decision. 

21

lent  about  the  import  of  cloned  animals  and  products 
derived from them.

Article  5.3  addresses  the  manner  in  which  risk  assess-
ments may be interpreted:

3.3. World Trade Organisation (WTO), GATT and SPS 
agreements

The  World  Trade  Organisation  (WTO)  has  developed  a 
multilateral system of trade to lower customs and trade 
barriers,  and  abolish  discrimination  in  international 
trade. WTO agreements are the legal ground rules for in-
ternational  commerce  which  were  negotiated  and 
signed by a large majority of the world’s trading nations 
and ratified by their parliaments. The General Agreement 
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the Sanitary and Phyto 
Sanitary  (SPS)  agreement  include  measures  that  might 
be  relevant  for  trade  of  food  products  resulting  from 
animal cloning.

Since  1995  (after  the  Uruguay  Round  of  the  General 
Agreement  on Tariffs  and Trade  -GATT)  an  agreement 
entered  into  force  regarding  food  safety,  animal  and 
plant  health.  Aspects  covered  by  the  agreement  in-
clude  measures  related  to  food  contamination,  pests 
and  pesticides  and  labeling.  As  a  consequence,  indi-
vidual  WTO  Member  States’  policies  regarding  the 
blocking of food imports are restricted to specific situ-
ations,  and  no  WTO  Member  State  can  endorse  safe-
guard measures or a ban against a specific trade prod-
uct (including food) unless it has carried out a relevant 
risk  assessment  and  provides  evidence  to  support  a 
trade restriction.

Under the WTO SPS agreement, the application of quar-
antine policies for safety reasons is regarded as a ‘techni-
cal barrier to trade’ to the detriment of foreign competi-
tors.  According  to  the  SPS  agreement,  if  there  is  no 
scientific  evidence  proving  a  product  to  be  a  threat  to 
human health and the environment, its marketing must 
be authorized. It is up to the individual member coun-
tries of the WTO to demonstrate that a product is dan-
gerous before its trade can be prevented, even if it is im-
possible  to  accurately  predict  all  damage  posed  by  all 
products.

Articles 5.1 and 5.2 of the SPS agreement state

‘Members  shall  ensure  that  their  sanitary  or  phy-
tosanitary measures are based on an assessment, as 
appropriate to the circumstances, of the risks to hu-
man,  animal  or  plant  life  or  health,  taking  into  ac-
count risk assessment techniques developed by the 
relevant  international  organizations’  and ‘In  the  as-
sessment  of  risks,  Members  shall  take  into  account 
available scientific evidence; relevant processes and 
production  methods;  relevant  inspection,  sampling 
and testing methods; prevalence of specific diseases 
or pests; existence of pest- or disease-free areas; rel-
evant ecological and environmental conditions; and 
quarantine or other treatment’.

22

‘In assessing the risk to animal or plant life or health 
and  determining  the  measure  to  be  applied  for 
achieving  the  appropriate  level  of  sanitary  or  phy-
tosanitary protection from such risk, Members shall 
take  into  account  as  relevant  economic  factors:  the 
potential  damage  in  terms  of  loss  of  production  or 
sales  in  the  event  of  the  entry,  establishment  or 
spread  of  a  pest  or  disease;  the  costs  of  control  or 
eradication in the territory of the importing Member; 
and the relative cost-effectiveness of alternative ap-
proaches to limiting risks.’

The import/export of food products derived from animal 
cloning will be subject to WTO provisions on trade and 
barriers to global trade.

3.4. WHO-FAO Codex Alimentarius

The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Na-
tions  (FAO)  and  the  World  Health  Organization  (WHO) 
have encouraged food-related scientific and technologi-
cal  research,  as  well  as  discussion,  to  raise  awareness 
about food safety, hygiene and related issues at interna-
tional level. In 1963 they created the Codex Alimentar-
ius60 as a reference document for consumers, food pro-
ducers,  manufacturers  and  national 
food  control 
agencies.  Since  then,  the  Codex  Alimentarius  has  ena-
bled the formulation and harmonization of food stand-
ards and has ensured the protection of public health and 
fair practices in the food trade through the global imple-
mentation of such standards worldwide.

The Codex Alimentarius also has relevance for the inter-
national  food  trade. Thus,  the WTO  Agreement  on  the 
Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS 
Agreement) and the Agreement on Technical Barriers to 
Trade  (TBT  Agreement)  have  encouraged  the  interna-
tional harmonization of food standards. Codex Alimen-
tarius  standards  have  become  the  benchmarks  for  na-
food  measures  and  regulations,  and  their 
tional 
evaluation  within  the  legal  parameters  of  the  WTO 
Agreements.

The latest report of the Ad Hoc Intergovernmental Task 
Force on Food Derived from Biotechnology (September 
200761) pointed out at the guidelines for risk assessment 
when  comparing  recombinant-DNA  animals  with  their 
conventional counterparts in order to identify new or al-
tered hazards in the new animals. A key element in such 
analysis is to take as a reference animals with a history of 
safe use. However, the established guidelines do not ap-
ply to cloning. As the mandate of the work was discussed, 

60  http://www.codexalimentarius.net/web/index_en.jsp
61  http://www.codexalimentarius.net/web/archives.jsp?lang=en

the work was limited to genetic modification and clon-
ing was seen as an assisting technique for genetic modi-
fication.

3.5. Intellectual Property (IP) regulation

As a general rule, under Article 52 of the European Pat-
ent Convention, patents can be granted to any invention 
which is new, is susceptible of industrial application and 
involves  an  inventive  step.  Exceptions  can  be  made  in 
the case of specific classes of inventions that cannot be 
patented, namely for methods of treatment (for both di-
agnostic and surgery), plant or animal varieties and es-
sential  biological  processes  for  their  production  and, 
lastly, for inventions contrary to ‘ordre public’ and/or mo-
rality.  For  biotechnological  processes,  which  cloning 
could  be  interpreted  to  be,  rules  23b,  c  and  d  apply62, 
opening the possibility of patenting, if cloning were not 
to fall into the categories described in Article 53(a) and, 
in  particular,  in  ‘processes  for  modifying  the  genetic 
identity of animals which are likely to cause them suffer-
ing  without  any  substantial  medical  benefit  to  man  or 
animal, and also animals resulting from such processes’.

According to Rule 23d (d) of the European Patents Con-
vention,  patents  shall  not  be  granted  to  processes  for 
modifying the genetic identity of animals which are like-
ly to cause them suffering without any substantial medi-
cal benefit to man or animal, and also animals resulting 
from  such  processes63.  This  is  also  stated  in  Directive 

62  Rule  23b…(2) ‘Biotechnological  inventions’  are  inventions  which 
concern a product consisting of or containing biological material 
or  a  process  by  means  of  which  biological  material  is  produced, 
processed or used. (3) ‘Biological material’ means any material con-
taining  genetic  information  and  capable  of  reproducing  itself  or 
being reproduced in a biological system.; Rule 23c Biotechnologi-
cal inventions shall also be patentable if they concern: (a) biologi-
cal material which is isolated from its natural environment or pro-
duced  by  means  of  a  technical  process  even  if  it  previously 
occurred in nature; (b) plants or animals if the technical feasibility 
of the invention is not confined to a particular plant or animal vari-
ety; a microbiological or other technical process, or a product ob-
tained  by  means  of  such  a  process  other  than  a  plant  or  animal 
variety.; Rule 23d Under Article 53(a), European patents shall not 
be granted in respect of biotechnological inventions which, in par-
ticular, concern the following: (a) processes for cloning human be-
ings; (b) processes for modifying the germ line genetic identity of 
human beings; (c) uses of human embryos for industrial or com-
mercial purposes; (d) processes for modifying the genetic identity 
of  animals  which  are  likely  to  cause  them  suffering  without  any 
substantial medical benefit to man or animal, and also animals re-
sulting from such processes.

63  EPO: Rule 23d’Exceptions to patentability Under Article 53(a), Euro-
pean patents shall not be granted in respect of biotechnological 
inventions which, in particular, concern the following: (a) process-
es for cloning human beings; (b) processes for modifying the germ 
line genetic identity of human beings; (c) uses of human embryos 
for industrial or commercial purposes; (d) processes for modifying 
the genetic identity of animals which are likely to cause them suf-
fering without any substantial medical benefit to man or animal, 
and also animals resulting from such processes.’ (http://www.euro-
pean-patent-office.org/legal/epc/pdf/epc_2006_v5_bm_en.pdf )

98/44/EC on the legal protection of biotechnological in-
ventions where it is also indicated that ‘inventions shall 
be considered unpatentable where their commercial ex-
ploitation would be contrary to ordre public or morality; 
however, exploitation shall not be deemed to be so con-
trary  merely  because  it  is  prohibited  by  law  or  regula-
tion’. Directive EC/98/44, specifically Article 6, states:

1. Inventions shall be considered unpatentable where 
their  commercial  exploitation  would  be  contrary  to 
ordre public or morality; 2. On the basis of paragraph 
1, the following, in particular, shall be considered un-
patentable: (…) (d) processes for modifying the ge-
netic  identity  of  animals  which  are  likely  to  cause 
them suffering without any substantial medical ben-
efit to man or animal, and also animals resulting from 
such processes.

This last condition may be interpreted to mean that ani-
mal cloning is not acceptable for public order and moral-
ity if it involves animal suffering and is not carried out for 
medical purposes. The question remains as to whether 
the arguments in support of animal cloning for food can 
be  categorized  as  a  substantial  medical  benefit  and 
whether  cloning  can  be  regarded  as  a  modification  of 
the animal gene identity.

Article 27 (3)(b) of the TRIPS Agreement (WTO) provides 
that animals other than micro-organisms, and essentially 
biological processes for the production of animals other 
than non-biological and microbiological processes, may 
be  excluded  from  patentability.  The  European  Patent 
Convention recognizes this in rules 23b and 23c.

4.  Ethical issues

Animal  cloning  for  food  supply  involves  a  number  of 
specific  ethical  concerns  that  come  to  play  when  deci-
sions are to be made concerning the application of SCNT 
cloning  technologies  in  breeding  establishments  for 
farm animals.

These ethical concerns are related to a broad spectrum 
of decisions with regard to (see also Table 6):

a)  cloned  animals  and  their  offspring  (e.g.  use  of 
animals for humans’ purposes; animal health; ani-
mal welfare; ‘animal integrity’);

b)  human beings (e.g. human health and wellbeing; 
food safety; bio-safety; possibility of misuse – in 
humans (‘slippery slope arguments’));

c)  environment  (e.g.  biodiversity;  environmental 
pollution  and  degradation;  environmental  sus-
tainability);

d)  human  society  at  large  (e.g.  social  desirability, 
social  acceptance;  consumers’  rights;  justice  is-
sues  –  local,  regional,  global;  intellectual  prop-
erty rights).

23

table 6 Ethical concerns in animal cloning for food supply

concerns
for the cloned animals  
(and for their offspring)

Using the animals  
for humans’ purposes 

Animal health
Animal welfare

Animal ‘integrity’  
(‘animal rights’?) 

concerns
for humans

concerns
for the environment

Human health and wellbeing 
(including food safety  
and food security)

Biodiversity
Biosafety

Environmental sustainability

Misuse in humans  
(‘slippery slope’ concerns)

Pollution, degradation

concerns
for the society

Public perception
Social desirability
Social acceptance
Consumers’ rights

Justice issues  
(local, regional, global)
Intellectual property rights

Industrialisation of agriculture
Sustainability of agriculture

It  should  be  pointed  out,  however,  ethical  issues  out-
lined here are just part of a complex framework of ethi-
cal concerns connected with modern agriculture64, and 
some advocated that animals do not have a moral status 
and can be instrumentally used for human purposes65.

4.1. The moral status of animals

Historically,  the  moral  status  that  people  attributed  to 
the animals (or believed the animals somehow possess), 
and especially to the domesticated and later on to the 
farmed ones, has mainly evolved along two lines: either 
animals were seen as a mere objects possessed by their 
owners and available to them for any purpose the owner 
might wanted to used them, or the animals were given 
various  degrees  of  respect. These  attitudes  were  influ-
enced strongly by cultural and religious traditions.

More  recently  philosophers  have  defended  the  moral 
status of animals in a number of theories arguing that an 
animal is a moral subject as it is: (a) able to feel pleasure 
and pain66, (b) subject-of-a-life67, an element of biodiver-
sity68, etc.

The first theory comes back to the philosophy of Bentham 
and Mill69, and has been advocated more recently, inter 

64  The ethical issues connected with the use of advanced (bio)tech-
nologies in agriculture will be analysed in the following EGE Opin-
ion.

65  See: Animal Rights & Human Morality by Bernard E. Rollin (Prome-

alia,  by  Peter  Singer.  According  to  his  theory,  actions 
causing pain in sentient animals are morally unaccepta-
ble, since animals are considered moral subjects – Need 
quote-. Therefore, if cloning affects animal welfare and 
health, then this use of biotechnology is ethically prob-
lematic70.

Another theory advocates that animals have a moral val-
ue in themselves as ‘subjects-of-life’ (intrinsic value argu-
ment) and states that both human and non-human be-
ings  are  (analogously)  moral  entities  because  of  their 
sentient capacities. The corollary of this argument is the 
non-instrumentalisation of animals for human purposes.

A number of philosophers have opposed animal bioen-
gineering on the basis of categorical arguments (animals’ 
intrinsic  value71,  or  integrity72,  or  telos73).  They  argued 
that, as we attribute a moral value to human beings, we 
ought  to  extend  this  ethical  concern  to  other  animal 
species74 and oppose animal biotechnology (transgenic 
animals and cloning in particular, but also other GM of 
animals for breeding purposes – blind chickens, for ex-
ample).

Other theories have advocated the possible use of ani-
mals in animal biotechnology under specific conditions 
where animal pain is minimised and authorised in well 
justified circumstances75 on an assessment based on the 

70  Rollin  B.  (1998)  The  Unheeded  Cry.  Animal  Consciousness  Animal 

Pain and Science. Oxford University Press 

theus Books. September 30, 2006)

71  Dol et al. (1999) Recognizing the intrinsic value of animals Van Gor-

66  Singer  P.  (1985)  In  Defence  of  Animals  N.Y.:  Blackwell;  Singer  P. 
(1990) Animal Liberation N.Y.: Avon Books; Suzuki D. & Knudson P. 
(1987) Genethics, the ethics of engineering life Stoddart Publishing 
Co. Toronto 

67  Regan T. (1983) The Case for Animal Rights Berkeley California.: Uni-

versity of California Press 

68  Norton B. (1986) Why preserve natural Variety? Princeton University 

69 

Press Princeton
Jeremy  Bentham,  The  Introduction  to  the  Principles  of  Morals  and 
Legislation, edited by J. H. Burns and H. L. A. Hart, London: Athline 
Press,  1970.  Many  of  John  Stuart  Mill’s  works  are  relevant,  espe-
cially his Utilitarianism and On Liberty. 

cum & Comp. Assen

72  Van den Bos et al. (1997) Animal Consciousness and Animal Ethics 

Van Gorcum & Comp. Assen

73  Rollin B. (1989) The Frankestein Syndrome. Ethical and Social Issues 
in the Genetic Engineering of Animals Cambridge Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. Rollin B. (1998) On telos and genetic engineering in 
Holland and Jonson (eds.) Animal Biotechnology and Ethics Chap-
man and Hall London 1998:162

74  Naess A. (1984) In defence of deep ecology Environmental Ethics 

6(3):265-270

75  Fincham J.R. & Ravez J.J. (1991) Genetically Engineered Organisms: 
Risks and Benefits University of Toronto Press. Toronto-Buffalo; Fox. 

24

3Rs (Reduction, Refinement and Replacement) principle 
and on the five freedoms as defined by the World Organ-
isation for Animal Health (OIE): freedom from (1) hunger, 
thirst and malnutrition; (2) fear and distress; (3) physical 
and thermal discomfort; (4) pain, injury and disease; and 
(5) to express normal patterns of behaviour.

4.2. Sustainability and animal farming

In the age of globalization, national boundaries tend to 
diminish in importance because each country is largely 
interconnected with, and interdependent on, many oth-
ers through economic and political links. In the area of 
farming,  several  kinds  of  methods  can  be  observed 
worldwide,  and  such  typologies  often  depend  on  the 
scale of farmed rural areas.

Whereas in several countries agriculture is characterized 
by very large farming areas which belong to a few farm-
ers, in Europe the average size of farming properties is 
much  smaller  and  they  belong  to  a  large  number  of 
farmers.  It  is  only  natural  that  farming  processes  have 
been  developing  differently  on  different  continents.  In 
several  countries,  agriculture  has  generally  been  em-
ployed on a large scale and using automated means of 
production; on the EU side, family-based properties have 
tended to follow a more traditional type of farming and 
on a smaller scale (Small and Medium-sized Enterprises). 
Apart  from  any  economic  considerations  in  terms  of 
costs and revenues, this development is likely to remain 
on different tracks.

According to a recent FAO report76 (2007), cattle breeds 
currently make up 22% of the world’s recorded mamma-
lian  livestock  breeds,  and  human  kind  relies  upon  14 
species  of  livestock  in  total  for  90%  of  its  animal  food 
production. Most probably, there are three countries in 
the world that would initially use animal cloning for food 
supply: they are Argentina, USA, and China.

Consequently, a discussion on the ethics of animal clon-
ing  for  food  cannot  be  restricted  to  economic  or  legal 
considerations alone. Other factors related to sustaina-
ble agriculture are just as important (e.g. human respon-
sibility towards the environment and future generations 
–  intergenerational  justice  and  ecology).  Sustainable 
farming is indeed an important focal concept. It involves 
many  dimensions,  including  human  health,  safety,  ani-
mal  welfare,  environmental  concerns,  biodiversity  and 
global justice. It does not contain or add anything that is 
not covered by these dimensions; it combines them. The 
above concerns will be addressed in the next Opinion of 

M. (1992) Superpigs and Wondercorm Lyons & Bufford N.Y.; Kaiser 
M.  Wellin  S.  eds.  (1995)  Ethical  Aspects  of  Modern  Biotechnology 
Centre for Research Ethics Goeteborg; 

76  http://www.fao.org/newsroom/en/news/2007/1000598/index.

html

the EGE, including issues related to the ethics of industri-
alized agriculture at EU and international level.

Another concern that has been put forward during the 
discussion on cloning relates to the potential use of ani-
mal cloning as a tool to develop SCNT and then to open 
the door for possible use of the technology with human 
beings (the ‘slippery slope’ argument).

4.3. Religious considerations

To a great extent, the relationship between mankind and 
animals varies according to the religious views of the so-
ciety  involved.  Generally  speaking,  humans’  attitude  to 
animals varies considerably between Western to Eastern 
cultures.  Eastern  -  predominantly  Hindu  or  Buddhist  - 
cultures tend to have a greater respect for animals and 
their protection due to their belief in reincarnation and 
in recognizing the divine in all living forms. Western cul-
tures  tend  to  view  animals  as  instrumental  to  human 
wellbeing  and  necessities,  provided  that  such  necessi-
ties do not cause pain to animals.

4.4. Public perception and public acceptance

A survey conducted in the US by the International Food 
Information  Council  in  2005  reflected  that  34%  of  re-
spondents  would  be  likely  to  buy  food  products  from 
cloned animals if the FDA determined them to be safe to 
eat (compared to 64% against). Accordingly, public per-
ception of animal cloning is likely to play a major role in 
its development and its commercial prospects. This per-
ception  may  vary  greatly  between  countries,  including 
between EU Member States.

Since 1991 the Eurobarometer surveys have examined 
the attitudes of the European public. However, no spe-
cific  public  surveys  have  yet  been  conducted  on  the 
social  perception  of  animal  cloning  for  food  supply. 
Knowledge  in  the  EU  about  the  public  perception  of 
animal cloning is very limited77. According to the avail-
able  data,  there  is  public  acceptance  for  cloning  as  a 
research  tool  in  biomedicine  (e.g.  bio-pharming),  but 
not for its application in agriculture. From the available 
data  it  seems  that  European  citizens  differentiate  be-
tween  medical  and  agricultural  applications  and  are 
most  sceptical  towards  biotechnology  when  it  is  ap-
plied to animal rearing or food production. Public con-

77  Earlier  research  indicates  that  public  acceptance  of  animal  bio-
technology is closely related to the perceived usefulness of the ap-
plications suggested. Consequently, research and biomedical ap-
plications  seem  to  be  more  acceptable  to  the  public  than 
agricultural applications which are regarded more negatively. See 
(a) Eurobarometer EB 52.1, 1999; (b) The report CLONING IN PUB-
LIC: Public perceptions of farm animal cloning in Europe (August 
2005); and (c) Lassen, J, Gjerris, M & Sandøe, P (2005): After Dolly – 
ethical limits to the use of biotechnology on farm animals. Theriog-
enology (Submitted).

25

cerns about cloning tend to be primarily human-related 
(food safety; socioeconomic effects, consumer choice) 
and less often zoocentric (animal welfare and integrity). 
At the present time it seems that the public is not fully 
informed  about  the  uses  and  implications  of  cloning. 
Taking into account the precedents of GM food, public 
interest would be likely to intensify as products came 
closer to marketing.

Under the 6th Framework Programme, the Commission 
has  supported  a  project  entitled  ‘Cloning  in  public’,  a 
specific support action project co-ordinated by the Dan-
ish  Centre  for  Bioethics  and  Risk  Assessment  (CeBRA, 
DK). The project had two main objectives: 1) to stimulate 
informed  public  debate  across  Europe  on  farm  animal 
cloning and to ensure public participation in the forma-
tion of European policies and regulation; 2) to make rec-
ommendations on regulation and guidelines concerning 
research and applications of farm animal cloning. The ar-
gument for this project was that ‘Whether a decision is 
made to rely on existing regulation or to introduce new, 
specifically  targeted  legislation,  concerns  about  both 
free trade and social acceptability in Europe will have to 
be negotiated78.

4.5. The consumer’s right to know, free choice  
and labelling

Once food safety risks are ruled out, a possible concern 
would be a requirement for consumer information and 
product  labelling,  either  confined ‘only’  to  clones  and 
products  derived  from  them,  and/or  on  offspring  and 
their products. Since a clone and its derived products 
cannot  effectively  be  distinguished  from  another  ani-
mal, a labelling policy would have to be associated with 
some  sort  of  trace-back  or  integrity  preservation  sys-
tems.  Currently,  beef  meat  must  be  traceable.  Animal 
semen  and  embryos  are  also  already  traceable.  How-
ever, for other processed products, the control of label-
ling  could  present  difficulties,  in  particular  for  off-
spring79.

From a technical point of view, the ‘analytical’ traceabil-
ity entails two different issues: (1) the analytical identi-
fication  of  clones/offspring  and  derived  products  and 
(2) the authentication of traceability schemes for indi-
vidual  animals  and  derived  products  (not  limited  to 
clones,  but  generalised). Traceability  schemes  for  ani-
mals are already enhanced through the use of Electron-
ic  Identification/Radio  frequency  identification  of  ani-
mals up to the slaughterhouse, and this may be further 
improved  through  the  use  of  molecular  markers  (see 
also 2.4.2).

5.  Opinion

The aim of farm animal breeding is to select animals that 
have genetic characteristics such as disease resistance or 
quality features that are of interest to farmers. Cloning of 
vertebrates via SCNT is a recently developed technology 
which is used in biomedical research and animal breed-
ing,  and  can  also  be  used  for  the  production  of’  food, 
such as meat and dairy products. The cloning technolo-
gy  may  also  be  used  for  the  reproduction  of  animals 
which  are  of  high  value  to  their  owners,  such  as  race-
horses and pet animals, as well as for the conservation of 
endangered species.

Animal cloning for food supply, however, raises a wide 
range  of  safety,  legal,  ethical  and  societal  concerns,  as 
well  as  political  concerns  of  various  kinds  (e.g.  global 
trade).  Some  of  these  concerns  are  being  analysed  by 
the EFSA, in particular those related to the scientific as-
pects of food safety and animal welfare.

5.1. Scope of the Opinion

The EGE issued an Opinion on ethical aspects of animal 
cloning in 1997, but given the state of the art of the tech-
nology at that time it did not address the issue of animal 
cloning specifically for food supply. This EGE Opinion up-
dates the previous one and is intended to complement 
that of the EFSA. The ethical considerations in this Opin-
ion  will  therefore  refer  to  the  use  of  cloning  in  animal 
breeding in order to produce progeny that could enter 
the food chain.

The EGE is aware that the experience in animal cloning 
could be used in the development of genetically modi-
fied animals (genetic modifications to produce nutraceu-
ticals, bio-pharming or prevention of animal diseases in 
farm  breeding,  or  increasing  the  added  value  of  food 
products from cloned animals and their offspring) or in 
the development of cloning techniques as such80. How-
ever, these issues, while acknowledged as relevant and 
deserving of further analysis with regard to their scien-
tific,  ethical,  legal  and  social  implications,  are  not  the 
subject of this EGE Opinion. In line with both the EFSA 
report and the request from President Barroso, this Opin-
ion  is  limited  to  the  use  of  animal  cloning  without  ge-
netic modification.

5.2. Arguments over animal cloning for food

The major arguments in favour of animal cloning for food 
are economic ones, aiming, inter alia: to keep up Euro-
pean  competition  vis-à-vis  third  countries  on  the  free 
market; to facilitate industrial development; to improve 

78  http://www.sl.kvl.dk/cloninginpublic/
79  An open question regarding the definition of offspring would be: 
For how many generations would the offspring of clones have to 
be labelled? 

80  As far as the potential use of SCNT on human beings for reproduc-
tive purposes is concerned, the Group reaffirms its opposition to 
such practices. 

26

food  production  and  quality,  while  lowering  prices  for 
consumers,  as  happens  in  the  case  of  other  intensive 
farm practices. Some have therefore advocated cloning 
as a possible development towards standardised, cheap-
er food production, particularly meat, which would then 
be affordable for a larger proportion of the population. 
Others have argued that cloning may be a useful tool to 
accelerate the breeding of animals with specific genetic 
lineage,  such  as  cattle  resistant  to  diseases  or  adverse 
conditions81, or that it might have proven positive effects 
on human and animal health, for instance in conjunction 
with transgenesis82.

Arguments against this use of animal biotechnology, on 
the  other  hand,  articulate  concerns  that  are  based  on 
human  health  and  safety,  animal  health  and  welfare, 
animal  integrity,  biodiversity,  the  risk  of  epidemics,  so-
cial and economic effects on rural areas, and agricultural 
trade (see Chapters 2 and 4 of this Opinion). Others have 
pointed  to  the danger  of  animals being  valued only  in 
terms of their instrumental use to humankind and iden-
tified the risk that increased use of cloning might even-
tually facilitate human reproductive cloning.

The  Group  is  aware  that  there  are  differing  viewpoints 
on  the  moral  acceptability  of  using  animals  in  modern 
farming and is aware that there are some very strongly 
held  views  against  the  instrumental  use  of  animals  for 
human  purposes  regardless  of  positive  consequences 
this might have for humans. The Group therefore recog-
nises that, for some people, animal cloning for food sup-
ply is an ethically unacceptable practice, whatever con-
ditions are required.

The EGE wishes to emphasise that embarking on cloning 
for food supply means opening up a new dimension in 
the general context of breeding that is not merely tech-
nical, and which for some people may create a moral un-
ease that cannot be simply dismissed.

5.3. Food safety

The EGE has neither the competence nor the authority 
to  assess  risks  related  to  food  safety.  Nevertheless,  the 
decision on the levels of risk to individuals and society 
that  are  acceptable  raises  ethical  issues.  The  scientific 
risk assessment of food safety of products derived from 
animal clones and/or their offspring falls within the re-
mit  of  the  EFSA  (EFSA  Opinion  and  its  subsequent  up-
dating) and the Group bases itself on that. EFSA’s draft 
Opinion states that (1) measures restricting animal clon-
ing for food purposes cannot be justified on food safety 
grounds,  (2) ‘the  available  data  for  risk  assessment  are 
limited’  and  (3)  there  are  uncertainties  in  their  assess-

81  These last two arguments, however, cover uses of animal cloning 

other than that addressed in this Opinion.
See paragraph 2.7 of this Opinion. 

82 

ment83. The  EGE  underlines  the  importance  of  guaran-
teeing the safety of food products for human consump-
tion  as  a  precondition  for  their  marketing  and  stresses 
the  importance  of  scientific  updates  and  follow-up  re-
search into progeny.

5.4. Animal welfare and health

In the Amsterdam Treaty animals are recognised as ‘sen-
tient’ beings84 and, therefore, while meat production  is 
important in the human diet, and the slaughter of ani-
mals a necessity, it should always be clear that the way in 
which we treat animals should be in accordance with the 
existing  animal  welfare  and  health  standards  required 
by EU legislation (see 3.1.2 of this Opinion). However, in 
addition to these standards, the Group believes that oth-
er requirements should be taken into account in inten-
sive animal breeding, in particular the guidance on ani-
mal  welfare  provided  by  the  World  Organisation  for 
Animal Health (OIE85), namely the five freedoms already 
mentioned  in  paragraph  4.1  of  this  Opinion;  freedom: 
from hunger, thirst and malnutrition; from fear and dis-
tress; from physical and thermal discomfort; from pain, 
injury and disease; and to express normal patterns of be-
haviour.

Infringements  of  the  above  criteria  would  need  to  be 
balanced  by  important  benefits  to  human  beings. The 
EGE,  however,  doubts  whether  infringements  of  these 
standards  can  be  justified  by  the  benefits  obtained 
through current procedures in cloning animals for food 
production.

In  addition,  having  regard  to  information  provided  by 
EFSA, the Group has noted a lack of data86 on the long-
term  animal  welfare  and  health  implications  of  clones 
and  their  offspring87,  due  to  the  current  limited  use  of 
the  technology.  Further  studies  and  analyses  on  long-
term animal welfare and health implications for clones 
and their offspring, as well as more comparative analy-
ses  with  other  assisted  and  traditional  reproductive 
technologies in animal farming, are needed for a proper 
assessment of this issue.

However, the Group is concerned that intensive breed-
ing techniques may adversely affect animal welfare and 
feels  that  a  review  of  current  practices  should  be  con-
ducted at European level. For this reason the Group sug-
gests  that  the  Commission  take  initiative  to  prepare  a 

83  See EFSA draft Opinion, Conclusions chapter, p.30.
84  This notion is also stated in the Lisbon Treaty, currently being rati-
fied, and which is extended to all technological developments (B 
specific amendments).

85  www.oie.int
86  See EFSA draft Opinion, Conclusions chapter, p.30.
87  Similar considerations apply to the existence of data on other as-
sisted reproduction technologies (ART) in animal breeding.

27

Code of Conduct on responsible farm animal breeding, 
including animal cloning.

5.5. Farm animal biodiversity and sustainability

Although the Group acknowledges that cloning could be 
used to maintain certain rare animal breeds among farm 
animal  species88,  the  intensive  industrial  use  of  cloning 
applied to highly prevalent animal races might ultimately 
reduce  diversity  and  affect  their  global  distribution.  Re-
cent reports have highlighted the danger that the use of a 
limited number of breeding lines in intensive animal farm-
ing may affect the biodiversity of farm animals (see Chap-
ter 2.7.3 of this Opinion) and create inbreeding problems.

While  the  Group  is  also  aware  that  the  use  of  animal 
cloning in animal husbandry would be difficult to extend 
on a global level89, it nevertheless advocates the need to 
protect biodiversity and limit inbreeding in farm animal 
stocks as far as possible, in order – among other things 
– to avoid the risk of global epidemics. In that respect, 
the Group recommends the Commission to take proper 
measures  to  preserve  the  genetic  heritage  of  animal 
species90,  for  example  by  funding  projects  designed  to 
preserve domesticated species and breeds in Europe.

The Group is concerned about the global impact of in-
creasing meat consumption on the environment as clon-
ing  of  farm  animals  could  be  another  step  towards  in-
creasing such impact.

5.6. Societal aspects

5.6.1. Public participation

The Group realises that, while cloning is only one step, 
and so far a relatively marginal one in the process of in-
dustrialisation  of  agriculture  and  globalisation,  it  is  of 
the  utmost  importance,  in  terms  of  global  justice  and 
environmental impact, that a debate be held concerning 
the issues underlying and accompanying this global de-
velopment. The  Group  therefore  underlines  the  impor-
tance of a public debate on the concept of biotechnolo-
gies  in  modern  agriculture,  the  environmental  and 
societal  impact  of  increasing  meat  consumption  and 
rearing of bovines, the fair distribution of food resources 
and the need to promote sustainable agriculture at EU 
level and worldwide.

88  Cattle (Bos bovis) is a species and there are around 1.2 billion indi-
viduals worldwide, falling into about a thousand breeds, or races, 
see 2.7.3.

89  By David Fraser, ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/009/a0158e/a0158e00.

pdf

In order to be able to exercise its freedom of choice, the 
public also needs to be adequately informed, and public 
debate should therefore be promoted.

The  Group  therefore  invites  the  Commission  to  take  a 
pro-active  role  in  promoting  public  discussion  on  this 
use of animal cloning, and its potential implications, by 
financing a number of ad hoc initiatives at Member State 
and pan-European level aimed at promoting public de-
bate  on  the  marketing  of  food  products  derived  from 
animal cloning. Relevant stakeholders (media, industry, 
policymakers,  NGOs  and  the  scientific  community) 
should  participate  in  this  effort  in  a  pro-active  manner 
and  communicate  reliable  information  about  the  work 
done. Transparency  at  all  decision-making  levels  (both 
private and institutional) is essential because a construc-
tive public debate can only take place on a basis of recip-
rocal trust and in full knowledge of factual data.

5.6.2. Public perception

The  Group  acknowledges  that  the ‘food  philosophy’  of 
individuals and countries (i.e. their views on the role and 
importance of food, the cultural and social traditions as-
sociated  with  it,  and  related  views  on  the  production 
processes  for  different  ingredients)  varies  considerably 
within Europe and worldwide. The Group also acknowl-
edges that European citizens have different perceptions 
and  (religious)  beliefs  as  regards  the  consumption  of 
meat  or  other  products  derived  from  cloned  animals 
and/or their progeny91. However, there are as yet no de-
finitive  indicators  on  the  public  perception  of  animal 
cloning for food supply and food products derived from 
cloned animals and their offspring. The Group therefore 
recommends  that  the  Commission  launch  a  thematic 
Eurobarometer  survey  on  animal  cloning  for  food  sup-
ply,  in  order  to  collect  indicators  on  public  perception 
concerning  the  introduction  of  such  products  to  the 
food market as is being done in other countries92.

5.7. Traceability and labelling

Traceability  and  labelling  raise  many  issues,  which  can 
be  related  to  the  well-known  precautionary  principle, 
and  are  relevant  to  safety  concerns,  economic  fairness 
and fairness in the burden of proof as well as to the is-
sues  of  consumer  freedom  discussed  earlier.  This  also 
raises issues of conditions of liability.

As far as the labelling of food products derived from ani-
mal  cloning  is  concerned,  the  Group  is  of  the  opinion 
that consumer freedom can only be achieved when con-

90  From the EGE Opinion No 3 on the ethical implications of Biotech-
nology: ‘Biodiversity … with ratification of the UN Convention on 
Biological Diversity, the Community would be well advised to start 
considering  the  matter  with  a  view  to  clarifying  what  it  under-
stands the concept to mean in practical terms’.

91 

In this respect the consumption of milk from cloned animals may 
probably have a different impact on public perception than con-
sumption of meat from clones. 

92  http://www.ap-foodtechnology.com/news/ng.asp?n=82108-

farm-bill-cfs-cloning

28

sumers have sufficient information to be able to choose 
the kind of products they want. In order to protect con-
sumer freedom of choice, the Group points to the need 
for enforcement of current EU legislation on food regard-
ing traceability of animals and their food products (e.g. 
Directive 2000/13/EC)93. However, the Group is aware of 
the technical difficulties and costs of labelling products 
from  offspring  (information  on  ancestors),  and  calls  on 
the Commission to devise targeted procedures (e.g. pos-
itive  labelling  of  meat)  prior  to  the  marketing  of  such 
food in the EU94.

5.8. Intellectual property issues

So far, patenting in animal cloning is limited to nuclear 
transfer techniques. The Group is concerned that patents 
might be extended to specific genes or to animals, and 
that this would lead to a monopoly/concentration of the 
resources that are important for breeding.

The Group also advocates further clarification, inter alia 
through  research,  on  the  applicability  of  the  exclusion 
clauses in Directive 98/44/EC (Art. 6) and the EPO rules 
(23 d) to animal cloning for food supply95.

5.9. Global trade

EU rules lay down requirements in respect of animal wel-
fare and animal ethics in breeding programmes. On the 
other hand, WTO agreements are based on the require-
ment that only scientifically documented risks to human 
health or to the environment can legitimately be used as 
a reason to limit free trade. If meat from cloned animals 
were  to  be  marketed  in  third  countries,  it  could  be  ex-
ported to the EU. This presents a dilemma between free 
trade considerations on the one hand and ethical con-
cerns regarding the cloning of animals on the other. Re-
solving  this  political  dilemma  is  not  easy.  On  the  one 
hand,  ethical  considerations,  including  animal  welfare, 
are seen as crucial – also in terms of public perception – 
while  on  the  other  hand  import  issues,  including WTO 
compliance, may complicate the market situation96.

93  See Chapter 3.1.1 of this Opinion.
94  The Group is aware that in addition to technical difficulties, costs 
to consumers will arise as a consequence of the implementation of 
a broad labelling system.

95  EPO: Rule 23d ‘Exceptions to patentability Under Article 53(a), Eu-
ropean patents shall not be granted in respect of biotechnological 
inventions which, in particular, concern the following: (a) process-
es for cloning human beings; (b) processes for modifying the germ 
line genetic identity of human beings; (c) uses of human embryos 
for industrial or commercial purposes; (d) processes for modifying 
the genetic identity of animals which are likely to cause them suf-
fering without any substantial medical benefit to man or animal, 
and also animals resulting from such processes.’
(http://www.european-patent- office.org/legal/epc/pdf/
epc_2006_v5_bm_en.pdf )

96  For  further  considerations,  please  see:  Challenges  in  regulating 
farm animal cloning. Recommendations from the project ‘Cloning in 

The  Group  acknowledges  the  complexity  of  the  issue, 
but points out that there are already some examples of 
specific requirements in the EU covering the import of 
meat and food products from third countries, for exam-
ple as regards the import of meat containing hormones. 
The Group therefore considers that the import of cloned 
animals,  their  offspring  and  materials  derived  from 
cloned  animals  (e.g.  semen  and  food  products,  as  de-
scribed  in  3.1  and  3.3)  should  be  conditional  on  the 
documentation as indicated in this Opinion, in particu-
lar  with  regard  to  traceability  provisions  and  animal 
welfare.

The Group notes the statement in the preamble and in 
Article  2  to  the  Agreement  on  the  Application  of  Sani-
tary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement) that 
members should not be prevented from adopting or en-
forcing  measures  necessary  to  protect  animal  health, 
subject to the requirement that these measures are not 
applied in a manner which would constitute a means of 
arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination between mem-
bers. It also notes Article 5(7) of the Agreement relating 
to  risk  assessment.  There  is  not  enough  scientific  evi-
dence  on  cloned  animals  and  their  offspring,  and  the 
Group believes that research is required as described in 
the EFSA report.

5.10. Conclusions

The Group is aware of the EFSA’s draft scientific findings 
and recommendations on food safety, animal health and 
welfare and environmental impact, as well as the indica-
tions of current gaps in knowledge about animal welfare 
and  health  of  animal  clones  and  their  offspring.  The 
group is also aware of the results of the FDA report pub-
lished the day before the adoption of this Opinion.

Considering  the  current  level  of  suffering  and  health 
problems  of  surrogate  dams  and  animal  clones,  the 
Group has doubts as to whether cloning for food is justi-
fied. Whether this applies also to the offspring is open to 
further scientific research.

At present, the EGE does not see convincing arguments 
to justify the production of food from clones and their 
offspring97. If, in the future, food products derived from 
cloned animals were to be introduced to the European 
market, the EGE recommends that the following require-
ments be met:

Food safety - The safety of food products for human 
consumption  as  a  precondition  for  their  marketing 
must  be guaranteed and scientific updates  and fol-
low-up research into progeny should be carried out.

public’, J. Gunning, M. Hartlev, C. Gambrog et al., Danish Centre for 
Bioethics and Risk assessment (2006). 

97  The conclusion in this paragraph was dissented by K. Marczewski. 

29

 
Animal  welfare  and  health  -  In  accordance  with  the 
Amsterdam Treaty  (animals  as  sentient  beings)  and 
the Lisbon Treaty, additional requirements should be 
met in intensive animal breeding, with the aim of fol-
lowing the guidance on animal welfare provided by 
the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE), e.g. 
the five freedoms: from hunger, thirst and malnutri-
tion; from fear and distress; from physical and ther-
mal discomfort; from pain, injury and disease; and to 
express normal patterns of behaviour.
Traceability - Current EU legislation on food regarding 
traceability of animals and their food products should 
be enforced. Steps should be taken to ensure that EU 
legislation provides for the ability to identify individ-
ual animals where necessary.
Global trade - The import of cloned animals, their off-
spring  and  materials  derived  from  cloned  animals 
(e.g. semen and food products) should be condition-
al  on  proper  documentation,  in  particular  with  re-
gard to traceability provisions and animal welfare.

In addition the EGE recommends the following:

Animal welfare - Further studies and analyses on long-
term  animal  welfare  and  health  implications  for 
clones and their offspring, as well as more compara-
tive  analyses  with  other  assisted  and  traditional  re-
productive  technologies  in  animal  farming,  should 
be carried out for a proper assessment of this issue, in 
line  with  the  EFSA  draft  opinion.  The  Commission 
should take initiatives to prepare a Code of Conduct 
on responsible farm animal breeding, including ani-
mal cloning.
Farm animal biodiversity and sustainability – The Com-
mission should take proper measures to preserve the 
genetic heritage of farm animal species, for example 
by  funding  projects  designed  to  preserve  domesti-
cated breeds in Europe and to promote sustainable 
agriculture.
Public  participation  -  Public  debates  should  be  pro-
moted on the impact of farm animal cloning on agri-
culture and the environment, on the societal impact 
of  increasing  meat  consumption  and  rearing  of 
bovines, and on the fair distribution of food resourc-

es. The Commission should take a pro-active role in 
promoting  public  discussion  on  the  use  of  animal 
cloning and its potential implications, by financing a 
number  of  ad  hoc  initiatives  aimed  at  promoting 
public debate on the marketing of food products de-
rived from animal cloning.
Public perception - The Commission should launch a 
thematic Eurobarometer survey and qualitative stud-
ies on animal cloning for food supply, in order to col-
lect indicators on public perception concerning the 
introduction of such products to the food market as 
is being done in other countries.
Labelling – The EGE is aware of the technical difficul-
ties  of  labelling  products  from  offspring;  neverthe-
less it recommends that the Commission take the ini-
tiative  in  devising  targeted  procedures  prior  to  the 
marketing of such food in the EU.
Intellectual  property  issues  –  Clarification  should  be 
provided as to whether the exclusion clauses in Di-
rective 98/44/EC (Art. 6d) on patentability of biologi-
cal inventions and the EPO rules (23 d) apply to ani-
mal cloning for food supply.
Global trade and consumer freedom – The EGE is aware 
that  import  issues  in  respect  of  food  products  de-
rived  from  cloned  animals,  including  compliance 
with World Trade Organisation provisions, may com-
plicate  the  market  situation;  however,  the  EGE  rec-
ommends  that  the  Commission  take  initiatives  to 
ensure consumers’ freedom and rights.
Research  -  Further  research  is  needed,  in  particular 
basic research into animal cloning, as well as the im-
pact on human health, and animal welfare for farmed 
species other than those covered by EFSA. Similarly, 
further studies on the ethical, legal and social impli-
cations of animal cloning for food supply as well as 
qualitative  studies  on  public  perception  should  be 
carried out.

5.11. The need for revision of this Opinion

Since further research is needed and cloning technolo-
gies are constantly improving, this Opinion could be re-
considered, and possibly revised, in the light of new sci-
entific data and societal considerations.

30

THE EUROPEAN GROUP 
ON ETHICS IN SCIENCE 
AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES 

31

AVIS DU GROUPE EUROPÉEN 
D’ÉTHIQUE DES SCIENCES  
ET DES NOUVELLES TECHNOLOGIES  
AUPRÈS DE LA COMMISSION EUROPÉENNE

23no

Éthique du clonage 
animal pour 
l’approvisionnement 
alimentaire

Référence: 
Rapporteurs: 

avis requis par le président Barroso
i. de Beaufort, P. Puigdomenech-Rosell, J. glasa

Seul le texte original en anglais est authentique.

European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies
to the European Commission

33

5.  Avis

Le but de la zootechnie est de sélectionner des animaux 
présentant  certaines  caractéristiques  génétiques,  telles 
que la résistance aux maladies ou des qualités qui revê-
tent un intérêt pour les éleveurs. Le clonage des verté-
brés  par  transfert  nucléaire  de  cellules  somatiques 
(TNCS)  est  une  technologie  récemment  développée, 
pratiquée dans la recherche biomédicale et l’élevage, et 
qui peut également être utilisée pour la production de 
denrées alimentaires telles que la viande et les produits 
laitiers. La technologie du clonage peut également ser-
vir à la reproduction d’animaux ayant une grande valeur 
pour  leurs  propriétaires,  notamment  les  chevaux  de 
course et les animaux de compagnie, ainsi que pour la 
conservation des espèces en voie de disparition.

Le clonage animal pour l’approvisionnement alimentaire 
suscite cependant de nombreuses préoccupations d’or-
dre juridique, éthique sociétal et de sécurité et soulève 
des questions politiques de plusieurs ordres (concernant 
notamment le commerce mondial). L’Autorité européen-
ne de sécurité des aliments (EFSA) examine certaines de 
ces préoccupations, en particulier celles liées aux aspects 
scientifiques  de  la  sécurité  alimentaire  et  du  bien-être 
des animaux.

5.1. Champ d’application de l’avis

Le  groupe  européen  d’éthique  (GEE)  a  publié  un  avis 
concernant l’éthique du clonage animal en 1997, mais, 
étant donné l’état de la technologie à cette époque, il n’a 
pas abordé l’éthique du clonage animal spécifiquement 
destiné  à  l’approvisionnement  alimentaire.  Le  présent 
avis du GEE actualise le précédent et est destiné à com-
pléter celui de l’EFSA. Les considérations éthiques émi-
ses dans le présent avis porteront donc sur l’utilisation 
du clonage animal dans l’élevage pour produire une des-
cendance pouvant entrer dans la chaîne alimentaire.

Le GEE est conscient que l’expérience du clonage animal 
pourrait être utilisée pour développer des animaux gé-
nétiquement  modifiés  [modifications  génétiques  pour 
la  fabrication  de  produits  nutriceutiques,  le  «biophar-
ming» (1), la prévention des maladies animales dans les 
élevages, l’accroissement de la valeur ajoutée des den-
rées alimentaires provenant d’animaux clonés et de leur 
descendance] ou pour développer les techniques de clo-
nage en tant que telles (2). Toutefois, ces questions, bien 
qu’il  soit  reconnu  qu’elles  sont  pertinentes  et  méritent 
une analyse complémentaire de leurs implications scien-
tifiques, éthiques, juridiques et sociales, ne font pas l’ob-

jet du présent avis du GEE. Conformément au rapport de 
l’EFSA et à la demande du président Barroso, le présent 
avis se limite à l’utilisation du clonage animal sans modi-
fication génétique.

5.2. Arguments relatifs au clonage animal à des fins 
alimentaires

Les principaux arguments avancés en faveur du clonage 
animal à des fins alimentaires sont économiques. Il s’agit 
notamment de soutenir la concurrence européenne vis-
à-vis de pays tiers sur le marché libre, de faciliter le déve-
loppement industriel, d’améliorer la qualité et la produc-
tion des denrées alimentaires, tout en réduisant les prix 
à  la  consommation,  comme  c’est  le  cas  pour  d’autres 
pratiques agricoles intensives. Certains préconisent dès 
lors  le  clonage  en  tant  qu’évolution  possible  vers  une 
production alimentaire, en particulier de viande, norma-
lisée et moins coûteuse, qui serait alors accessible à une 
plus grande proportion de la population. D’autres sou-
tiennent que le clonage peut être un outil utile pour ac-
célérer la sélection d’animaux ayant une filiation généti-
que spécifique, comme le bétail résistant aux maladies 
ou aux conditions défavorables (3), ou qu’il pourrait avoir 
des effets positifs avérés sur la santé humaine et animale, 
notamment en conjonction avec la transgenèse (4).

Les arguments contre cet usage de la biotechnologie ani-
male  formulent  en  revanche  des  préoccupations  fon-
dées sur la santé et la sécurité humaines, la santé et le 
bien-être des animaux, l’intégrité animale, la biodiversi-
té, le risque d’épidémies, les effets sociaux et économi-
ques  sur  les  zones  rurales,  le  commerce  agricole  (voir 
chapitres 2 et 4 du présent avis). D’autres soulignent le 
danger que les animaux ne soient appréciés qu’en fonc-
tion de leur utilité pour l’espèce humaine et mettent en 
évidence le risque qu’un recours accru au clonage facilite 
finalement le clonage reproductif humain.

Le groupe est conscient de l’existence d’opinions diver-
gentes  quant  à  l’acceptabilité  morale  de  l’utilisation 
d’animaux  clonés  dans  l’élevage  moderne,  ainsi  que 
d’oppositions très tranchées à l’utilisation instrumentale 
d’animaux  à  des  fins  humaines,  indépendamment  des 
conséquences positives que cela pourrait avoir pour les 
êtres humains. Le groupe reconnaît donc que, pour cer-
taines personnes, le clonage animal aux fins d’approvi-
sionnement  alimentaire  est  une  pratique  inacceptable 
d’un point de vue éthique, quelles que soient les condi-
tions requises.

Le GEE tient à souligner que la pratique du clonage pour 
l’approvisionnement alimentaire équivaut à ouvrir dans 

(1)  N.d.T.: culture de plantes transgéniques produisant des molécules 

pharmaceutiques ou industrielles.

(2)  En  ce  qui  concerne  l’utilisation  potentielle  du TNCS  sur  les  êtres 
humains à des fins de reproduction, le groupe réaffirme son oppo-
sition à de telles pratiques.

(3)  Ces  deux  derniers  arguments  couvrent  toutefois  des  utilisations 
du  clonage  animal  autres  que  celles  abordées  dans  le  présent 
avis.

(4)  Voir point 2.7 du présent avis.

35

le contexte général de l’élevage une nouvelle dimension, 
qui n’est pas purement technique et qui peut engendrer 
chez certaines personnes un malaise moral que l’on ne 
peut pas simplement ignorer.

5.3. Sécurité alimentaire

Le GEE n’a ni la compétence ni l’autorité pour évaluer les 
risques liés à la sécurité alimentaire. Néanmoins, la déci-
sion concernant les niveaux de risques acceptables pour 
les individus et la société pose des problèmes éthiques. 
L’évaluation  scientifique  du  risque  pour  la  sécurité  ali-
mentaire  de  produits  dérivés  de  clones  animaux  et/ou 
de leur descendance relève du mandat de l’EFSA (avis de 
l’EFSA  et  mise  à  jour  ultérieure)  sur  lequel  se  fonde  le 
groupe. Le projet d’avis de l’EFSA déclare que: 1) les me-
sures de restriction du clonage animal à des fins alimen-
taires ne peuvent être justifiées par des motifs de sécu-
rité  alimentaire;  2)  «les  données  disponibles  pour 
l’évaluation  du  risque  sont  limitées»;  3)  leur  évaluation 
contient des incertitudes (5). Le GEE souligne l’importan-
ce de la garantie de la sécurité des produits alimentaires 
destinés à la consommation humaine en tant que condi-
tion  préalable  à  leur  commercialisation,  ainsi  que  des 
mises  à  jour  scientifiques  et  de  la  recherche  de  suivi 
concernant la progéniture.

5.4. Santé et bien-être des animaux

Le  traité  d’Amsterdam  reconnaît  que  les  animaux  sont 
des êtres «sensibles» (6) et, partant, bien que la produc-
tion  de  viande  soit  importante  pour  l’alimentation  hu-
maine et que l’abattage d’animaux soit une nécessité, il 
doit toujours être clair que la manière dont nous traitons 
les animaux doit être conforme aux normes actuelles en 
matière de santé et de bien-être des animaux imposées 
par  la  législation  communautaire  (voir  point  3.1.2  du 
présent avis). Le groupe estime toutefois que, en plus de 
ces normes, des exigences supplémentaires doivent être 
respectées dans l’élevage intensif, en particulier l’orien-
tation en matière de bien-être des animaux, fournie par 
l’Office international des épizooties [OIE (7)], et plus pré-
cisément les cinq libertés déjà citées au point 4.1 du pré-
sent avis: être épargné de la faim, de la soif et de la mal-
nutrition; être épargné de la peur et de la détresse; être 
épargné de l’inconfort physique et thermique; être épar-
gné de la douleur, des blessures et des maladies; être li-
bre d’exprimer des modes normaux de comportement.

Le  non-respect  des  critères  énoncés  ci-dessus  devrait 
être  compensé  par  des  avantages  importants  pour  les 
êtres humains. Le GEE doute cependant que l’inobserva-

(5)  Voir projet d’avis de l’EFSA, conclusions, p. 30.
(6)  Cette notion figure également dans le traité de Lisbonne, actuelle-
ment en cours de ratification et qui s’étend à tous les développe-
ments technologiques (B amendements spécifiques).

(7)  www.oie.int

tion de ces normes puisse se justifier par les avantages 
obtenus  par  les  procédés  actuels  de  clonage  des  ani-
maux à des fins alimentaires.

En outre, au vu des informations fournies par l’EFSA, le 
groupe constate un manque de données (8) concernant 
le bien-être des animaux à long terme et les implications 
pour la santé des clones et de leur progéniture (9), en rai-
son de l’utilisation actuellement limitée de la technolo-
gie. Des études et analyses complémentaires sur le bien-
être des animaux à long terme et les implications pour la 
santé  des  clones  et  de  leur  progéniture  ainsi  que  des 
analyses  comparatives  supplémentaires  avec  d’autres 
technologies  reproductives  traditionnelles  et  assistées 
dans l’élevage sont nécessaires pour une évaluation cor-
recte de cette question.

Le groupe craint toutefois que les techniques d’élevage 
intensif puissent affecter le bien-être des animaux et est 
d’avis  que  les  pratiques  actuelles  doivent  faire  l’objet 
d’un examen à l’échelon européen. Il propose par consé-
quent que la Commission prenne des initiatives en vue 
d’élaborer  un  code  de  déontologie  pour  l’élevage  res-
ponsable  des  animaux  de  ferme,  y  compris  le  clonage 
animal.

5.5. Biodiversité des animaux d’élevage et durabilité

Bien  que  le  groupe  reconnaisse  que  le  clonage  puisse 
être utilisé pour conserver certaines races rares parmi les 
espèces  d’élevage  (10),  l’utilisation  industrielle  intensive 
du clonage, appliquée à des races animales nettement 
prévalentes,  pourrait  finalement  réduire  la  diversité  et 
influencer  leur  distribution  mondiale.  De  récents  rap-
ports ont mis en lumière le risque que l’utilisation d’un 
nombre limité de lignées généalogiques dans l’élevage 
intensif  affecte  la  biodiversité  des  animaux  d’élevage 
(voir point 2.7.3 du présent avis) et crée des problèmes 
de consanguinité.

Le groupe a conscience que l’utilisation du clonage ani-
mal dans l’élevage serait difficile à étendre à l’échelle mon-
diale (11), mais plaide néanmoins pour la nécessité de pro-
téger la biodiversité et de limiter autant que possible la 
consanguinité  dans  les  troupeaux  d’animaux  d’élevage, 
en  vue  —  notamment  —  d’éviter  le  risque  d’épidémies 
mondiales.  À  cet  égard,  il  recommande  que  la  Commu-
nauté européenne (CE) prenne des mesures appropriées 
pour  préserver  l’héritage  génétique  des  espèces  anima-

(8)  Voir projet d’avis de l’EFSA, conclusions, p. 30.
(9)  Des considérations comparables s’appliquent à l’existence de don-
nées  relatives  à  d’autres  technologies  de  reproduction  assistée 
(ART) dans l’élevage.

(10)  Les  bovidés  (Bos  bovis)  sont  une  espèce  qui  compte  environ  1,2 
milliard  de  têtes  dans  le  monde,  réparties  en  un  millier  de  races 
environ, voir point 2.7.3.

(11)  David Fraser, ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/009/a0158e/a0158e00.pdf

36

les (12), par exemple en finançant des projets visant à pré-
server les races et espèces domestiquées en Europe.

Le  groupe  s’inquiète  de  l’incidence  mondiale  de  la 
consommation  croissante  de  viande  sur  l’environne-
ment, car le clonage des animaux d’élevage pourrait être 
un pas de plus vers l’aggravation de cette incidence.

5.6. Aspects sociétaux

5.6.1. Participation publique

Quoique le clonage ne soit qu’une étape, jusqu’à présent 
relativement marginale, dans le processus d’industrialisa-
tion  de  l’agriculture  et  de  mondialisation,  le  groupe  se 
rend compte qu’il est de la plus haute importance, en ter-
mes  de  justice  mondiale  et  d’impact  environnemental, 
qu’il y ait un débat sur les questions qui sous-tendent et 
accompagnent cette évolution mondiale. Il souligne donc 
l’importance  d’un  débat  public  sur  le  concept  des  bio-
technologies dans l’agriculture moderne, sur les inciden-
ces environnementales et sociétales de la consommation 
croissante de viande et de l’élevage de bovins, ainsi que 
sur la distribution équitable des ressources alimentaires et 
la  nécessité  de  promouvoir  une  agriculture  durable  à 
l’échelle de l’Union européenne (UE) et du monde entier.

Pour être en mesure d’exercer sa liberté de choix, le pu-
blic doit aussi être suffisamment informé, et il faut dès 
lors encourager le débat.

Le  groupe  invite  donc  la  Commission  à  jouer  un  rôle 
proactif dans la promotion de la discussion publique sur 
cette  utilisation  du  clonage  animal  et  ses  implications 
potentielles, en finançant diverses initiatives ad hoc au 
niveau paneuropéen et des États membres, visant à pro-
mouvoir le débat public sur la commercialisation de pro-
duits alimentaires dérivés du clonage animal. Les parties 
prenantes  [médias,  industrie,  responsables  politiques, 
organisations non gouvernementales (ONG) et commu-
nauté scientifique] doivent participer à cet effort d’une 
manière proactive et communiquer des informations fia-
bles au sujet du travail réalisé. La transparence à tous les 
niveaux  de  décision  (privé  et  institutionnel)  est  essen-
tielle, car un débat public constructif ne peut avoir lieu 
que s’il est fondé sur la confiance réciproque et la pleine 
connaissance des données factuelles.

5.6.2. Perception publique

Le  groupe  reconnaît  que  la  «philosophie  alimentaire» 
des individus et des pays (c’est-à-dire leur conception 

(12)  De l’avis n° 3 du GEE sur les implications éthiques de la biotechno-
logie: «Biodiversité … avec la ratification de la Convention des Na-
tions unies sur la diversité biologique, la Communauté serait bien 
inspirée de commencer à examiner cette question pour détermi-
ner ce qu’il faut entendre par ce terme dans la pratique.»

du  rôle  et  de  l’importance  de  la  nourriture,  les  tradi-
tions  culturelles  et  sociales  qui  y  sont  associées  et  les 
points  de  vue  connexes  concernant  les  processus  de 
production des différents ingrédients) varie considéra-
blement en Europe et dans le monde. Il reconnaît éga-
lement que les citoyens européens ont des perceptions 
et  des  croyances  (religieuses)  différentes  en  ce  qui 
concerne la consommation de viande ou d’autres pro-
duits dérivés d’animaux clonés et/ou de leur progéni-
ture (13). Il n’y a cependant pas encore d’indicateurs dé-
finitifs  concernant  la  perception  publique  du  clonage 
animal  pour  l’approvisionnement  alimentaire  et  des 
produits  alimentaires  dérivés  d’animaux  clonés  et  de 
leur progéniture. Le groupe recommande dès lors que 
la Commission lance une enquête thématique Euroba-
romètre  sur  le  clonage  animal  pour  l’approvisionne-
ment alimentaire, afin de recueillir des indicateurs sur 
la perception publique de l’introduction de produits de 
cette nature sur le marché alimentaire, comme cela se 
fait dans d’autres pays (14).

5.7. Traçabilité et étiquetage

La  traçabilité  et  l’étiquetage  soulèvent  de  nombreuses 
questions,  qui  peuvent  être  rapportées  au  principe  de 
précaution  bien  connu  et  portent  sur  des  préoccupa-
tions de sécurité, d’équité économique, d’équité en ma-
tière de charge de la preuve, ainsi que sur les questions 
abordées précédemment de liberté du consommateur. 
Ils  soulèvent  en  outre  des  questions  de  conditions  de 
responsabilité.

En  ce  qui  concerne  l’étiquetage  des  produits  alimen-
taires dérivés du clonage animal, le groupe est  d’avis 
que la liberté des consommateurs n’existe que si ceux-
ci disposent d’informations suffisantes pour choisir le 
type de produits qu’ils désirent. En vue de protéger la 
liberté de choix du consommateur, le groupe deman-
de  l’application  de  la  législation  communautaire  ac-
tuelle sur les denrées alimentaires en matière de traça-
bilité des animaux et des produits alimentaires qui en 
sont dérivés (notamment la directive 2000/13/CE) (15). 
Le groupe a toutefois conscience des difficultés tech-
niques et des coûts liés à l’étiquetage des produits pro-
venant  de  la  progéniture  (informations  sur  les  ancê-
tres)  et  demande  à  la  Commission  d’élaborer  des 
procédures ciblées (par exemple, étiquetage positif de 
la viande) avant la commercialisation de ces produits 
dans l’Union (16).

(13)  À cet égard la consommation de lait provenant d’animaux clonés 
peut sans doute avoir un autre impact sur la perception publique 
que la consommation de viande de clones.

(14)  http://www.ap-foodtechnology.com/news/ng.asp?n=82108-farm-

bill-cfs-cloning.

(15)  Voir point 3.1.1 du présent avis.
(16)  Le groupe a conscience que, en plus des difficultés techniques, la 
mise  en  œuvre  d’un  vaste  système  d’étiquetage  entraînera  des 
coûts supplémentaires pour les consommateurs.

37

5.8. Questions de propriété intellectuelle

Jusqu’à présent, les brevets en matière de clonage ani-
mal se limitent aux techniques de transfert nucléaire. Le 
groupe  craint  que  les  brevets  puissent  être  étendus  à 
des  gènes  ou  à  des  animaux  spécifiques  et  que  cela 
conduise  à  un  monopole/une  concentration  des  res-
sources importantes pour l’élevage.

Le  groupe  recommande  également  une  clarification 
supplémentaire, notamment par la recherche, de l’appli-
cabilité des clauses d’exclusion de la directive 98/44/CE 
(article 6) et des règles de l’Office européen des brevets 
(OEB)  (23  d)  au  clonage  animal  pour  l’approvisionne-
ment alimentaire (17).

5.9. Commerce mondial

La législation de l’Union européenne exige le respect du 
bien-être des animaux et de l’éthique animale dans les 
programmes  d’élevage.  Par  ailleurs,  les  accords  OMC 
sont fondés sur l’idée que seuls les risques scientifique-
ment documentés pour la santé humaine ou l’environ-
nement peuvent légitimement être invoqués pour limi-
ter  le  libre-échange.  Si  la  viande  d’animaux  clonés  est 
commercialisée dans des pays tiers, elle pourrait être ex-
portée  vers  l’UE,  d’où  un  dilemme  entre  les  considéra-
tions de libre-échange d’une part et les préoccupations 
éthiques concernant le clonage d’animaux d’autre part. 
Il n’est pas facile de résoudre ce dilemme politique. D’une 
part,  les  considérations  éthiques,  notamment  le  bien-
être des animaux, sont jugées capitales — y compris en 
matière de perception publique — tandis que de l’autre, 
des questions d’importation, notamment la conformité 
à l’OMC, peuvent compliquer la situation du marché (18).

Le  groupe  reconnaît  la  complexité  du  problème,  mais 
signale  qu’il  existe  déjà  des  exemples  de  dispositions 
spécifiques  dans  l’UE  concernant  les  importations  de 
viande  et  de  produits  alimentaires  de  pays  tiers,  par 
exemple  en  ce  qui  concerne  l’importation  de  viande 
contenant des hormones. Il considère dès lors que l’im-

(17)  OEB: Règle 23 quinquies «Exceptions à la brevetabilité 

Conformément  à  l’article  53,  lettre  a),  les  brevets  européens  ne 
sont pas délivrés notamment pour les inventions biotechnologi-
ques qui ont pour objet: a) des procédés de clonage des êtres hu-
mains;  b)  des  procédés  de  modification  de  l’identité  génétique 
germinale de l’être humain; c) des utilisations d’embryons humains 
à des fins industrielles ou commerciales; d) des procédés de modi-
fication  de  l’identité  génétique  des  animaux  de  nature  à  provo-
quer chez eux des souffrances sans utilité médicale substantielle 
pour l’homme ou l’animal, ainsi que les animaux issus de tels pro-
cédés.»
http://www.european-patent-office.org/legal/epc/pdf/epc_2006_
v5_bm_en.pdf)

 (

(18)  Pour  tout  complément  d’information,  prière  de  consulter:  Gun-
ning, J., Hartlev, M., Gambrog, C., e. a., Challenges in regulating farm 
animal  cloning.  Recommendations  from  the  project  ‘Cloning  in  pu-
blic’, Danish Centre for Bioethics and Risk assessment, 2006.

portation  d’animaux  clonés,  de  leur  progéniture  et  de 
matières  dérivées  d’animaux  clonés  (par  exemple  le 
sperme et les produits alimentaires décrits aux points 3.1 
et 3.3) doit être soumise à la condition de documenta-
tion figurant dans le présent avis, en particulier en ce qui 
concerne  les  dispositions  relatives  à  la  traçabilité  et  au 
bien-être des animaux.

Le groupe prend note de la déclaration du préambule et 
de l’article 2 de l’accord sur l’application des mesures sa-
nitaires  et  phytosanitaires  (accord  SPS)  selon  laquelle 
«aucun membre ne devrait être empêché d’adopter ou 
d’appliquer des mesures nécessaires à la protection de la 
santé  des  animaux,  sous  réserve  que  ces  mesures  ne 
soient  pas  appliquées  de  façon  à  constituer  un  moyen 
de  discrimination  arbitraire  ou  injustifiable  entre  les 
membres». Il note également l’article 5(7) de l’accord re-
latif  à  l’évaluation  du  risque.  Les  preuves  scientifiques 
concernant les animaux clonés et leur descendance sont 
insuffisantes et le groupe estime que la recherche est né-
cessaire comme l’indique le rapport de l’EFSA.

5.10. Conclusions

Le  groupe  a  connaissance  du  projet  de  conclusions 
scientifiques et de recommandations de l’EFSA sur la sé-
curité alimentaire, la santé et le bien-être des animaux et 
l’impact environnemental, ainsi que des indices de lacu-
nes actuelles dans la connaissance du bien-être des ani-
maux et de la santé des clones animaux et de leur des-
cendance. Il connaît aussi les résultats du rapport de la 
FDA publié la veille de l’adoption du présent avis.

Considérant le niveau actuel de souffrance et les problè-
mes  de  santé  des  mères  de  substitution  et  des  clones 
animaux, le groupe émet des doutes au sujet de la justi-
fication du clonage à des fins alimentaires. Le fait de sa-
voir  si  cela  s’applique  aussi  à  la  descendance  doit  faire 
l’objet de recherches scientifiques supplémentaires.

Actuellement, le GEE ne voit pas d’arguments convain-
cants pour justifier la production de denrées alimentaires 
à partir de clones et de leur progéniture (19). Si à l’avenir, 
des produits alimentaires dérivés d’animaux clonés de-
vaient être introduits sur le marché européen, le GEE re-
commande le respect des exigences suivantes:

Sécurité  alimentaire  —  La  sécurité  des  produits  ali-
mentaires  destinés  à  la  consommation  humaine  en 
tant  que  condition  préalable  à  leur  commercialisa-
tion doit être garantie. Il faut en outre procéder à des 
mises à jour scientifiques et à des recherches de suivi 
sur la progéniture.
Santé et bien-être des animaux — Conformément au 
traité d’Amsterdam (les animaux sont des êtres sensi-

(19)  K. Marczewski n’a pas marqué son assentiment sur la conclusion 

de ce paragraphe.

38

 
bles) et au traité de Lisbonne, l’élevage intensif d’ani-
maux  devrait  remplir  des  conditions  supplémentai-
res en vue de respecter les principes directeurs pour 
le bien-être des animaux, définis par l’Office interna-
tional  des  épizooties,  par  exemple  les  cinq  libertés: 
être épargné de la faim, de la soif et de la malnutri-
tion; être épargné de la peur et de la détresse; être 
épargné  de  l’inconfort  physique  et  thermique;  être 
épargné de la douleur, des blessures et des maladies; 
être  libre  d’exprimer  des  modes  normaux  de  com-
portement.
Traçabilité — La législation européenne actuelle sur 
les denrées alimentaires en matière de traçabilité des 
animaux et des produits alimentaires qui en sont dé-
rivés doit être appliquée. Il faut faire en sorte que la 
législation  communautaire  prévoie 
la  possibilité 
d’identifier les animaux individuels au besoin.
Commerce  mondial —   L’importation  d’animaux  clo-
nés, de leur progéniture et des matières issues d’ani-
maux  clonés  (notamment  le  sperme  et  les  produits 
alimentaires) doit être soumise à la condition d’une 
documentation  adéquate,  en  particulier  en  ce  qui 
concerne les dispositions relatives à la traçabilité et 
au bien-être des animaux.

En outre, le GEE recommande:

Bien-être des animaux — Des études et des analyses 
complémentaires  sur  les  implications  à  long  terme 
en  matière  de  santé  et  de  bien-être  des  animaux 
pour les clones et leur progéniture ainsi que des ana-
lyses comparatives avec d’autres technologies repro-
ductives traditionnelles et assistées appliquées dans 
l’élevage doivent être menées pour évaluer correcte-
ment cette question, conformément au projet d’avis 
de l’EFSA. La Commission devrait prendre des initiati-
ves en vue d’élaborer un code de déontologie pour 
l’élevage responsable des animaux de ferme, y com-
pris le clonage animal.
Biodiversité des animaux d’élevage et durabilité  —  La 
Commission  doit  prendre  des  mesures  adéquates 
pour préserver l’héritage génétique des espèces ani-
males d’élevage, par exemple en finançant des pro-
jets visant à préserver les races domestiquées en Eu-
rope et à promouvoir l’agriculture durable.
Participation publique — Il y a lieu d’encourager les dé-
bats  publics  sur  l’incidence  du  clonage  des  animaux 
d’élevage sur l’agriculture et l’environnement, l’impact 
sociétal de la consommation croissante de viande et 
de l’élevage de bovins, ainsi que la distribution équita-
ble  des  ressources  alimentaires.  La  Commission  de-

vrait jouer un rôle proactif dans l’encouragement de la 
discussion publique sur la pratique du clonage animal 
et ses implications potentielles, en finançant une série 
d’initiatives  ad  hoc  destinées  à  promouvoir  le  débat 
public  sur  la  commercialisation  des  produits  alimen-
taires issus du clonage animal.
Perception publique — La Commission devrait lancer 
une enquête thématique Eurobaromètre et des étu-
des qualitatives sur le clonage animal pour l’approvi-
sionnement alimentaire, afin de recueillir des indica-
teurs sur la perception publique de l’introduction de 
ces produits sur le marché alimentaire, comme cela 
se fait dans d’autres pays.
Étiquetage —   Le  GEE  a  conscience  des  difficultés 
techniques liées à l’étiquetage des produits issus de 
la progéniture, mais recommande néanmoins que la 
Commission prenne l’initiative d’élaborer des procé-
dures ciblées avant la commercialisation de ces pro-
duits alimentaires dans l’UE.
Questions de propriété intellectuelle — Il convient de 
déterminer  si  les  clauses  d’exclusion  de  la  directive 
98/44/CE  [article  6,  paragraphe  2,  point  d)]  concer-
nant la brevetabilité des inventions biologiques et les 
règles de l’EPO/OEB (23 d) relatives au clonage ani-
mal à des fins alimentaires s’appliquent.
Commerce  mondial  et  liberté  du  consommateur  —  Le 
GEE est conscient de ce que les questions d’importa-
tion  de  produits  alimentaires  dérivés  d’animaux  clo-
nés, y compris le respect des dispositions de l’Organi-
sation mondiale du commerce, peuvent compliquer la 
situation du marché. Il recommande néanmoins que 
la Commission prenne des initiatives pour garantir la 
liberté et les droits des consommateurs.
Recherche —   Des  recherches  complémentaires  sont 
nécessaires, en particulier la recherche fondamentale 
sur le clonage animal ainsi que des recherches sur l’im-
pact sur la santé humaine et le bien-être des animaux 
pour les espèces d’élevage autres que celles couvertes 
par  l’EFSA.  De  même,  il  faut  procéder  à  des  études 
complémentaires  des  implications  éthiques,  juridi-
ques et sociales du clonage animal pour l’approvision-
nement alimentaire et réaliser des études qualitatives 
relatives à la perception publique.

5.11. Nécessité de révision du présent avis

Comme des recherches complémentaires sont nécessai-
res  et  que  les  technologies  de  clonage  ne  cessent  de 
s’améliorer, le présent avis peut être réexaminé et éven-
tuellement revu à la lumière de données scientifiques et 
considérations sociétales nouvelles.

39

23nr.

STELLUNGNAHME DER EUROPÄISCHEN 
GRUPPE FÜR ETHIK 
IN NATURWISSENSCHAFTEN 
UND NEUEN TECHNOLOGIEN 
BEI DER EUROPÄISCHEN KOMMISSION

Ethik des Klonens
von Tieren für die
Lebensmittelversorgung

Bezug: 
Berichterstatter: 

Anfrage von Präsident Barroso
i. de Beaufort, P. Puigdomenech-Rosell, J. glasa

Nur der Originaltext auf Englisch ist authentisch.

European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies
to the European Commission

41

5  Stellungnahme

Ziel  der  Nutztierzüchtung  ist  die  Selektion  von  Tieren 
mit bestimmten genetischen Eigenschaften, z. B. der Re-
sistenz gegen Krankheiten oder für die Landwirte inter-
essanten Qualitätsmerkmalen. Beim Klonen von Wirbel-
tieren  mithilfe  der  SCNT-Methode  handelt  es  sich  um 
eine  kürzlich  entwickelte,  in  der  biomedizinischen  For-
schung  und  in  der Tierzucht  angewandte Technologie, 
die  auch  für  die  Lebensmittelproduktion  geeignet  ist, 
z. B. von Fleisch und Milcherzeugnissen. Weitere poten-
zielle  Einsatzfelder  der  Klontechnologie  sind  auch  die 
Zucht von Tieren, die für ihre Besitzer sehr wertvoll sind, 
wie etwa Rennpferde oder Haustiere sowie die Erhaltung 
vom Aussterben bedrohter Tierarten.

Allerdings ergeben sich durch das Klonen von Tieren für 
die  Lebensmittelversorgung  eine  ganze  Reihe  von  si-
cherheitstechnischen, rechtlichen, ethischen und gesell-
schaftlichen  Problemen.  Darüber  hinaus  ergeben  sich 
verschiedenste politische Fragestellungen (z. B. zum glo-
balen Handel). Einige dieser Probleme werden durch die 
EFSA  analysiert,  insbesondere  im  Hinblick  auf  die  wis-
senschaftlichen Aspekte der Lebensmittelsicherheit und 
des Tierschutzes.

5.1  Geltungsbereich der Stellungnahme

1997  veröffentlichte  die  EGE  eine  Stellungnahme  zur 
Ethik  des  Klonens  von Tieren,  in  der  jedoch  angesichts 
des damaligen Standes der Technologie der spezielle As-
pekt des Klonens für die Nahrungsversorgung nicht be-
rücksichtigt wurde. Die vorliegende EGE-Stellungnahme 
aktualisiert  das  vorangegangene  Gutachten  und  ver-
steht  sich  als  Ergänzung  des  EFSA-Berichtes.  Die  ethi-
schen  Überlegungen  beziehen  sich  hier  demnach  auf 
das Klonen von Tieren bei der Tierzucht zur Erzeugung 
von Nachkommen, die potenziell in die Nahrungskette 
gelangen können.

Die EGE ist sich der Tatsache bewusst, dass Erfahrungen 
im Klonen von Tieren auch für die Entwicklung genetisch 
modifizierter  Tiere  eingesetzt  werden  könnten  (geneti-
sche  Modifikationen  zur  Herstellung  von  Nutrazeutika, 
Biopharming  oder  die  Vermeidung  von  Krankheiten  in 
der  Nutztierzucht,  oder  die  Steigerung  der  Wertschöp-
fung bei Lebensmitteln aus geklonten Tieren und deren 
Nachkommen). Zudem könnten sie die Entwicklung neu-
er Klontechniken (1) vorantreiben. Diese Themen werden 
als wichtig erachtet und sollten im Hinblick auf die wis-
senschaftlichen, ethischen, rechtlichen und sozialen Fol-
gen weiter untersucht werden, sind jedoch nicht Gegen-
stand der vorliegenden Stellungnahme. Im Einklang mit 
dem EFSA-Bericht und der Anfrage von Präsident Barroso 

beschränkt sich die vorliegende Stellungnahme auf das 
Klonen von Tieren ohne genetische Modifikation.

5.2  Argumente zum Klonen von Tieren  
für den Verzehr

Die wichtigsten Argumente für das Klonen von für den 
Verzehr  bestimmten  Tieren  sind  ökonomischer  Natur. 
Hierzu  zählen  etwa  die  Erhaltung  des  europäischen 
Wettbewerbs  gegenüber  Drittländern  auf  dem  freien 
Markt, die Förderung der industriellen Entwicklung so-
wie  Verbesserungen  hinsichtlich  der  Herstellung  und 
Qualität  von  Lebensmitteln  bei  gleichzeitiger  Senkung 
der Verbraucherpreise, wie dies auch bei anderen Prakti-
ken  der  intensiven  Landwirtschaft  zu  beobachten  ist. 
Manche  befürworten  daher  das  Klonen  als  mögliche 
Entwicklung hin zu einer standardisierten, kostengünsti-
geren Lebensmittelproduktion, insbesondere bei Fleisch, 
welches  dann  für  einen  größeren Teil  der  Bevölkerung 
erschwinglich  werden  würde.  Andere  argumentieren, 
dass das Klonen die Züchtung von Tieren mit spezieller 
genetischer  Abstammung  vorantreiben  würde,  etwa 
von  Rindern,  die  gegen  Krankheiten  oder  ungünstige 
Haltungsbedingungen resistent sind (2). Zudem könnte 
das Klonen nachweisbar positive Auswirkungen auf die 
Gesundheit von Mensch und Tier haben, etwa in Verbin-
dung mit Transgenese (3).

Argumente  gegen  diese  Anwendung  von  Biotechnolo-
gie  artikulieren  dagegen  die  Sorge  um  die  Gesundheit 
und Sicherheit des Menschen, die Gesundheit und das 
Wohlergehen der Tiere, die Unversehrtheit der Tiere, die 
biologische  Vielfalt,  das  Risiko  von  Epidemien,  soziale 
und ökonomische Folgen für ländliche Räume sowie den 
Agrarhandel  (siehe  Kapitel  2  und  4  der  vorliegenden 
Stellungnahme). Andere Kritiker sehen die Gefahr, dass 
das Tier nur noch anhand seines Nutzens für den Men-
schen wertgeschätzt wird, oder sie weisen auf das Risiko 
hin, dass die zunehmende Praxis des Klonens schließlich 
auch das Klonen von Menschen erleichtern könnte.

Die  EGE  ist  sich  der  Tatsache  bewusst,  dass  es  unter-
schiedliche Standpunkte zur moralischen Akzeptanz ei-
ner  modernen  Nutztierhaltung  gibt,  ebenso  wie  vehe-
mente Gegner einer Instrumentalisierung von Tieren für 
die Zwecke des Menschen, ungeachtet möglicher positi-
ver  Auswirkungen  auf  den  Menschen.  Sie  erkennt  an, 
dass für einige das Klonen von Tieren für die Nahrungs-
versorgung  unter  allen  Umständen  eine  ethisch  inak-
zeptable Praxis darstellt.

Die EGE möchte betonen, dass der Weg hin zum Klonen 
für die Lebensmittelversorgung eine neue Dimension im 

(1)  Die Gruppe bekräftigt erneut, dass sie strikt gegen die potenzielle 
Anwendung  von  SCNT  in  der  humanen  Reproduktionsmedizin 
ist. 

(2)  Diese letzten beiden Argumente betreffen allerdings Anwendun-
gen des Tierklonens, die nicht Gegenstand der vorliegenden Stel-
lungnahme sind.

(3)  Siehe Kapitel 2.7 der vorliegenden Stellungnahme. 

43

allgemeinen Kontext der Tierzucht eröffnet, die über das 
rein Technische hinausgeht und bei manchen Menschen 
ein moralisches Unbehagen auslöst, das sich nicht ein-
fach ignorieren lässt.

5.3  Lebensmittelsicherheit

Der EGE fehlen sowohl die erforderliche Kompetenz als 
auch  die  Befugnis  für  eine  Risikobewertung  bezüglich 
der Lebensmittelsicherheit. Trotzdem wirft die Entschei-
dung  über  die  vertretbaren  Risiken  für  den  Einzelnen 
und die Gesellschaft auch ethische Fragen auf. Die wis-
senschaftliche Risikobewertung der Sicherheit von Le-
bensmitteln  aus  geklonten  Tieren  und/oder  deren 
Nachkommen  fällt  unter  die  Zuständigkeit  der  EFSA 
(EFSA-Gutachten  und  nachfolgende  Updates).  Hierauf 
nimmt  die  Gruppe  Bezug.  Im  EFSA-Gutachtenentwurf 
wird festgestellt, dass 1. Maßnahmen zur Einschränkung 
des Klonens von Tieren für die Nahrungsversorgung mit 
Argumenten  der  Lebensmittelsicherheit  nicht  begrün-
det werden können, 2. „für die Risikobewertung nur we-
nige Daten zur Verfügung stehen“ und dass es 3. Unsi-
ihrer  Bewertung  gibt  (4).  Die  EGE 
cherheiten  bei 
unterstreicht  die  Bedeutung  einer  Garantie  für  die  Si-
cherheit von für den Verzehr bestimmten Produkten als 
Vorbedingung  für  ihre  Vermarktung  und  betont  die 
Notwendigkeit  aktueller  wissenschaftlicher  Untersu-
chungen hinsichtlich der Klon-Nachkommen.

5.4  Tierschutz und Tiergesundheit

Im Vertrag von Amsterdam werden Tiere als „fühlende“ 
Wesen  (5)  anerkannt.  Daher  sollte  immer  feststehen, 
dass – ungeachtet der Bedeutung der Fleischproduktion 
für die menschliche Ernährung und der Notwendigkeit 
des Schlachtens von Tieren – die Art und Weise, wie wir 
Tiere behandeln, stets im Einklang mit den bereits exis-
tierenden, in den EU-Gesetzen festgeschriebenen Stan-
dards  zu Tierschutz  und Tiergesundheit  erfolgen  sollte 
(siehe  Kapitel  3.1.2  der  vorliegenden  Stellungnahme). 
Ergänzend zu diesen Standards jedoch vertritt die Grup-
pe die Auffassung, dass die intensive Tierzucht zusätzli-
che Forderungen erfüllen sollte, insbesondere die vom 
Internationalen  Tierseuchenamt  (OIE)  (6)  erarbeiteten 
Leitlinien für den Tierschutz, d. h. die fünf bereits in Kapi-
tel 4.1 dieser Stellungnahme erwähnten Freiheiten: frei 
von Hunger, Durst und Mangelernährung; frei von Angst 
und Leid; frei von physischen und temperaturbedingten 
Beschwerden;  frei  von  Schmerz,  Verletzungen  und 
Krankheit sowie die Freiheit, ein normales, artgemäßes 
Verhalten auszuleben.

(4)  Siehe EFSA-Gutachtenentwurf, Kapitel Schlussfolgerungen, S. 30.
(5)  Dieser Begriff findet sich auch im Vertrag von Lissabon, der zur-
zeit den Ratifizierungsprozess durchläuft, und in dem alle tech-
nologischen  Entwicklungen  berücksichtigt  sind  (B  spezifische 
Ergänzungen).

(6)  www.oie.int

Eine Verletzung dieser Kriterien wäre nur dann zu recht-
fertigen, wenn der Nutzen für den Menschen besonders 
groß ist. Ob dieser Fall allerdings mit den heutigen Ver-
fahren des Tierklonens für die Nahrungsversorgung ge-
geben ist, wird von der EGE bezweifelt.

Hinzu kommt der von der EFSA festgestellte Mangel an 
Daten (7) bezüglich der langfristigen Auswirkungen auf 
das Wohlergehen und die Gesundheit der Klone und de-
ren Nachkommen (8) – bedingt durch die derzeit einge-
schränkte  Anwendung  der  Klontechnologie.  Für  eine 
angemessene Bewertung dieser Frage sind weitere Stu-
dien über Langzeitfolgen für das Wohlergehen und die 
Gesundheit von Tierklonen und deren Nachkommen so-
wie weitere vergleichende Analysen mit anderen assis-
tierten  und  konventionellen  Reproduktionstechniken 
erforderlich.

Allerdings ist die Gruppe besorgt, dass intensive Zucht-
verfahren  das  Wohlergehen  der  Tiere  beeinträchtigen 
könnten. Hier sollte eine Prüfung der derzeitigen Prakti-
ken auf europäischer Ebene erfolgen. Aus diesem Grund 
schlägt die Gruppe vor, dass die Kommission die Ausar-
beitung eines Verhaltenskodex für eine verantwortungs-
bewusste Nutztierzüchtung, einschließlich des Klonens 
von Tieren, in die Wege leitet.

5.5  Biologische Vielfalt und Nachhaltigkeit bei 
Nutztieren

Die EGE erkennt das Klonen als mögliches Verfahren für 
die Erhaltung bestimmter seltener Nutztierrassen an (9). 
Das Klonen im intensiven, industriellen Maßstab mit weit 
verbreiteten Tierrassen könnte dagegen letztendlich zu 
einem  Rückgang  der  biologischen  Vielfalt  führen  und 
Auswirkungen auf die Verbreitung dieser Rassen haben. 
Neueste Berichte weisen auf die Gefahr hin, dass die Ver-
wendung einer begrenzten Zahl von Zuchtlinien bei der 
intensiven Tierproduktion zu einem Verlust der biologi-
schen Vielfalt der Nutztiere (siehe Kapitel 2.7.3 der vorlie-
genden  Stellungnahme)  und  damit  zu  Inzuchtproble-
men führt.

Die Gruppe ist sich der Tatsache bewusst, dass sich das 
Klonen von landwirtschaftlichen Nutztieren schwer auf 
eine  globale  Ebene  ausweiten  ließe  (10).  Dennoch  for-
dert sie eindringlich den Schutz der biologischen Viel-
falt  und  eine  weitest  mögliche  Einschränkung  der  In-
zucht in landwirtschaftlichen Tierbeständen, um – unter 

(7)  Siehe EFSA-Gutachtenentwurf, Kapitel Schlussfolgerungen, S. 30.
(8)  Ähnliche Überlegungen gibt es für das vorhandene Datenmaterial 
über andere assistierte Reproduktionstechniken (ART) in der Tier-
züchtung.

(9)  Das Hausrind (Bos bovis) ist eine Art. Weltweit gibt es etwa 1,2 Mil-
liarden  Tiere,  die  etwa  1  000  verschiedenen  Rassen  angehören; 
siehe Kapitel 2.7.3.

(10)  Von David Fraser, ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/009/a0158e/a0158e00.

pdf

44

anderem – das Risiko weltweiter Epidemien zu vermei-
den. In dieser Hinsicht empfiehlt die Gruppe der Euro-
päischen  Gemeinschaft  die  Durchführung  von  Maß-
nahmen  zur  Erhaltung  des  genetischen  Erbes  der 
einzelnen Tierarten (11), z. B. die Förderung von Projek-
ten,  deren  Ziel  die  Erhaltung  von  Haustierarten  und 
-rassen in Europa ist.

Die Gruppe ist besorgt über die globalen Auswirkungen 
des  wachsenden  Fleischkonsums  auf  die  Umwelt.  Das 
Klonen von Nutztieren könnte ein weiterer Schritt hin zu 
einer Verstärkung dieser Folgen sein.

5.6  Gesellschaftliche Aspekte

5.6.1  Beteiligung der Öffentlichkeit

Die  Gruppe  weist  darauf  hin,  dass  das  Klonen  bislang 
zwar nur ein kleiner Schritt am Rande des landwirtschaft-
lichen  Industrialisierungsprozesses  und  der  Globalisie-
rung darstellt, dass jedoch im Zuge der globalen Gerech-
tigkeit und der weltweiten Umweltfolgen eine Diskussion 
über  die  Fragen,  die  dieser  globalen  Entwicklung  zu-
grunde  liegen,  von  größter Wichtigkeit  ist.  Die  Gruppe 
unterstreicht  daher  die  Bedeutung  einer  öffentlichen 
Debatte  über  biotechnologische  Konzepte  in  der  mo-
dernen  Agrarwirtschaft,  über  die  Folgen  des  wachsen-
den Fleischkonsums und der Ausbreitung der Rinderhal-
tung  für  Umwelt  und  Gesellschaft  sowie  über  die  faire 
Verteilung  von  Nahrungsressourcen  und  die  Notwen-
digkeit der Förderung einer nachhaltigen Landwirtschaft 
auf EU-Ebene und weltweit.

Damit die Öffentlichkeit ihr Recht auf freie Auswahl aus-
üben kann, muss sie ausreichend informiert werden. Die 
öffentliche Debatte ist demnach zu fördern.

Aus diesem Grund ersucht die Gruppe die Kommission, 
eine proaktive Rolle bei der Unterstützung der öffentli-
chen  Diskussion  über  das  Klonen  von  Tieren  und  die 
potenziellen Auswirkungen einzunehmen. Hierbei soll-
te sie eine Reihe von Ad-hoc-Initiativen auf der Ebene 
der Mitgliedstaaten und auf gesamteuropäischer Ebe-
ne finanzieren, die die öffentliche Debatte über die Ver-
marktung von Lebensmitteln aus geklonten Tieren för-
dern.  Wichtige  Interessenvertreter  (Medien,  Industrie, 
politische  Entscheidungsträger,  Nichtregierungsorga-
nisationen  und  Wissenschaft)  sollten  an  dieser  Maß-
nahme  aktiv  teilnehmen  und  verlässliche  Informatio-
nen  über 
ihre  Arbeiten  zur  Verfügung  stellen. 
Transparenz  auf  allen  Entscheidungsebenen  (sowohl 
auf privater als auch auf institutioneller Ebene) ist von 

grundlegender  Bedeutung,  da  eine  konstruktive  öf-
fentliche Debatte nur dann stattfinden kann, wenn sie 
auf gegenseitigem Vertrauen und in voller Kenntnis der 
Fakten geführt wird.

5.6.2  Öffentliche Wahrnehmung

Die  Gruppe  erkennt  an,  dass  die  „Ernährungsphiloso-
phie“ der Menschen und der einzelnen Länder (d. h. ihre 
Ansichten  über  die  Rolle  und  Bedeutung  von  Lebens-
mitteln, die damit verbundenen kulturellen und gesell-
schaftlichen Traditionen und die Ansichten über die Pro-
duktionsverfahren  für  die  verschiedenen  Bestandteile) 
innerhalb  Europas  und  weltweit  stark  variieren.  Sie  er-
kennt auch an, dass die Bürger Europas unterschiedliche 
Wahrnehmungen und (religiöse) Glaubensvorstellungen 
bezüglich des Verzehrs von Fleisch oder anderer aus ge-
klonten  Tieren  und/oder  deren  Nachkommen  herge-
stellter  Produkte  haben  (12).  Allerdings  gibt  es  bislang 
noch keine definitiven Indikatoren bezüglich der öffent-
lichen Wahrnehmung über das Klonen von Tieren für die 
Nahrungsversorgung  bzw.  über  Lebensmittel  aus  ge-
klonten  Tieren  und  deren  Nachkommen.  Die  Gruppe 
empfiehlt daher, dass die Kommission eine thematische 
Eurobarometer-Erhebung  über  das  Klonen  von  Tieren 
für  die  Nahrungsversorgung  lanciert.  Auf  diesem  Weg 
lassen sich Indikatoren für die öffentliche Wahrnehmung 
bezüglich einer Einführung solcher Erzeugnisse auf dem 
Lebensmittelmarkt sammeln, wie dies auch in anderen 
Ländern bereits erfolgt (13).

5.7  Rückverfolgbarkeit und Kennzeichnung

Die Rückverfolgbarkeit und Kennzeichnung von Lebens-
mitteln  wirft  viele  Fragen  auf,  die  im  Zusammenhang 
mit dem bekannten Vorsorgeprinzip stehen. Beide Fak-
toren sind von Bedeutung für die Frage der Sicherheit, 
die ökonomische Gerechtigkeit, die faire Verteilung der 
Beweislast und die bereits diskutierten Fragen der Ver-
braucherfreiheit. Zudem werfen sie auch Fragen zu den 
Haftungsbedingungen auf.

Bezüglich  der  Kennzeichnung  von  Lebensmitteln  aus 
geklonten Tieren ist die Gruppe der Auffassung, dass die 
Verbraucherfreiheit  nur  dann  gewährleistet  werden 
kann,  wenn  der  Verbraucher  genügend  Informationen 
erhält,  um  die  gewünschten  Produkte  auszuwählen. 
Zum Schutz der freien Auswahl des Verbrauchers fordert 
die  Gruppe  die  Anwendung  des  aktuellen  EU-Lebens-
mittelrechts  bezüglich  der  Rückverfolgbarkeit  von  Tie-
ren  und Tierprodukten  (z.  B.  Richtlinie  2000/13/EG)  (14). 

(11)  Aus der EGE-Stellungnahme Nr. 3 über die ethischen Hintergründe 
der  Biotechnologie: „Biologische  Vielfalt  …  Mit  der  Ratifizierung 
des  UN-Übereinkommens  über  die  Biologische  Vielfalt  wäre  die 
Gemeinschaft  gut  beraten,  sich  mit  dieser  Frage  auseinander  zu 
setzen, um zu klären, was nach ihrem Verständnis dieses Konzept 
praktisch bedeutet.“

(12)  In dieser Hinsicht hat der Verzehr von Milch von geklonten Tieren 
vermutlich  einen  anderen  Einfluss  auf  die  öffentliche  Wahrneh-
mung als der Verzehr von Fleisch von Tierklonen. 

(13)  http://www.ap-foodtechnology.com/news/ng.asp?n=82108-

farm-bill-cfs-cloning

(14)  Siehe Kapitel 3.1.1 der vorliegenden Stellungnahme.

45

Allerdings  sind  der  Gruppe  die  technischen  Schwierig-
keiten und Kosten für die Kennzeichnung von Produkten 
aus Klon-Nachfahren (Informationen zur Abstammung) 
bewusst. Sie fordert die Kommission auf, gezielte Verfah-
ren zu entwickeln (z. B. die positive Kennzeichnung von 
Fleisch), bevor solche Lebensmittel in der EU (15) auf den 
Markt gelangen.

5.8  Fragen zum geistigen Eigentum

Bislang  beschränkt  sich  die  Patentierung  des  Klonens 
von Tieren auf die Techniken des Kerntransfers. Es steht 
jedoch  zu  befürchten,  dass  die  Patente  auf  spezielle 
Gene oder Tiere erweitert werden könnten und dass dies 
zu einer Monopolisierung/Konzentration der für die Tier-
zucht wichtigen Ressourcen führt.

Die Gruppe befürwortet auch eine weitere Klärung, un-
ter  anderem  durch  wissenschaftliche  Untersuchungen, 
hinsichtlich  der  Anwendbarkeit  der  in  der  Richtlinie 
98/44/EG (Artikel 6) und in den EPO Regeln (23 d) enthal-
tenen Ausschlussklauseln auf das Klonen von Tieren für 
die Nahrungsversorgung (16).

5.9  Globaler Handel

Die EU-Gesetze fordern die Achtung des Wohlergehens 
und  der  Ethik  der Tiere  bei  der Tierzucht.  Andererseits 
basieren WTO-Übereinkommen auf der Forderung, dass 
nur wissenschaftlich dokumentierte Risiken für die Ge-
sundheit  des  Menschen  oder  die  Umwelt  als  legitime 
Begründung für eine Einschränkung des freien Handels 
gelten können. In Drittländern vermarktetes Fleisch von 
geklonten Tieren könnte von dort auch ohne Weiteres in 
die EU exportiert werden. Hier ergibt sich ein politisches 
Dilemma  zwischen  freiem  Handel  auf  der  einen  Seite 
und  ethischen  Problemen  bezüglich  des  Klonens  von 
Tieren auf der anderen, dessen Lösung nicht einfach ist. 
Einerseits wird die elementare Bedeutung von ethischen 
Überlegungen, einschließlich des Wohlergehens der Tie-
re, festgestellt – auch in Bezug auf die öffentliche Wahr-
nehmung –, während andererseits Importprobleme und 

(15)  Die Gruppe ist sich der Tatsache bewusst, dass bei der Einführung 
eines  umfassenden  Kennzeichnungssystems  neben  technischen 
Schwierigkeiten auch zusätzliche Kosten für die Verbraucher anfal-
len werden.

(16)  EPO: Regel 23 d „Ausnahmen von der Patentierbarkeit. Nach Artikel 
53  Buchstabe  a  werden  europäische  Patente  insbesondere  nicht 
erteilt  für  biotechnologische  Erfindungen,  die  zum  Gegenstand 
haben: a) Verfahren zum Klonen menschlicher Lebewesen; b) Ver-
fahren zur Veränderung der genetischen Identität der Keimbahn 
des menschlichen Lebewesens; c) die Verwendung von menschli-
chen  Embryonen  zu  industriellen  oder  kommerziellen  Zwecken; 
d) Verfahren zur Veränderung der genetischen Identität von Tie-
ren, die geeignet sind, Leiden dieser Tiere ohne wesentlichen me-
dizinischen  Nutzen  für  den  Menschen  oder  das  Tier  zu  verursa-
chen, sowie die mithilfe solcher Verfahren erzeugten Tiere.“ 
(http://www.european-patent-office.org/legal/epc/pdf/
epc_2006_v5_bm_en.pdf )

die Einhaltung von WTO-Übereinkommen die Marktsitu-
ation kompliziert machen können (17).

Die Gruppe ist sich der komplexen Natur dieser Thematik 
bewusst, weist aber darauf hin, dass es bereits eine Reihe 
von  Beispielen  für  spezielle  EU-Bestimmungen  für  den 
Import von Fleisch und anderen Lebensmitteln aus Dritt-
ländern gibt, z. B. bezüglich der Einfuhr von hormonbelas-
tetem Fleisch. Die Gruppe vertritt daher die Auffassung, 
dass  der  Import  von  geklonten Tieren  und  deren  Nach-
kommen  sowie  aus  geklonten  Tieren  hergestellten  Er-
zeugnissen (z. B. Samen und Lebensmittel, wie beschrie-
ben in den Kapiteln 3.1 und 3.3) an die in der vorliegenden 
Stellungnahme  beschriebene  Dokumentation  geknüpft 
werden sollte, insbesondere hinsichtlich der Bestimmun-
gen über die Rückverfolgbarkeit und des Tierschutzes.

Die Gruppe weist auf die in der Präambel und in Artikel 2 des 
Übereinkommens  über  die  Anwendung  gesundheitspoli-
zeilicher  und  pflanzenschutzrechtlicher  Maßnahmen  (SPS-
Übereinkommen) enthaltene Erklärung hin, dass kein Mit-
glied daran gehindert werden darf, notwendige Maßnahmen 
zum Schutz der Tiergesundheit zu beschließen oder anzu-
wenden, sofern solche Maßnahmen nicht zu einer willkürli-
chen  oder  ungerechtfertigten  Diskriminierung  zwischen 
Mitgliedstaaten führen. Darüber hinaus verweist sie auf Arti-
kel 5 Absatz 7 des Übereinkommens zur Frage der Risikobe-
wertung. Es fehlt bislang noch an wissenschaftlichen Bewei-
sen über geklonte Tiere und deren Nachkommen, sodass die 
Gruppe die bereits im EFSA-Bericht beschriebene Forderung 
nach weiterer Forschung zu diesem Thema unterstützt.

5.10  Schlussfolgerungen

Die Gruppe nimmt Kenntnis von den vorläufigen Ergebnis-
sen und Empfehlungen der EFSA zur Lebensmittelsicher-
heit und Tiergesundheit, zum Tierschutz und zu den Folgen 
für die Umwelt wie auch von den aufgezeigten Kenntnislü-
cken in den Bereichen Tierschutz und der Gesundheit von 
Tierklonen  und  deren  Nachkommen.  Bekannt  sind  auch 
die Ergebnisse des FDA-Berichtes, der einen Tag vor Annah-
me der vorliegenden Stellungnahme veröffentlicht wurde.

Angesichts  des  derzeitigen  Leidens  und  der  Gesund-
heitsprobleme  von  Ersatzmuttertieren  und  Tierklonen 
bezweifelt die Gruppe, ob das Klonen für die Lebensmit-
telerzeugung  gerechtfertigt  ist.  Ob  dies  auch  für  die 
Nachkommen  gilt,  müsste  in  weiteren  wissenschaftli-
chen Studien untersucht werden.

Zum jetzigen Zeitpunkt sieht die EGE keine überzeugen-
den Argumente, die die Nahrungsmittelproduktion aus 
Klonen  und  deren  Nachkommen  rechtfertigen  wür-

(17)  Näheres hierzu siehe bei: Challenges in regulating farm animal clo-
ning. Recommendations from the project „Cloning in public“, J. Gun-
ning, M. Hartlev, C. Gambrog et al., Dänisches Zentrum für Bioethik 
und Risikoabschätzung (2006).

46

 
den  (18).  Sollten  in  Zukunft  Lebensmittel  aus  geklonten 
Tieren auf den europäischen Markt gelangen, empfiehlt 
die EGE die folgenden Anforderungen:

Lebensmittelsicherheit  –  Die  Sicherheit  der  Lebens-
mittel  für  den  menschlichen  Verzehr  als  Vorbedin-
gung für eine Vermarktung muss gewährleistet sein. 
Wissenschaftliche Updates und Follow-up-Studien in 
den Folgegenerationen sind durchzuführen.
Tierschutz  und  Tiergesundheit  –  Gemäß  der  Verträge 
von Amsterdam (Tiere als fühlende Wesen) und Lissa-
bon  müssen  im  Bereich  der  intensiven Tierzucht  zu-
sätzliche Forderungen erfüllt werden. Ziel ist die Ein-
haltung  der  vom  Internationalen  Tierseuchenamt 
(OIE) aufgestellten Leitlinien zum Tierschutz, z. B. die 
fünf Freiheiten: frei von Hunger, Durst und Mangeler-
nährung; frei von Angst und Leid; frei von physischen 
und  temperaturbedingten  Beschwerden;  frei  von 
Schmerz, Verletzungen und Krankheit sowie die Frei-
heit, ein normales, artgemäßes Verhalten auszuleben.
Rückverfolgbarkeit – Das derzeitige EU-Lebensmittel-
recht in Bezug auf die Rückverfolgbarkeit von Tieren 
und aus ihnen hergestellten Lebensmitteln sollte An-
wendung finden. Dabei muss sichergestellt werden, 
dass  die  EU-Bestimmungen  gegebenenfalls  eine 
Identifizierung jedes einzelnen Tieres ermöglichen.
Globaler  Handel  –  Bedingung  für  den  Import  von 
Klontieren, deren Nachkommen sowie aus geklonten 
Tieren hergestellten Stoffen (z. B. Samen und Lebens-
mittel) sollte eine ordnungsgemäße Dokumentation 
sein,  insbesondere  hinsichtlich  der  Vorschriften  zur 
Rückverfolgbarkeit und des Tierschutzes.

Ergänzend spricht die EGE folgende Empfehlungen aus:

Tierschutz – Übereinstimmend mit dem Gutachtenent-
wurf  der  EFSA  sollten  weitere  Untersuchungen  über 
die Langzeitfolgen für das Wohlergehen und die Ge-
sundheit von Klonen und deren Nachkommen sowie 
weitere vergleichende Analysen mit anderen assistier-
ten  und  konventionellen  Reproduktionstechniken  in 
der  Tierproduktion  durchgeführt  werden,  um  eine 
richtige Bewertung dieser Fragen zu ermöglichen. Die 
Kommission sollte die Ausarbeitung eines Verhaltens-
kodex für eine verantwortungsbewusste Tierzucht in 
die Wege leiten, der das Klonen mit einbezieht.
Biologische Vielfalt und Nachhaltigkeit bei Nutztieren – 
Die  Kommission  sollte  angemessene  Maßnahmen 
zum Schutz des genetischen Erbes von Nutztierarten 
durchführen, z. B. in Form einer Förderung von Pro-
jekten mit dem Ziel der Erhaltung von Haustierrassen 
in Europa sowie durch die Förderung einer nachhalti-
gen Landwirtschaft.
Beteiligung der Öffentlichkeit – Die öffentliche Debatte 
über die Auswirkungen des Klonens von Nutztieren auf 

(18)  Der Schlussfolgerung in diesem Absatz wurde widersprochen von 

K. Marczewski.

47

Landwirtschaft  und  Umwelt,  über  gesellschaftliche 
Folgen  des  steigenden  Fleischkonsums  und  der  Aus-
breitung  der  Rinderhaltung  sowie  über  die  gerechte 
Verteilung von Nahrungsressourcen ist zu fördern. Die 
Kommission  sollte  eine  proaktive  Rolle  bei  der  Anre-
gung der öffentlichen Diskussion über das Klonen von 
Tieren und die potenziellen Folgen einnehmen, indem 
sie  eine  Reihe  von  Ad-hoc-Initiativen  fördert,  die  die 
öffentliche Debatte über die Vermarktung von aus Tier-
klonen hergestellten Lebensmitteln unterstützen.
Öffentliche  Wahrnehmung  –  Die  Kommission  sollte 
eine  thematische  Eurobarometer-Erhebung  sowie 
qualitative  Untersuchungen  über  das  Klonen  von 
Tieren für die Nahrungsversorgung lancieren, um In-
dikatoren  für  die  öffentliche Wahrnehmung  bezüg-
lich  einer  Einführung  solcher  Produkte  auf  dem  Le-
bensmittelmarkt  zu  sammeln.  In  anderen  Ländern 
laufen solche Untersuchungen bereits.
Kennzeichnung – Die EGE ist sich der technischen Pro-
bleme einer Kennzeichnung von Produkten, die aus 
Nachkommen  von  Tierklonen  hergestellt  wurden, 
bewusst. Dennoch empfiehlt sie, dass die Kommissi-
on hier noch vor einer möglichen Vermarktung sol-
cher  Produkte  in  der  EU  die  Entwicklung  gezielter 
Verfahren in die Wege leitet.
Fragen zum geistigen Eigentum – Zu klären ist, ob die 
in der Richtlinie 98/44/EG (Artikel 6d) über den recht-
lichen Schutz biotechnologischer Erfindungen sowie 
in  den  EPO-Regeln  (23  d)  enthaltenen  Ausschluss-
klauseln auf das Klonen von Tieren für die Nahrungs-
versorgung anwendbar sind.
Globaler  Handel  und  Freiheit  des  Verbrauchers  –  Die 
Gruppe ist sich der Tatsache bewusst, dass die Fragen 
des Imports von Lebensmittelprodukten aus Tierklo-
nen,  auch  im  Hinblick  auf  die  Einhaltung  der WTO-
Bestimmungen,  die  Marktsituation  komplizierter 
machen  könnten.  Dennoch  empfiehlt  sie  der  Kom-
mission  Initiativen  zu  ergreifen,  um  die  Freiheiten 
und Rechte der Verbraucher zu gewährleisten.
Forschung  –  Weitere  Untersuchungen  sind  notwen-
dig,  insbesondere  Grundlagenforschung  über  das 
Klonen von Tieren sowie Studien über die Folgen für 
die Gesundheit des Menschen und das Wohlergehen 
von solchen Nutztierarten, die nicht von der EFSA be-
handelt wurden. Gleichermaßen sollten weitere ethi-
sche, rechtliche und soziale Auswirkungen des Tier-
klonens für die Nahrungsversorgung erforscht sowie 
qualitative  Untersuchungen  zur  öffentlichen  Wahr-
nehmung durchgeführt werden.

5.11  Revisionsbedarf der vorliegenden 
Stellungnahme

In  Anbetracht  der  Tatsache,  dass  noch  weitere  For-
schungsarbeit erforderlich ist und die Klontechnologien 
ständig verbessert werden, ist die vorliegende Stellung-
nahme  angesichts  neuer  wissenschaftlicher  Daten  und 
gesellschaftlicher Überlegungen möglicherweise neu zu 
überdenken und gegebenenfalls zu überarbeiten.

Appendix

Appendix

Ethical aspects 
of animal cloning 
for food supply

49

Addendum requested
from Professor Krzysztof Marczewski,
EGE member

Appendix I
Addendum requested from Professor Krzysztof Marczewski, EGE member

In full respect for different ethical preferences of other 
EGE members I can not agree with the following sen-
tences of our opinion Nr 23 in the conclusion part: 

‘Considering the current level of suffering and health prob-
lems  of  surrogate  dams and animal clones,  the  Group has 
doubts  as  to  whether  cloning  for  food  is  justified’  and  ‘At 
present, the Group does not see convincing reasons for the 
production of food from clones and their offspring’. 

The reasons for my disagreement refer to potential ben-
efits for humans that may derive from animal cloning for 
food supply. I do not see convincing ethical reasons for 
unnecessarily  delaying  the  introduction  of  this  tech-
nique and its products on to the European Food Market. 

Appendix I

In a long time perspective I expect from this technology 
a  positive  impact  on  both  economy  (growth  impulse) 
and ecology (restoring of biodiversity). I believe also that 
cloning of animals for breeding purposes will have ben-
eficial effects on both human health and animal welfare. 
The problem of obesity and type 2 diabetes connected 
with  consumption  of  too  fatty  meat  could  possibly  be 
partially  solved  with  the  introduction  of  better  quality 
meat  from  selected  animals.  The  current  arguments 
against animal cloning are is killing thousands cattle be-
cause of BSE and birds due to avian influenza, a problem 
which  could  probably  be  avoided  in  selected  races  of 
cloned animals resistant to such diseases. 

But  the  most  important  cause  of  my  disagreement  is 
the need to protect the right of consumers’ choices of 
which  is  for  me  closely  connected  with  the  dignity  of 
human beings. I suppose that probably only a minority 
of  Europeans  would  at  present  buy  food  based  on 
cloned animals but the protection of the rights of this 
minority is a mile stone of democracy. 

For me, as a physician, it is a paradox that other forms 
of traditional breeding (e.g. foie gras) are currently not 
prohibited, or seriously limited, in the EU because they 
are detrimental to the welfare of thousands of animals. 
More importantly, I’d like to express my doubts on the 
possible  affected  welfare  of  few  cattle  and  pigs  and 
stress  that  they  are  not  convincing  when  considering 
that, for example, the cultivation and trade of tobacco 
is not only tolerated but also supported notwithstand-
ing  the  fact  that  it  is  connected  with  suffering  and 
death of millions of people, including  the involuntary 
passive  smokers.  Animal  welfare  effects  towards  the 
animals  cloned  for  food  purposes  (pigs  and  cattle), 
therefore,  are  not  convincing  insofar  the  same  effects 
are  accepted  in  other  animal  breeding  or  artificial  re-
production techniques. 

If we decide that the protection of people and animals 
is  more  important  than  the  consumer’s  right  to  free 
choice we should, without doubts, begin from an abso-
lute ban for tobacco.

Addendum requested from Professor Krzysztof Marczewski, EGE member

krzysztof Marczewski 
Member of EgE

51

Secretariat of the European 
Group On Ethics

Dr Maurizio Salvi
Head of the EGE Secretariat

Tel. (32-2) 299 11 79
Fax (32-2) 299 45 65
E-mail: maurizio.salvi@ec.europa.eu

Dr Alessandra Ferrari

Tel. (32-2) 295 43 29
Fax (32-2) 299 45 65
E-mail: alessandra.ferrari@ec.europa.eu

Ms Joelle Bezzan

Tel. (32-2) 296 19 48
Fax (32-2) 299 45 65

Mail address

European Commission

Secretariat of the European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies

BERL 8/143
B-1049 Brussels

Office

European Commission
Berlaymont Building, Rue de la Loi 200
B-1049 Brussels

Website

http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm

53

 
 
European Commission

Ethical aspects of animal cloning for food supply

Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities

2008 — 53 pp. — 21 × 29.7 cm

ISBN 978-92-79-07145-4

How to obtain EU publications

Our priced publications are available from EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu), where you can place an 
order with the sales agent of your choice.

The Publications Office has a worldwide network of sales agents. You can obtain their contact details by sending 
a fax to (352) 29 29-42758.

K
A
-
A
J
-
0
7
-
0
2
3
-
3
A
-
C

European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies
to the European Commission

Ethical aspects 
of animal cloning 
for food supply

16 January 2008

opinion n°23

ISBN 978-92-79-07145-4

