N
A
-
A
I
-
0
9
-
0
1
3
-
E
N

-
C

ISSN 1725-5562

Ethically speaking

A newsletter providing information
on the activities of the National Ethics Committees
compiled by the Secretariat of the European Group
on Ethics in Science and New Technologies
to the European Commission

December 2009

How to obtain EU publications

Publications for sale:

•	

•	

•	

via EU Bookshop (

http://bookshop.europa.eu);

from your bookseller by quoting the title, publisher and/or ISBN number;

by contacting one of our sales agents directly. You can obtain their contact details on 
the Internet (http://bookshop.europa.eu) or by sending a fax to +352 2929-42758.

Free publications:

•	

•	

via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu);

at the European Commission’s representations or delegations. You can obtain their 
contact details on the Internet (http://ec.europa.eu) or by sending a fax  
to +352 2929-42758.

The European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies 
to the European Commission 

Ethically Speaking 

Issue No 13 
December 2009 

Chief Editor 
Maurizio SALVI 

EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

 
 
 
Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers 
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers 
or these calls may be billed.

More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu).

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication.

Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2009

ISSN 1725-5562

© European Union, 2009
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Printed in Luxembourg

Printed on white chlorine-free PaPer

Contents

Editorial 

Maurizio Salvi, Head of the EGE Secretariat

EU national and regional ethics committees 

Austria: The Austrian Bioethics Commission 

Belgium: The Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics 

Cyprus: The Cyprus National Bioethics Committee 

Denmark: The Danish Council of Ethics 

Finland: The Finnish National Advisory Boardon Research Ethics 

France: The National Consultative Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences 

Germany: The German Ethics Council 

Greece: The Hellenic National Bioethics Commission 

Ireland: The Irish Council for Bioethics 

Italy: The Italian Committee for Bioethics 

Spain: The Spanish Bioethics Committee 

Non-EU national and regional ethics committees 4

Brésil: Comité National d’Ethique en Recherche 

Indonesia: The National Bioethics Commission 

Pan African Bioethics Congress: COPAB 

Zambia: UNZA Biomedical Research Ethics Committee 

European Commission 5

DG ENTR: Consultation on the assessment of howthe ‘Clinical Trials Directive’ works 

DG JLS: Consultation on the legal framework for the fundamental right to protection 
of personal data 

DG RTD: Call for research proposals on the role of ethics in EU policy and law 

DG RTD: Consultation on the Codeof Conduct for Responsible Nanosciences 
and Nanotechnologies Research 

International organisations 6

The Council of Europe’s Bioethics Division 

Division of Ethics of Science and Technology, Human and Social Science Sector, UNESCO 6

Ethics and Health at WHO 7

5

9

11

13

15

17

21

23

27

31

33

37

41

3

45

47

49

53

5

57

59

61

63

5

67

9

3

Editorial

Maurizio Salvi

1.  The work done by the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE)

Over the past three years the EGE has adopted several opinions:

•	 Opinion No 21 on the ethical aspects of nanomedicine, in January 2007;

•	 Opinion No 22 on the ethical review of human embryonic stem cell research projects financed by 

the European Union, in July 2007;

•	 Opinion No 23 on the ethics of animal cloning for food supply, in January 2008;

•	 Opinion No 24 on the ethics of modern developments in agricultural technologies, in December 2008;

•	 Opinion No 25 on the ethics of synthetic biology, on 17 November 2009.

To achieve this ambitious goal the EGE held 45 working meetings and four public round tables, and met 
the Forum of EU27 National Ethics Councils under all Council rotating presidencies (UK, A, FI, DE, PT, 
SL, FR, CZ, and SE). 

The Group published five opinions, four round table proceedings, and seven issues of ‘Ethically speaking’.

The Group also asked the European Commission to set up an International Dialogue on Bioethics to enable 
European and non-European National Ethics Councils (NECs) to share information and open dialogue in the 
field of bioethics. The first meeting took place in February 2009, with NECs from 42 countries represented. 
The second meeting will take place in March 2010 in Madrid, under the Spanish presidency of the Council. 

2. The extension of the EGE Remit and the call for applicants

The mandate of the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE) was renewed for a 
period of four years by Commission Decision 2005/383/EC of 11 May 2005, and its members were appointed 
for a term of four years by Commission Decision 2005/754 of 19 October 2005. Under these two decisions, 
both the mandate of the EGE and the period of appointment of its members came to an end on 20 October 
2009. However, they have both been extended (by Commission Decision 2009/757/EC of 14 October 2009) 
so that the group can keep working until its new mandate is adopted and its new members are appointed. 

The Commission will now adopt a decision on renewing the mandate of the European Group on Ethics in 
Science and New Technologies. Once adopted, this decision will be published in the Official Journal and 
the Commission will issue a call for expressions of interest in membership of the EGE. This will be open 
to nationals of a European Union Member State or a Member State of the European Economic Area.

3. The EGE Opinion on the ethics of synthetic biology

On 28 May 2008, President José Manuel Barroso asked the European Group on Ethics in Science and 
New  Technologies  (EGE)  to  issue  an  Opinion  on  the  ethical,  legal  and  social  implications  raised  by 
synthetic biology. The EGE adopted its Opinion on 18 November 2009. In this Opinion the EGE proposes 
a number of specific recommendations on synthetic biology, including the following:

•	 Safety:  The  EGE  advocates  that  any  use  of  synthetic  biology  products  should  be  conditional  on 
meeting  safety  requirements  identified  in  the  Opinion  as  needing  further  elaboration.  The  EGE 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 5

 
 
recommends among other things that the EC initiates a survey on relevant risk assessment procedures 
in the EU and identify possible gaps in the current regulations and how identified gaps are to be filled; 
and that a Code of Conduct for research in synthetic biology should be prepared by the EC.

•	 Environmental applications: The EGE recommends among other things that before an organism, 
fabricated or modified via synthetic biology, is released into the environment, ecological long term 
impact assessment must be carried out. The results of the study should be evaluated taking into 
account the precautionary principle and EU legislation on the deliberate release into the environ-
ment of genetically modified organisms (2001/18/EC).

•	 Energy and sustainable chemical industry: The Group proposes that the use of synthetic biology 
for alternative energy supply in EU Member States would be complementary to the EU renewable 
energy plan. The EGE also advocates that the protection of consumers’ rights is a key factor. The 
EGE therefore stresses that labelling of specific synthetic biology products, such as cosmetics and 
textiles, should be explored. 

•	 Biomedicine  and  biopharmaceutical  applications:  The  EGE  recommends  that  further  to  the 
application  of  scientific  and  legal  frameworks,  specific  ethics  considerations  have  also  to  be 
addressed by the competent Authorities (such as EMEA) when drugs and medical products will 
result from synthetic biology protocols.

•	 Biosecurity, prevention of bioterrorism and dual use: New tools may be derived from synthetic 
biology for the military sector such as biomaterials or bioweapons. Ethical analysis must assess the 
goal of security in relation to transparency. In addition, the EGE recommends control mechanisms 
such as licensing and registering of tools in order to prevent terrorist uses of synthetic biology. 
The Group also recommends that the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Produc-
tion and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction 
should incorporate provisions on the limitation or prohibition of research in synthetic biology. 
•	 Governance: The existing fragmented regulatory framework may not be sufficient, and the EGE 
urges the EC to propose and put in place a robust framework for synthetic biology, identifying the 
relevant stakeholders and indicating their responsibilities. The EGE proposes that the EU takes up 
the question of governance of synthetic biology in relevant global fora.

•	 Patenting and common heritage: The EGE proposes that debates on the most appropriate ways to 
ensure the public access to the results of synthetic biology is launched. The EGE stresses that gen-
eral ethical issues raised by patent applications have to be addressed properly in the patent alloca-
tion system. The EU legal patent system defines the EGE as the body to assess ethical implications 
related to patents. The EGE urges the European Patent Organisation and national patent offices to 
take account of Article 7 in the EU patent directive 98/44 and implement this article.

•	 Trade  and  global  justice:  The  EGE  recommends  that  when  synthetic  biology  is  discussed  at 
international level, including the WTO, the ethical issues associated to the technology should be 
addressed.  This should be taken into account in the Doha round negotiations. The EGE urges that 
EU Biosafety standards for synthetic biology products are adopted as minimal standards for EU 
import-export of synthetic biology products.

•	 Science and society dialogue: The Group asks the EU and EU Member States to take actions to 
promote public debates and engagement amongst the stakeholders in order to identify main soci-
etal concerns in the different areas covered by synthetic biology.

•	 Research: The Group invites the Commission to support basic research in the fields of biology, 
chemistry, energy, materials science, and engineering, as well as applied and interdisciplinary 
research, as identified in this Opinion. This should be reflected in the R&D EU research Frame-
work Programmes budget. The Group notes that synthetic biology could lead, in the future, to a 
paradigm shift in understanding concepts of life. It therefore calls on the Commission to initiate 
an open intercultural forum to address the issues, to include philosophical and religious input.

6 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

4. Conclusion

The  current  EGE  has  been  the  most  productive  Group  since  1991,  when  the  European  Commission 
decided to incorporate ethics into the decision-making process for Community research and technologi-
cal development policies, and set up the Group of Advisers on the Ethical Implications of Biotechnology 
(GAEIB). I wish to express my gratitude and admiration for the work done, in particular to Prof. Göran 
Hermerén, the person who made all these ambitious results possible.

On 1 December 2009 the Lisbon Treaty entered into force, opening a new chapter in EU history. Ethics 
will play a key role in that chapter, and the work of the EGE will help the implementation of the notion 
of Europe as a community of values where fundamental rights of EU citizens will more and more be 
embedded in the policy design of EU actions.

Further Information

Maurizio Salvi, PhD
Head of the EGE Secretariat
Member of the Bureau of European Policy Advisors (BEPA)

Address

European Commission
Rue de la Loi 200 (BERL 8/282)
B-1049 Brussels
E-mail: maurizio.salvi@ec.europa.eu
EGE website: http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 7

EU national and regional 
ethics committees

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 9

The Austrian Bioethics Commission

Austria

On the eve of its 5th biennium, the Austrian Bioethics Commission plans to address scientific integrity

October  20  2009  marked  the  beginning  of  the  5th  biennium  of  the  Austrian  Bioethics  Commission. 
The appointment of the members of the Commission by the Federal Chancellor Werner Faymann was 
celebrated with an international conference on scientific integrity featuring Carl Djerassi as the keynote 
speaker. Djerassi, professor of chemistry at the University of Stanford, self-proclaimed mother – rather 
than father – of the birth control pill, playwright and novelist in the genre of science-in-fiction, used the 
context of reproductive technology to raise fundamental ethical questions about the rights of the state in 
relation to those of the individual.

The newly appointed Austrian Bioethics Commission consists of 25 members, 12 of whom (48%) are women.

Active term comes to an end – a short review

The years 2007-2009 can be described as an active period in the Commission’s history. In existence since 
July 2001,1 the Austrian Bioethics Commission has produced a total of 13 opinions and rulings. Four rul-
ings were passed during the last two years. These include the: 

•	 Opinion on Cord Blood Banking; 

•	 Recommendations with Gender Reference for Ethics Committees and Clinical Studies; 

•	 Opinion on Research into Embryonic Stem Cells; and 

•	 Opinion on the Ethical Aspects of Development and Use of Assistive Technologies.2

Stem cell research – split vote

The Commission’s ruling on research into embryonic stem cells was issued in March 2009 in two parts, 
one from the majority and one from a minority group. The opinion consists of a general section address-
ing  the  current  state  of  the  art  in  stem  cell  research,  related  Austrian  legislation  and  general  ethical 
perspectives. While the general section of the opinion was passed unanimously, the subsequent recom-
mendations resulting from two lines of argumentation divided the opinions of the Commission.

According to 17 members of the Commission, research on human embryonic stem cells is scientifically rel-
evant, morally legitimate and to be supported under certain conditions. The majority opinion recommends:

•	 establishing legal conditions that enable the use of fertilized egg cells obtained in the process of in 

vitro fertilization for the procurement of stem cell lines for health-related research;

•	 authorising other techniques to procure viable cells (for example, therapeutic cloning, cybrids);

•	 establishing an independent and interdisciplinary commission for approving research using embry-

onic stem cells;

•	 publishing projects that have been granted approval in a public database.

1  Acting on instructions issued by the Federal Chancellor on June 29 2001, the Austrian Bioethics Commission first convened 
on July 2 2001. Consisting of up to 25 experts from the fields of medicine, genetics, sociology, law, philosophy and theology, 
the Commission provides a forum for interdisciplinary debate on human medicine and human biology. 

2  All opinions of the Austrian Bioethics Commission are available as PDF-documents in German at: http://www.bundeskan-

zleramt.at/site/3458/Default.aspx and in English at: http://www.bundeskanzleramt.at/site/4070/default.aspx

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

11

Five members of the Commission support an explicit legal ban on research on embryos, therapeutic clon-
ing and the import of stem cell lines. The minority opinion recommends:

•	 focusing public research funding on adult and induced pluripotent stem cells (IPS);

•	 countering the risk of further developments to embryonic research by a cut-off date regulation.

Research and use of assistive technologies

The opinion on research into and the use of assistive technologies concludes the series of rulings pro-
duced by the Commission from 2007-2009. Originating in the Commission’s working group on ageing, 
the opinion focuses on the ethical issues surrounding research into and deployment of new technologies 
that aim to support the independent living of older people in their homes. Substantial resources are cur-
rently being invested in the development of these technologies and considerable savings are expected to 
be produced by their use in an ageing society. As promising as many of the developments are, the Com-
mission draws attention to the ethical aspects of transferring into the domestic environment some of the 
work involved in the care, treatment and rehabilitation of patients with chronic illnesses and disabilities. 

Beginning with a preamble, the opinion consists of chapters on the aims of the use of assistive technolo-
gies, a description of technological developments, evaluation studies, ethical issues and recommenda-
tions. Unanimously passed, the opinion on the ethical aspects of the development and use of assistive 
technologies recommends a number of measures regarding:

•	 autonomy, dependence and care; 

•	 socio-ethical aspects; 

•	

legal aspects; 

•	 data protection and invasion of privacy; and lastly 

•	 demands on technology development.

Future events

The Commission’s 5th term will begin with a two-day working meeting in November where the agenda 
for 2010 will be defined. The future events of the Austrian Bioethics Commission include two interna-
tional conferences:

•	 “Loi bioéthique” December 14 2009 in cooperation with the French Embassy in Vienna and, 

•	 “Research Ethics and Research Law” (“Forschungsethik und Forschungsrecht”) in cooperation with the 
Institute for Ethics and Law in Medicine at the University of Vienna to be held on 14-15 January 2010.

Further Information

Dr. Doris Wolfslehner 
Head of the Secretariat of the Austrian Bioethics Commission 
Secretariat of the Austrian Bioethics Commission 
The Federal Chancellery

Address

Ballhausplatz 2 
1014 Vienna, Austria 
Tel.: +43-1-53115/2987 
Fax: +43-1-53109/2987 
E-mail: doris.wolfslehner@bka.gv.at 
Website: www.bka.gv.at/bioethics

12 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

The Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics

Belgium

The Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics has just ended its third term of four years by publishing 
five opinions.

These are:

•	 Opinion No 45 of 19 January 2009 on human body material banks designed for research;

•	 Opinion No 46 of 19 January 2009 on infertility treatment at the request of a prisoner;

•	 Opinion No 47 of 9 March 2009 on the ethical implications of legislation concerning compas-

sionate use programmes and medical need programmes;

•	 Opinion No 48 of 30 March 2009 on the Belgian ‘influenza pandemic’ operating plan;

•	 Opinion No 49 of 20 April 2009 on the use of pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) to detect 
healthy carriers of a mutation causing a chronic hereditary disease which can entail a high risk 
for descendants.

These opinions are available on the internet site in French and Dutch: www.health.fgov.be/bioeth. 

They will also be published in English on the website as soon as possible. 

Below is a summary of Opinion No 46.

Opinion No 46 of 19 January 2009 on treating infertility, reversing sterilisation and on 
medically assisted procreation at the request of a prisoner

Should prisoners be guaranteed access to infertility treatment, including medically assisted procreation 
and the reversal of a sterilisation operation? This question submitted to the Committee proved tricky for 
several reasons.

Until recently, penitential medical services did not generally follow up on these requests, their role being 
limited to providing curative care, contributing to preventative medicine, sanitary protection and the 
reintegration of prisoners. In other words, this meant that their priority was to respond to the basic needs 
of prisoners and not to their desires. 

However, changes to the legal rules and case law on human rights, both nationally and internationally, are 
ushering in changes to this trend. These changes seek to increase protection, affirm the principle of equal 
access to healthcare and extend the coverage of costs to prisoners. This irreversible change in mentality 
and practice is, in Belgium, enshrined in the Belgian Prisons Act of 12 January 2005. This establishes the 
principle of equivalence between medical healthcare given intra-muros in Belgian prisons and medical 
healthcare given extra-muros. Consequently, infertility treatment available in free society should also, in 
principle, be accessible to prisoners, according to their specific needs, during their custodial sentence.

The essential problem raised by infertility treatments — and by conjugal visits — resides in their pur-
pose: the possibility of children being born or raised in prison. Given the current conditions, it is clearly 
a highly unfavourable environment for their welfare and their development. In the context of prisons, 
infertility treatment gives rise to a conflict between the rights of prisoners and the interest of the child. 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

13

Following legal and sociological research into penitential conditions in general and into the life of young 
children in a prison environment in particular, the in-depth analysis of this very sensitive problem has 
aroused, within the Committee, many qualified positions, which can be summarised not by two unitary 
positions taken but by two schools of thought. 

The  first  takes  a  restrictive  interpretation  of  the  principle  of  equivalence  of  healthcare  and  proposes 
excluding the possibility for prisoners to receive these treatments, due to the interest of the child taking 
precedence. Several members of the Committee also emphasise that the current situation in prisons and 
the available resources make it necessary to set priorities in terms of healthcare. 

The other school of thought holds that the principles provided by the law constitute major ethical and 
legal progress, likely to serve as a driving force to bring about necessary changes to the conditions of 
imprisoned persons. As the recognition of rights does not, therefore, deserve any exception other than 
those provided by law, access to medically assisted procreation must be given to prisoners as if they were 
free persons. However, centres specialised in assisted medical procreation are responsible for commenc-
ing or not commencing such treatments. Well aware of the diversity of situations, and of the difficulties 
that arise for children born and raised in prison, several members recommend an evaluation to be made 
on a case-by-case basis. To help penitential medical services and external doctors take such decisions, the 
members of the Committee propose taking into account a series of factors when examining each request, 
including: the respective situation of prospective parents, the nature of the crime and previous offences, 
the context of detention and its ordinary constraints, the length of the sentence, prison leave, perspectives 
for social reintegration and the conditions for accommodating young children and their mothers. 

The different positions taken within the Committee did not, however, prevent the members of the Com-
mittee from reaching unanimous agreement on certain points or from drafting recommendations, particu-
larly on the need for collaboration between the different people involved, better information for prisoners 
(pregnancy, parenthood, contraception), quality medical check-ups on pregnancies in prison and improved 
accommodation for mothers with young children. Lastly, the Committee reaffirmed, more generally, the 
need to review penitential conditions and to increase resources to improve the material life of prisoners.

Further Information
Monique Bosson 
Information Officer 
Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics

Address
4 rue de l’Autonomie 
1070 Brussels
Belgium 
Tel.: +32 (0)2.525.09.07. 
Fax: +32 (0)2. 525.09.12. 
Email: monique.bosson@health.fgov.be 
Website: www.health.fgov.be/bioeth

14 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

The Cyprus National Bioethics Committee

Cyprus

The Committee

The Cyprus National Bioethics Committee (CNBC) was established in 2001 by «Τhe Law Providing for 
the Establishment and Function of the National Bioethics Committee» Law No 150 (I) of 2001.

Its mandate is to monitor constantly, survey, analyse systematically and evaluate the issues and problems 
associated with scientific research, advances in and applications of biotechnology, biology, medicine, 
genetics and pharmaceutics, along with human intervention in biological processes and the human geno-
type, as well as to investigate their moral, deontological, social, humanistic and legal dimensions.

The CNBC is an independent body subject to administrative supervision by any ministry, agency, depart-
ment or service and has the powers conferred on it by the current Law and any other Law.

The CNBC has 13 members, including the chairperson. The members represent different professions and 
disciplines and are appointed by the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Cyprus for a four-year term. 
The Law stipulates that at least four members must come from the humanities and social sciences; four 
from medical and biological sciences and four from any other science or profession where they have been 
distinguished for their contribution in any area of activity.

According to the provisions of the national legislation currently in force, CNBC is the body responsible 
for performing the bioethical review of all research protocols involving human subjects in Cyprus (for 
both biomedical and clinical research). In order to achieve this, the CNBC has adopted, with very few 
changes,  the  World  Health  Organisation’s  ‘Operational  Guidelines  for  ethics  committees  that  review 
biomedical research’ as the basis of the guidelines for ethics committees reviewing biomedical research 
involving human subjects in Cyprus enacted on 31.3.2005 (Κ.Δ.Π. 175/2005).

In accordance with these guidelines and with the authority conferred on it by Law No150 (I)/2001 the 
Committee set up the following three Review Bioethics Committees:

I.  the Review Bioethics Committee for Biomedical Research on Human Beings and their biological 

substances;

II.  The Review Bioethics Committee for clinical trials on Medicinal Products for Human Use; 

III.  The Review Bioethics Committee for Biomedical Research on Human Beings and their biological 

substances and the clinical trials on Medicinal Products for Human Use.

The Review Bioethics Committees review protocols relating to:

•	 biomedical research on human beings and their biological substances;

•	 clinical trials on medicinal products for human use; 

•	 research on medical devices to be used for human beings.

The Role of the Review Bioethics Committees is to:

(1)  contribute to safeguarding the dignity, rights, safety and well-being of all actual or potential 

research participants;

(2)  provide independent, competent and timely review of the ethical aspects of proposed studies;

(3)  review research proposals before the research begins.

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

15

 
The CNBC appoints the Members of the Review Bioethics Committees; monitors, directs, and coor-
dinates their work; and reviews their decisions by applying the specific procedures provided for in the 
Operational Guidelines (Κ.Δ.Π. 175/2005).

Current work and forthcoming opinions

•	 Informed Consent 

•	 Revision of the Operational Guidelines for the establishment and operation of ethics committees 

in reviewing biomedical research involving human subjects in Cyprus

Previous Opinions

1.  Opinion on the establishment and use of human biobanks and registries of human biological sam-

ples for research purposes (23/06/2009).

2.  Opinion on the use of ionising radiation in medical practice (12/05/2009).

3.  Opinion on palliative care for terminally ill and dying patients (01/07/2008).

4.  Opinion on genetically modified organisms (03/04/2008).

5.  Opinion on prenuptial test for thalassaemia before the conclusion of a civil wedding (24/03/2008).

6.  Opinion on predictive health information in the conclusion of health and life insurance contracts 

(22/01/2008).

7.  Opinion on medically assisted human procreation (05/03/2007).

8.  Opinion on PGD and sex selection of the in-vitro procreated embryos (01/11/2006).

9.  Opinion on human cloning (12/09/2006).

10. Opinion on human organ donor Registries (19/07/2006).

11. Opinion on cord blood banking (27/04/2004).

12. Opinion on transplantation of biological substances of human origin (14/04/2003).

13. Opinion on the use of Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis method (20/10/2003).

Further Information
Rena Vrahimi-Petridou 
President
The Cyprus National Bioethics Committee

Address
Nikou Kranidioti
Engomis Medical Centre, 1st Floor 
2411 Engomi
Cyprus
Tel.: +357 22 809038 / +357 22 809039 
Fax: +357 22 353878
Email: repetridou@law.gov.cy  
Website: www.bioethics.gov.cy

16 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

The Danish Council of Ethics

Denmark

Organ donation — Recommendations from the Danish Council of Ethics*

The Danish Council of Ethics is an independent council and consists of 17 members, both experts and 
laymen. Nine of the members are appointed by the parliamentary committee; the other eight are appointed 
by different ministers in the Danish government. All members are appointed for a term of three years and 
can be reappointed for a further term of three years.

The Council’s opinions and recommendations do not have to be unanimous. The Council presents vari-
ous dilemmas arising from a given ethical problem, and in doing so it leaves room for different views. 
This is seen as one of the Council’s strong points.

In December 2008, the Council launched the report ‘Organ donation — ethical deliberations and recom-
mendations’. It focused on the following four topics:

•	 How to create a proper setting for relatives’ leave-taking?

•	 What rules should apply to citizens’ consent to act as organ donors in the event of brain death?

•	 How are public agencies supposed to inform citizens and help them come to a decision for or 

against organ donation? 

•	 How to ensure that citizens are familiar and comfortable with the way organ donation affects the 

death process? 

Leave-taking rituals

All members of the Council of Ethics recommend taking steps to give relatives plenty of reassurance in 
the highly difficult situation in which they find themselves when one of their next-of-kin has been diag-
nosed as brain-dead and may possibly have to donate organs. This sad and emotionally chaotic situation 
is further complicated by the fact that the relatives are often those who have to make a decision on pos-
sible organ donation. Their loved one needs to be treated with great respect and dignity.

Reassurance, respect and dignity can be quite adequately ensured through ritual-like procedures. The Council 
recommends that the authorities strongly endeavour to develop and disseminate the ritualistic measures and 
practices that have already been adopted locally by hospitals in Denmark. This may involve, for example, a 
distinct ritual marking the time of death and a subsequent letter of thanks from the hospital to the relatives. In 
addition, dialogue with the relatives should be conducted with professionalism and sympathy.

Informed consent versus presumed consent

When the Council came to discuss the question of consent it was almost evenly split: nine of the members 
think that the present system of regulating organ donation should be maintained. In other words, there should 
still be explicit consent from the deceased or from the relatives before organ donation can be carried out.

Informed consent caters best for the doubters and those who do not wish to be organ donors. The abovemen-
tioned nine members think that the public authorities should work on the basis that people are in two minds 
and may have good reason to be so. Informed consent further promotes active stance-taking and thus makes 
it more likely that the people concerned will talk to one another about organ donation well ahead of time.

Seven other Committee members recommend introducing an opt-out system of ‘presumed consent’ for organ 
donation in Denmark. In future, they feel, it should be possible for organs to be removed from a brain-dead 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

17

 
person for use in organ donation unless that person, while alive, has declined to be an organ donor. These 
seven members advocate presumed consent because organ donation is a self-evidently value-based preference, 
and because this system is expected to result in a greater number of people being potential organ donors.

Stance-taking by law?

When it comes to informing people, a majority of ten members recommend that organ donation be regulated 
so that, in future, all citizens should be required to take a stance on whether or not they wish to be organ 
donors. Previously, there has been no legal requirement that every citizen should take a stance on organ dona-
tion. The ten members concerned think that such a requirement should become law, but that people who do 
not comply with it should not be punished in any way. Given that the vast majority of Danish citizens probably 
acknowledge organ donation to be in the public interest, the abovementioned ten members feel that solidarity 
regarding organ donation can be promoted by openly encouraging citizens to take a stance.

A minority of seven members do not think compulsory stance-taking should be introduced for organ 
donation. For these members it is important that the individual citizen should not feel obliged to consider 
and take a position on life-and-death issues that he or she would otherwise have had greater freedom to 
be in two minds about and could relegate to the realm of the uncertain or the undecided. Moreover, any 
legal requirement to take up a position can result in people taking that decision rashly and, to an exces-
sive degree, glossing over the all-important conversation with their next-of-kin.

Brain death criteria — a need for information and debate 

The  Council  of  Ethics  recommends  that  the  public  authorities  ensure  a  thoroughly  informed  public 
debate about the issues arising from the discrepancy between the brain death criterion and culturally-
rooted expectations about the death process.

First, many people still do not know what the brain death criterion actually is. Second, there is a mis-
match between people’s naturally or culturally rooted expectations of the death process and the medical 
definition of the onset of death, as entailed by the brain death criterion. This can be seen, for example, 
in the difficulty in talking about ‘the dead person’s heart beating’ or ‘the corpse being wheeled into the 
operating theatre’, when speaking about a brain-dead person.

The Council of Ethics calls for debate and reflection on these topics in (for example) elementary schools 
and at post-compulsory education level.

The full report is available in Danish, and an English version can be found on the Danish Council of Ethics’ 
homepage www.etiskraad.dk

* Submitted by Louise Charlotte Dehn, Communication Coordinator, the Secretariat of the Danish Council of Ethics

Further Information
Ulla Hybel, LLM, PhD, Project Leader 
Thomas Laursen, MA, Project Leader 
The Danish Council of Ethics

Address
Ravnsborggade 2-4, 4th Floor
DK- 2200 Copenhagen  
Tel.: +4535375833 
Fax: +4535375755 
Email: info@etiskrad.dk           
Website: www.etiskraad.dk

18 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

The Danish Council of Ethics

Denmark

The Future of Prenatal Diagnosis 

In October 2009 The Danish Council of Ethics published a report entitled The Future of Prenatal Diag-
nosis. The summary of the report has been translated into English and is accessible on the Council’s 
website: http://www.etiskraad.dk/sw293.asp.

The report focuses on new methods of prenatal diagnosis that are likely to be developed within the next 
few years. These methods will make it possible to obtain information about the hereditary characteristics 
of the foetus by taking a blood sample from the woman. The blood of a pregnant woman contains DNA 
from the foetus which it is possible to isolate and examine in the 7th to 8th week of pregnancy. At present, 
this can reveal only a few characteristics, such as the sex of the foetus: but the methods now being devel-
oped could, at some point in the future, even be used to conduct a full investigation of the foetal genome. 
Since they avoid the increased (one half to one percent) risk of miscarriage that is posed by invasive test-
ing, the new methods are significantly more attractive than the existing ones and are likely to become 
widely used early in pregnancy. 

Ethical issues

The application of new methods involves a range of ethical issues that are discussed in the report. A cen-
tral problem is that they will make it possible for pregnant women to access information about the foetus 
before the 12th week of pregnancy, which in Denmark is the upper limit for having an abortion. A woman 
might therefore choose to have an abortion if the foetus has characteristics she or her partner perceive 
as undesirable. The question is whether this option is acceptable in all cases, for example where the foe-
tus has a non-serious disease, or where the parents are simply disappointed about the foetus’s physical 
attributes or its sex.

All members of the Danish Council of Ethics consider it unacceptable to have an abortion because of 
less serious diseases, foetal sex or other normal attributes. However, there is no consensus about where 
exactly the limit has to be drawn. For example, even though most members do not consider it acceptable 
to have an abortion due to the paternity of the foetus, a few members do not recommend avoiding an 
examination for paternity. 

The report also contains discussions of other issues relating to prenatal diagnosis. One of them is whether 
prenatal diagnosis involves specific elements which might make it difficult for the pregnant woman to 
make independent and informed decisions. Another issue is the degree to which the Danish Parliament 
should be involved in designing prenatal diagnostic practice. Some members consider it important that 
the parliament should be involved, since – in their view – the actual practice of prenatal diagnosis influ-
ences major societal issues such as the understanding of parenthood and the concept of what it is to be 
human.

Recommendations

The report includes recommendations on the future organisation and regulation of prenatal diagnosis. 
Among the main recommendations are the following two, endorsed by all members of the Danish Coun-
cil of Ethics:

1.  The  Council  of  Ethics  believes  that  information  about  the  results  of  prenatal  examination  should 
not  exist  unless  the  woman  herself  has  access  to  that  information.  This  implies  that,  if  it  is  deemed 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

19

 
inappropriate or ethically unacceptable that pregnant women have access to certain types of information 
about the foetus, such information should not be generated at all.

2. Prenatal examinations should only generate information that is relevant to healthcare. This means that 
the examinations should either be directed towards identifying (risk of) serious diseases or malforma-
tions of the foetus, or relate to diseases that can be treated before or after birth. The members recom-
mend that not all pregnant women be offered a detailed examination of the genome of the foetus, and that 
any examination should be directed only at identifying severe diseases. 

All members of the Danish Council of Ethics believe that it will be impossible to draw up exhaustive lists 
[of diseases and malformations] as the basis for targeting prenatal examinations. On the other hand, the 
members do not think that judgments concerning the targeting of examinations can be left entirely to the 
discretion of the individual and have come up with two different recommendations about the organisa-
tion of prenatal diagnosis. 

First, seven members believe that, in future, a practice should be established that ensures a certain coor-
dination and control of the ways new prenatal examination technologies are used. The members do not 
rule out the possibility that new diagnostic methods might be included in the prenatal diagnosis on offer 
to  all  pregnant  women  in  Denmark.  Currently  this  consists  of  an  early  double-test  combined  with  a 
nuchal translucency screening around the 13th week and a final ultrasound screening for malformations 
in the 18th week. 

Ten committee members do not believe that the management and organisation of prenatal diagnosis can 
be entrusted to ‘practice’ in the future. For that reason, these members recommend a political decision 
that the new, information-maximising technologies for prenatal examination should not be offered to all 
pregnant women but must be carried out only on the basis of medical referral.

The Debate in Denmark

The publication of the report has started a debate in Denmark concerning the use of new methods for 
prenatal diagnosis. One of the main topics is to what degree the Danish Parliament should be involved 
in establishing future practice. One main view is that the decisions on high-precision prenatal diagnosis 
should be taken jointly by the medical practitioner and the pregnant woman. Another view is that the par-
liament should be more involved than it has been. The members of the Danish Council of Ethics are not 
in agreement on this matter, but the politicians themselves have joined in the debate and some of them 
have declared that they want to take up the issue. It remains to be seen what will happen in Denmark and 
the rest of Europe as regards the application of new methods for prenatal diagnosis.

Further Information
Ulla Hybel, LLM, PhD, Project Leader 
Thomas Laursen, MA, Project Leader 
The Danish Council of Ethics

Address

Ravnsborggade 2-4, 4th Floor
DK- 2200 Copenhagen  
Tel.: +4535375833 
Fax: +4535375755 
Email: info@etiskrad.dk           
Website: www.etiskraad.dk

20 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

The Finnish National Advisory Board 
on Research Ethics

Finland

Ethical Principles of Research in the Humanities and Social and Behavioural Sciences and Propos-
als for Ethical Review

The ethical evaluation of medical research involving human beings is regulated by the Medical Research 
Act (1999). The regional ethics committees are responsible for the prior evaluation of research projects. 
To this end, the ethics committees examine whether the project takes account of the provisions of the 
Medical Research Act, the provisions on data protection, international obligations concerning the status 
of research subjects, and the regulations and guidelines governing medical research. They also monitor 
and guide the handling of research ethics issues in their region.

However, there is also a need for ethical review in the case of studies that do not fall under the Medical 
Research Act but involve face-to-face contact with study subjects. Such studies are typically in the fields 
of nursing science, psychology, sociology, anthropology, etc. 

The standpoint of the Finnish National Advisory Board on Research Ethics is that science should be 
practiced  primarily  with  the  help  of  the  scientific  community’s  own  critical  review  and  joint  ethical 
rules. Instead of binding law, the Board has adopted Ethical principles of research in the humanities 
and social and behavioural sciences and proposals for ethical review (2009). The Board proposes an 
ethical review system for the humanities and social and behavioural sciences. The review system should 
follow the same principles as the guidelines published by the Board entitled Good scientific practice and 
procedures for handling misconduct and fraud in science (2002). The scientific community has made a 
broad commitment to comply with those guidelines. With the new proposal, this commitment would also 
include an obligation to arrange ethical review in the manner proposed by the Board, and to apply the 
Board’s ethical principles. The new process will start in January 2010. 

The Board allows universities and research organisations to arrange ethical review in the way they con-
sider best. If no bodies currently exist to deal with ethical issues, ethics committees can be established 
within the organisation or through regional cooperation.

When is ethical review required? 

The National Advisory Board on Research Ethics considers that researchers must submit their research 
study to ethical review if it contains any of the following features: 

1) The study involves an intervention in the physical integrity of subjects;

2) The study deviates from the principle of informed consent;

3)  The subjects are children under 15, the study is not part of the normal activities of a school or an institu-
tion for early childhood education and care, and the data are collected without parental consent and with-
out providing parents or guardians the opportunity to prevent the child from taking part in the study;

4)  The study exposes research subjects to exceptionally strong stimuli where the evaluation of possible 

harm requires special expertise (for example studies involving violence or pornography),

5) The study may cause long-term mental harm (trauma, depression, sleeplessness) beyond the risks 
encountered in normal life;

6) The study can pose a security risk to subjects (for example studies concerning domestic violence).

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

21

A researcher can also request an ethical review if the research subject, the funding agency or a cooperation 
partner so requires or if the results are to be published in a scientific journal that requires ethical review.

Approval by an ethics committee does not remove the researcher’s overall responsibility for the study. If 
researchers do not accept the changes recommended by the ethics committee, they can ask for the Board 
to review the ethics committee’s decision.

The Board recommends that education in research ethics should be strengthened and given a permanent place 
in undergraduate and post-undergraduate education. In addition to ethical review, ethics committees can also 
handle other tasks that they deem necessary, such as the coordination of education in research ethics.

Ethical principles

Evaluation by ethics committees should be based on the ethical principles published by the Board. These 
principles are divided into three areas:

1) Respecting the autonomy of research subjects,

2) Avoiding harm,

3) Privacy and data protection. 

The autonomy of research subjects means that participation in research should be voluntary and based on 
informed consent. Consent can be given orally or in writing, or one can interpret from the subject’s behav-
iour that the subject has consented to participate. If the research involves intervention in the physical integ-
rity of subjects, consent must always be obtained in writing or in some other certifiable way, unless this is 
contrary to the interests of subjects. Subjects have the right to stop participating in a study at any stage, but 
this does not mean that any input up to that point (interviews, etc.) cannot be used in the study.

If a study deviates from the principle of informed consent, ethical review by an ethics committee is 
always required.

Avoiding harm includes avoiding mental, financial and social harm. Studies whose possible risks can-
not be evaluated by the researchers themselves and studies that may cause harm beyond what can be 
expected in normal life must undergo evaluation by an ethics committee. 

The protection of privacy is a right protected by the Constitution of Finland. It is also an important principle 
in research ethics. Research ethics principles concerning the protection of privacy fall into three categories: 
1) protecting research data and confidentiality, 2) storing or disposing of research data and 3) publishing 
research. The goal is to find a balance between confidentiality and the openness of science and research.

The National Advisory Board on Research Ethics considers it important that the functionality of the new 
system and the ethical review guidelines, as well as any problems that may arise, are evaluated by the 
end of 2011. The commitment model provides a flexible possibility to alter the ethical review system and 
ethical guidelines on the basis of experience, if necessary.

Further Information

Dr Liisa Nieminen
National Advisory Board on Research Ethics

Address
Hallituskatu 2 B 
FI-01300 Helsinki 
Tel.: +358 9 2286 9234 
Email: tenk@tsv.fi
Website: www.tenk.fi

22 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

The National Consultative Ethics Committee 
for Health and Life Sciences

France

Legal basis and mandate

The National Consultative Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (CCNE) was established by 
presidential decree on 23 February 1983 as an independent authority linked to the Ministries of Research 
and Health.

Taking an ethical view on health and life sciences

The CCNE’s mission is to ‘provide opinions on the ethical problems and societal questions raised by 
progress in the fields of biology, medicine and health, and to publish recommendations on these issues’.1 

The CCNE at work

Decree No 2005-390 of 28 April 2005 determined the composition, organisation and operation of the 
committee, and specified its tasks.

A purely consultative body, the CCNE receives requests from presidents of parliamentary assemblies, 
government representatives, higher education establishments, public institutions and officially recog-
nised foundations working in research and technological development and in health promotion and pro-
tection. It may also address various issues raised by others.

The CCNE’s highest decision-making authority is the plenary committee, composed of all its members.

Cases are investigated by the technical section, which has 12 members chosen by the committee on the 
basis of nominations by the CCNE’s president. Each case is handled by a working group made up of 
members of the technical section, who may request help from outside experts in order to shed new light 
on a subject. The technical section then examines the case and presents it to the plenary committee. 
Meetings of the plenary committee and the technical section are closed to the public. After a case has 
been examined, a final report is published, including recommendations or opinions. 

Law No 2004-800 of 6 August 2004 determines the composition of the committee

-  The  CCNE  president  and  two  honorary  presidents  are  designated  by  the  President  of  the  French 

Republic.

-  Five key figures from the main philosophies and religious faiths are appointed by the President of the 

French Republic.

-  Nineteen members are chosen for their expertise and interest in ethical issues, fifteen are designated 
by the various ministers concerned with biology and health issues, and the four remaining members 
are appointed by the presidents of France’s two parliamentary houses, the vice-president of the Conseil 
d’État (France’s highest administrative court) and the president of the Cour de Cassation (supreme 
court of appeal), respectively.

- Fifteen representatives from the research sector are designated by their peers.

1 Article 1412 of Law No 2004-800 of 6 August 2004.

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

23

Composition of the committee

President:

Alain Grimfeld

Vice-President:

Pierre Le Coz

Honorary Presidents:

Didier Sicard, Jean-Pierre Changeux

Members:

Yves Agid, Annick Alpérovitch, Jean-Claude Ameisen, Ali Benmakhlouf, Michaël Azoulay, François 
Beaufils,  Joëlle  Belaisch-Allart,  Ali  Benmaklhouf,  Marie-Germaine  Bousser,  Claude  Burlet,  Sylvie 
Cazalot, André Comte-Sponville, Alain Cordier, Pascale Cossart, Bernard Debré, Anne-Marie Dickelé, 
Frédérique Dreifuss-Netter, Roger-Pol Droit, Gérard Férey, Luc Ferry, Patrick Gaudray, Françoise Héritier, 
Marie-Thérèse Hermange, Emmanuel Jolivet, Xavier Lacroix, Chantal Lebatard, Claire Legras, Claude 
Matuchansky, Lucien Neuwirth, Philippe Rouvillois, Michel Roux, Louis Schweitzer, Danièle Siroux, 
Alain-Gérard Slama, Dominique Stoppa-Lyonnet, Claude Sureau, Jean-Louis Vildé, Philippe Waquet, 
Bertrand Veil.

The CCNE on the international scene

The CCNE will take part in the 8th Global Summit of National Bioethics Advisory Bodies in Singapore 
on 26-27 July 2010.

A meeting between the German, British and French ethics committees will be held in Berlin on 
17 December 2009.

The CCNE took part in the 13th Forum of National Ethics Councils (‘Emerging technologies in an age of 
globalisation’) in Prague on 4–5 June 2009.

Current work

•	Embryo research

•	Financing of palliative care

•	Ethical problems raised by scientific communication

•	Preimplantation genetic diagnosis and prenatal diagnosis

•	Surrogate motherhood

•	Biodiversity

Recent publications

Opinion No 105: Questions for the Estates-General on Bioethics

Opinion No 106: Ethical issues raised by a possible influenza pandemic

24 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

Further Information
Mrs Marie-Hélène MOUNEYRAT
Secretary-General
National Consultative Committee for Health and Life Sciences

Address
7, rue Saint-Georges
F-75009 Paris
Tel.: + (33) 01 53 86 11 49 / 52
Fax: + (33) 01 53 86 11 40
Email: contact@comite-ethique.fr.
Website: www.ccne-ethique.fr

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

25

The German Ethics Council

Germany

Introduction

On the basis of the Ethics Council Act, which was passed by the German Bundestag on 26 April 2007 
and took effect on 1 August 2007, the German Ethics Council started its work on 11 April 2008, succeed-
ing the National Ethics Council established by the Federal Government in 2001. 

By statute of 16 July 2007, it is the duty of the German Ethics Council to pursue the questions of ethics, 
society, science, medicine and law and the probable consequences for the individual and society that arise 
in connection with research and development, in particular in the field of life sciences and their applica-
tion to humanity. Its duties also include informing the public and encouraging discussion in society, pre-
paring opinions and recommendations for political and legislative action, and cooperating with national 
ethics councils and comparable institutions in other countries and with international organisations.

Public meetings and promotion of social discourse

With a view to organising the social debate on issues of bioethics and providing the public with material 
for discussion, the German Ethics Council follows the tradition of the National Ethics Council by hold-
ing its plenary meetings and hearings as a rule in public and documenting them in verbatim records, by 
presenting its opinions in public, and by mounting public events in a variety of formats.

The types of events on offer include the Annual Meeting and evening events in the “Bioethics Forum” 
series. Discussion meetings with students are another platform for social discourse. The German Eth-
ics Council aims its events at a variety of target groups in society. The public presentations of its opin-
ions are intended primarily for political decision-makers, the public at large and the media. In hearings 
and  panel  discussions,  it  engages  in  public  exchanges  of  views  with  experts,  academics  involved  in 
research in the life sciences and bioethics, and representatives of organisations and associations. Lastly, 
the Annual Meeting and the Bioethics Forum give the public at large an opportunity to discuss bioethical 
issues with experts and members of the Council.

•	Annual Meeting

The German Ethics Council’s first annual conference, titled “Are human beings controllable? Insights 
into the brain and ways of modifying its function”, was held in Berlin on 28 May 2009. Over 450 people 
from all walks of life attended the meeting.

More and more insights and potential practical applications are being discovered in the neurosciences, 
with implications that are often difficult to predict in spite – or indeed because – of the promise they are 
said to hold out.

As Christiane Woopen, the Council’s Deputy Chair, pointed out in her introduction, the matter was especially 
acute because it not only raised questions within the ethical field, but also touched upon the very foundations 
and basic principles of ethics itself. She noted that our image of man influences the way in which we pose 
ethical questions, the questions that we deem particularly important, and how we answer them.

Can images of the brain help us to understand our thinking and feeling? Is it acceptable for healthy sub-
jects to take performance-enhancing drugs developed for the treatment of mental illness, dementia or 
attention disorders? What might be the outcome if implanted electrodes could home in ever more closely 
on, and influence, specific brain functions such as motor activity, speech and mood? These were the 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

27

 
three central questions on which the meeting focused. In the lectures delivered, they were considered 
from different scientific, legal and ethical points of view.

In the concluding debate, Wolfgang van den Daele, a sociologist, argued that everyone could and should 
decide for themselves whether they could continue to lead an authentic life if they availed themselves 
of neuro-enhancement. Any external judgement was presumptuous. Theologian Dietmar Mieth, on the 
other hand, favoured a social debate that would lead to a consensus on what was feasible, permissible 
and achievable. Although it is ultimately not possible to ban people from manipulating their own brains, 
legal limits could be set in relation to the development of harmful products and measures, as well as to 
experiments and applications for the benefit of third parties.

In  the  three  rounds  of  discussion,  the  audience  showed  itself  to  be  predominantly  hostile  to  neuro-
enhancement. It was argued in particular that, precisely in an achievement-oriented society, the growing 
availability of such methods would only increase the pressure on individuals to use them.

•	Bioethics Forum 

The German Ethics Council’s aim in holding the “Bioethics Forum” series of meetings is to promote 
dialogue with the public. Controversial issues of importance to the community at large will be addressed 
three or four times a year. 

On 24 June, the Bioethics Forum took place under the heading “Medicine takes it personally”. It consid-
ered the possibilities and limits of diagnostic and therapeutic individualisation. 

Friedemann Horn, of Leipzig University’s Department of Clinical Immunology and Transfusion Medi-
cine, stated in his introductory lecture on the scientific, medical and technical aspects of personalised 
medicine, that therapies were not as effective as they could be because many patients received drugs that 
were not optimised for them individually. As seemingly identical disorders sometimes have different 
molecular characteristics, patients do not always respond in the same way to drugs. The aim of individu-
alised or personalised medicine is to identify such subtypes of diseases, to predict individual responses 
to therapies and, in the longer term, to develop new individualisable forms of therapy and treatment 
optimised for a given patient.

The contribution from Norbert Paul, of Mainz University’s Department of the History, Theory and Eth-
ics of Medicine, was devoted to the ethical and social aspects of the subject. He emphasised that although 
personalised medicine was still in its infancy in terms of clinical applicability, this was not the case as 
regards the expanded scope for obtaining information.

In the following panel discussion, the two speakers were joined by journalist Sibylle Herbert and Klaus 
Lindpaintner, of the Roche Molecular Medicine Laboratories in Basle. The debate was guided by Regine 
Kollek, a member of the German Ethics Council.

When the discussion was opened to the audience, the main issues raised concerned new challenges to 
the doctor-patient relationship as well as the potential for misunderstanding of the term personalised or 
individualised medicine. As Regine Kollek noted in her closing statement, this showed that science also 
needed to take responsibility for its choice of paradigms for the propagation of new developments, and 
that greater reticence was called for in relation to claims of individualisation.

First Opinion

The German Ethics Council is expected to publish its first opinion on anonymous birth on 26 November 
2009. Afterwards, the report will be translated into English and French. It will be published on the Coun-
cil’s website and on SINAPSE.

28 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

Further Information
Dr Joachim Vetter 
Head of Office 

Address
German Ethics Council  
Jaegerstrasse 22/23 – 10117 Berlin 
Tel.: +49/30/20370-242 
Fax: +49/30/20370-252 
Email: vetter@ethikrat.org  
Website: www.ethikrat.org 

Ulrike Florian
Press and public relations officer

German Ethics Council
Jaegerstrasse 22/23 – 10117 Berlin
+49/30/20370-246
Fax: +49/30/20370-252
florian@ethikrat.org
Website: www.ethikrat.org 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

29

The Hellenic National Bioethics Commission

Greece

Most recently issued opinion (25 February 2009)

The recently issued opinion ‘On the Management of Biological Wealth’ has been translated into English and is 
available on the English pages of the Hellenic National Bioethics Commission’s website (www.bioethics.gr).

Please note that the full text (in pdf format) of all opinions and reports issued by the Commission, in 
English, can be found at the following URL:
http://www.bioethics.gr/category.php?category_id=55 or can be requested from the
Secretariat: Secretariat@bioethics.gr

Current work

Currently the Commission is discussing the issue of ‘Autonomy and Informed Consent in healthcare’. An 
opinion on this subject is expected to be published by the end of the year.

Events in 2009

On 12 June 2009 the Hellenic National Bioethics Commission, in cooperation with the National School 
of Public Health and with the support of the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, organised a meet-
ing to mark the 10th anniversary of the entry into force of the Convention on Human Rights and Bio-
medicine. During the meeting bioethical issues of great interest were also discussed (informed consent, 
genetic screening, embryo research). 

To celebrate ten years of functioning, the Hellenic National Bioethics Commission is organising a one-
day event dedicated to its first President, the late George Koumantos. The chairman of the EGE, Prof. 
Goran Hermeren, and distinguished Greek speakers will take part. The event will take place on 2 Decem-
ber 2009 in Athens and the main topic that will be debated is ‘Euthanasia’. 

Presentations in 2009

The members of the Hellenic National Bioethics Commission and its two senior scientists regularly par-
ticipate in meetings and workshops on bioethical issues, in Athens and other cities in Greece, as speakers 
or experts.

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

31

 
They also participated in international meetings, as follows:

 Date
19 February 2009 

 Conference/Meeting
First Meeting of the 
European Commission 
International Dialogue 
on Bioethics, Brussels, 
Belgium

Title
‘First Meeting of the 
International Dialogue 
on Bioethics’

Participant/s
Dr Ariadne Hager-
Theodoridou,

Senior Scientist of the 
HNB Commission

4-5 June 2009

13th NEC FORUM

 Prague, Czech Republic

‘Emerging Technologies 
in an Age of Globalisa-
tion’

Professor George Mania-
tis, Deputy Chairman of 
the HNB Commission

17-18 September 2009

14th NEC FORUM 

Stockholm, Sweden

23-24 September 2009 TISS.EU workshop

7th Framework Pro-
gramme

Padova, Italy

‘Justice in Health and 
Health care: national, 
European and global 
challenges’

Professor G. Maniatis, 
Deputy Chairman

‘Procurement, storage 
and transfer of tissues 
and cells for non-clinical 
purposes in a legal and 
ethical perspective’ 

Dr Ariadne Hager-
Theodorides, 

Senior Scientist of the 
HNB Commission

Further Information
Mrs Marianna Dracopoulou
Head of Secretariat at the Hellenic National Bioethics Commission

Address
47, Evelpidon str.
11362- Athens
Greece 
Tel.: +30-210-88.47.700, Fax: +30-210-88.47.701 
E-mail address: Secretariat@bioethics.gr
Website: www.bioethics.gr

32 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

The Irish Council for Bioethics

Ireland

Biometrics: Enhancing Security or Invading Privacy? Opinion.

Currently, biometric information is being used for numerous purposes, such as civil and criminal iden-
tification, surveillance and screening, e-Health, e-Commerce and e-Government. The use of biometric 
systems and applications raises a number of ethical questions with regard to human dignity and identity 
(individuality), as well as basic rights such as privacy, autonomy, bodily integrity, and, in the case of 
criminal identification, due process.

In general, the issues that arise are not with the use of biometric technologies per se but rather how they 
are applied and how the resulting information is dealt with. Considering the continuing developments in 
biometric technologies, their increasing use and the diversity of their applications, the Irish Council for 
Bioethics (ICB) has produced an opinion document examining some of the ethical issues surrounding the 
collection, use and storage of biometric information.

In November 2009, the ICB launched its report entitled Biometrics: Enhancing Security or Invading 
Privacy? Opinion. The key findings of the report are as follows.

•	 The  ICB  is  of  the  view  that,  when  implemented  appropriately  and  managed  correctly,  biometric 
technologies can both improve security and enhance privacy. However, it also acknowledges that 
these technologies could have significant implications for an individual’s privacy. The ICB places 
paramount  importance  on  respecting  and  protecting  the  autonomy  of  individuals  as  well  as  their 
personal and informational privacy with regard to the collection, use and storage of their biometric 
and other personal information.

•	 The  ICB  recognises  the  need  to  establish  and/or  confirm  the  identification  of  an  individual  in  a 
globalised  world  and  the  many  advantages  of  doing  so.  However,  the  method(s)  of  identification 
used  should  in  no  way  be  taken  to  define  or  categorise  a  person’s  identity  in  a  more  substantive 
sense. Indeed, the inappropriate use of bodily information to categorise, stigmatise or discriminate 
in  any  way  should  be  resisted  strongly.  With  that  in  mind,  the  ICB  recommends  that  respect  for 
human dignity should be at the forefront of the considerations of policy makers and the biometrics 
community when designing, implementing and operating biometric technologies and applications.

•	 The ICB believes that it is essential that profiling measures do not target particular groups within 
society unfairly or disproportionately. In addition, where individuals are profiled, this should be done 
in an appropriate manner based on valid reasoning and evidence, and in accordance with due process 
to ensure that their rights and civil liberties are respected and upheld.

•	 An  individual’s  biometric  information  is  an  intrinsic  element  of  that  person.  The  ICB,  therefore, 
recommends  that  the  right  to  bodily  integrity  and  respect  for  privacy  should  apply  not  only  to 
an  individual’s  body,  but  also  to  any  information  derived  from  the  body,  including  biometric 
information.

•	 The  ICB  is  of  the  opinion  that,  in  order  to  respect  and  uphold  an  individual’s  privacy  and 
confidentiality, biometric applications should utilise only the information required to meet a clear, 
limited and specified purpose. Therefore, any subsequent attempts to use the information for another 
purpose or to share it with third parties without the knowledge and consent of the individual should 
be prohibited. In addition, the ICB recommends that appropriate information and access management 
procedures should be established for all biometric applications.

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

33

•	 In the ICB’s opinion, the justification for implementing a biometric application relies on the application 
being considered proportionate. Biometric applications should therefore be assessed on a case-by-case 
basis, considering the relevance and necessity of employing biometric technologies, the environment 
in which the application will be used, and the level of efficiency and degree of reliability required to 
achieve the proposed purpose.

•	 While an individual’s rights and civil liberties are deserving of respect and are subject to legal protection, 
the ICB recognises that these rights may be overridden by the state under certain circumstances for the 
common good. However, it is concerned that the argument of upholding the common good may be 
employed too readily as the reason for implementing particular programmes and applications. Therefore, 
given the limitations such programmes can place on an individual’s civil liberties, there needs to be a 
proportionate justification and rationale for invoking the common good argument.

•	 The  ICB  believes  that  increased  transparency  regarding  biometric  technologies,  applications,  the 
use  to  which  an  individual’s  biometric  information  will  be  put  and  who  will  have  access  to  this 
information is essential to gain the trust and acceptance of the intended users of these systems. This 
includes providing information on the most up-to-date independent research and developments in 
biometrics and accurate information on the role the biometric application will play in resolving the 
particular problem at hand. An important aspect of this transparency is the need for a full and frank 
debate in advance on the related issues by all parties who will be involved in the proposed application. 
This is considered particularly important for applications where participation will be mandatory.

•	 In order to decide whether or not to participate in a biometric programme, individuals should be fully 
and accurately informed and should understand all the issues and implications relating to the provision 
of their information. The ICB considers that the issue of user understanding is of particular importance 
for biometric applications that will be used by potentially vulnerable groups (e.g. the elderly, the very 
young or those with mental and/or learning disabilities). Where such individuals are deemed competent 
and aware of the consequences of their decision, this decision should be respected. Where this is not the 
case, however, decisions regarding their participation should be made by their parents or legal guardians. 
In the case of biometric applications involving children (i.e. individuals under 18 years of age), the assent 
of the child should be sought as well as the consent of the parent or legal guardian.

•	 The ICB considers it important that alternative non-biometric systems should be made available, where 
practicable, for those individuals who do not want to use the biometric system, and individuals should not 
be disenfranchised or discriminated against by choosing not to participate in a biometric programme.

•	 The ICB recommends that certain technical and practical measures should be established in order to 
ensure the integrity of an individual’s personal and informational privacy. Therefore, subject to justifiable 
exceptions, templates1 should be used instead of raw images; applications should be verification-based2 
as opposed to identification-based3; systems using databases should store the biometric information 
separately from other personal information, with these databases being connected by a secure network; 
and cryptographic systems and biometric encryption should be implemented.

Biometrics: Enhancing Security or Invading Privacy? Opinion is available in hardcopy by contacting the 
secretariat or can be downloaded from the ICB’s website www.bioethics.ie

1  Digital data representing the distinct features extracted from an individual’s biometrics sample. In basic terms templates take 
the form of numeric data.
2  A one-to-one comparison to authenticate an individual’s identity. In this case, a sample biometric is compared with the cor-
responding template.
3  A one-to-many comparison to authenticate an individual’s identity. In this case, a sample biometric is compared with all the 
raw images or templates in a specific database.

34 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

Further Information
Mr Paul Ivory 
Irish Council for Bioethics
1 Ormond Quay Lower
Dublin 1
Ireland 
Tel.: (+353) 1 878 3035
Email: p.ivory@bioethics.ie           
Website: www.bioethics.ie

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

35

The Italian Committee for Bioethics

Italy

The National Bioethics Committee was set up following Resolution No 6-00038 of 5 July 1988, in which 
the Chamber of Deputies, among other things, committed the Government to promoting an international 
comparison of the state of the art in biomedical research and genetic engineering that could serve as a 
valid point of reference for future choices in which scientific progress can be reconciled with respect for 
human freedom and dignity.

The Committee’s tasks

The National Bioethics Committee was established by a decree signed by the President of the Council of 
Ministers on 28 March 1990 entrusting it with the following tasks:

• 

• 

• 

• 

to make, if necessary by exercising its faculty to access the required information in existing national 
operating centres, as well as by liaising with similar committees set up in other countries and inter-
national organisations operating in the sector, an outline summary of the programmes, objectives 
and results of research and experimentation in the field of the life sciences and human health; 

to express opinions and suggest solutions, including for the purpose of preparing legislative acts, 
to address the ethical and legal problems that may emerge as a result of progress in research and 
the emergence of possible new applications of clinical interest, taking into account the need to 
safeguard fundamental human rights and human dignity and the other values expressed in the Con-
stitutional Charter and in the international instruments supported by Italy; 

to propose solutions for the functions of control over both the safeguarding of human and environ-
mental safety in the production of biological material and the protection from all risk of patients 
treated with products of genetic engineering or by gene therapy; 

to promote the drawing-up of codes of conduct for practitioners working in the various sectors con-
cerned and to encourage action to ensure that public opinion is properly informed. 

Composition

President:

Prof. Francesco Paolo Casavola

Honorary Presidents:

Giovanni Berlinguer, Adriano Bompiani, Francesco D’Agostino, Rita Levi Montalcini, Adriano Ossicini

Vice-Presidents:

Lorenzo D’Avack, Riccardo Di Segni, Luca Marini, Laura Palazzani

Members:

Salvatore  Amato,  Luisella  Battaglia,  Stefano  Canestrari,  Cinzia  Caporale,  Roberto  Colombo,  Bruno 
Dallapiccola, Antonio Da Re, Maria Luisa Di Pietro, Emma Fattorini, Carlo Flamigni, Romano Forleo, 
Silvio Garattini, Marianna Gensabella, Laura Guidoni, Aldo Isidori, Claudia Mancina, Assunta Morresi, 
Demetrio Neri, Andrea Nicolussi, Alberto Piazza, Vittorio Possenti, Rodolfo Proietti, Lucetta Scaraffia, 
Monica Toraldo di Francia, Giancarlo Umani Ronchi, Grazia Zuffa.

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

37

Opinions

•  Bioethical problems in clinical experimentation with non-inferiority plan (24 April 2009)

•  Pharmacological experimentation on women (28 November 2008) 

•  Conscious refusal and renunciation of health treatment in the patient-doctor relationship 

(24 October 2008) 

•  Premature infants (29 February 2008) 

•  The fate of embryos resulting from medically assisted procreation (MAP) and not complying with 

the conditions for implantation (6 October 2007) 

•  Conflict of interest in biomedical research and clinical practice (8 June 2006) 

•  Nanosciences and nanotechnologies (9 June 2006) 

•  Biobanks and research on human biological material. Opinion of the NBC on a Recommendation of the 
Council of Europe and on a Document of the National Committee for Biosecurity and Biotechnology 
(9 June 2006)

•  Caudotomy and conchectomy (5 May 2006) 

•  Ethics, health and new information technologies (21 April 2006) 

•  From pharmacogenetics to pharmacogenomics (21 April 2006) 

•  Bioethics and rehabilitation (17 March 2006) 

•  Differentiated diet and interculturality (17 March 2006) 

•  Bioethics and the rights of the elderly (20 January 2006) 

•  Assistance to pregnant women and post-partum depression (16 December 2005) 

•  Adoption for birth of cryopreserved and residual embryos obtained by medically assisted procreation 

(MAP) (18 November 2005) 

•  Bioethical problems concerning the use of animals in activities linked to human health and well-

being (21 October 2005) 

•  Nourishment and hydration of patients in persistent vegetative state (30 September 2005) 

•  Bioethical remarks on so-called “ootides” (15 July 2005) 

•  Bioethics in dentistry (24 June 2005) 

•  Opinion on “the cellular therapy of Huntington’s disease through the implantation of foetal neurons” 

(20 May 2005) 

•  Alternative medicine and the problem of informed consent (18 March 2005) 

•  The precautionary principle: bioethical, philosophical and legal profiles (18 June 2004) 

•  Advanced care statements (18 December 2003) 

•  Ritual slaughtering and animal suffering (19 September 2003) 

•  Research using human embryos and stem cells (11 April 2003) 

•  Tobacco use (21 March 2003) 

•  Opinion of the NBC on the draft protocol on human genetics (6 March 2002) 

•  Aims, risks and limits of medicine (14 December 2001) 

•  Ethical and legal considerations on the use of biotechnologies (30 November 2001) 

•  Bioethics and veterinary science (30 November 2001) 

•  Animal well-being and human health (30 November 2001) 

38 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

•  Guidelines for ethical committees in Italy (13 July 2001) 

•  Violent acts, the media and children (25 May 2001) 

•  Bioethical guidelines for equal access to healthcare (25 May 2001) 

•  Pain therapy: bioethical guidelines (30 March 2001) 

•  Psychiatry and mental health: bioethical guidelines (24 November 2000) 

•  Therapeutic use of stem cells (27 October 2000) 

•  Protection of the human embryo and foetus. Opinion of the NBC on the preliminary draft protocol 

of the Bioethics Committee of the Council of Europe (31 March 2000) 

•  NBC statement on the patentability of human embryonic cells (25 February 2000) 

•  NBC opinion on the European protocol on biomedical research (19 November 1999) 

•  Bioethical guidelines for genetic testing (19 November 1999) 

•  NBC opinion on the proposal for a moratorium on human xenotransplantation clinical trials 

(19 November 1999) 

•  Statement on children’s right to a non-polluted environment (24 September 1999) 

•  NBC opinion on the Council of Europe White Paper on the treatment of mentally-ill patients 

24 September 1999) 

•  The bioethical issue of non-voluntary sterilisation (20 November 1998) 

•  Circumcision: bioethics outline (25 September 1998) 

•  Youth suicide as a bioethical problem (17 July 1998) 

•  Ethics, health care system and resources (17 July 1998) 

•  Pregnancy and childbirth from the bioethical standpoint (17 April 1998) 

•  Bioethical issues in a multiethnic society (16 January 1998) 

•  The bioethical problem of non-kinsman living donor kidney transplant (17 October 1997) 

•  Cloning (17 October 1997) 

•  Childhood and the environment (18 July 1997) 

•  Ethics committees in Italy: Recent issues (18 April 1997) 

•  Animal testing and health of living beings (17 April 1997) 

•  NBC opinions on the “Convention for the protection of human rights and biomedicine” (Council 
of Europe) and on the “Preliminary draft of the universal declaration on the human genome and 
human rights” (Unesco) (21 February 1997) 

• 

Identity and status of the human embryo (22 June 1996) 

•  The anencephalic infant and organ donation (21 June 1996) 

•  Coming to life (15 December 1995) 

•  Ethical aspects of electroconvulsive therapy (22 September 1995) 

•  Vaccinations (22 September 1995) 

•  Bioethics and the environment (21 September 1995) 

•  End-of-life issues in bioethics (14 July 1995) 

•  Medically assisted fertilisation — Documents by the National Bioethics Committee (17 February 1995)

•  Medically assisted procreation techniques. Synthesis and conclusions (17 June 1994) 

•  Human genome project (18 March 1994) 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

39

•  Bioethics with childhood (22 January 1994) 

•  Organ transplantation in childhood (21 January 1994) 

•  Report on the patentability of living organisms (19 November 1993) 

•  Drug experimentation (17 November 1992) 

•  Prenatal diagnosis (18 July 1992) 

• 

Information and consent related to medical acts (20 June 1992) 

•  Ethical committees (27 February 1992) 

•  Organ donation for transplantation purposes (7 October 1991) 

•  Bioethics and education in the health care system (7 September 1991) 

•  Opinion on the proposed resolution concerning assistance to terminally ill patients (6 September 1991) 

•  Document on the safety of biotechnology (28 May 1991) 

• 

Issues related to the collection and treatment of human seminal plasma for diagnostic purposes 
(5 May 1991) 

•  Gene therapy (15 February 1991) 

•  Definition and detection of human death (15 February 1991)

Motions and statements

Motion on the UN Convention on the rights of persons with disabilities (27 June 2008) 
Motion on the collection, storage and use of stem cells deriving from umbilical cord (13 July 2007) 
Motion on the trade in ovocytes (13 July 2007) 
Motion on assistance to newborns and children affected by serious pathologies or handicaps and on 
paediatric euthanasia (28 January 2005) 
Motion on the trade in organs for transplantation (18 June 2004) 
Note on emergency contraception (28 May 2004) 
Motion on unconventional medicines and practices (23 April 2004) 
Statement on the penitentiary issue (17 January 2003) 
Motion on human cloning for reproductive purposes (17 January 2003) 
Motion on the compulsory treatment of subjects convicted of paedophilia crimes (17 January 2003)

Further Information
Via della Mercede 96 
00187 Roma
Italy  
Tel.: 0039-06-67794601 
Fax: 0039-06-67794686 
Email: cnbioetica@palazzochigi.it 
Website: www.palazzochigi.it/bioetica/eng/index.html

40 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

The Spanish Bioethics Committee

Spain

Opinion of the Spanish Bioethics Committee on the proposal regarding the voluntary interruption 
of pregnancy in the future Organic Law

The Spanish Bioethics Committee (SBC), using its powers under the Biomedical Research Law, has 
deemed it opportune to contribute its opinion to the debate on the ethical and social implications of the 
Draft Organic Law on Sexual Health and Reproduction and the voluntary termination of pregnancy. 
The resulting document certainly does not attempt to analyse the whole issue of voluntary termination 
of pregnancy; rather it offers an assessment linked to the current debate that this reform has provoked 
in Spanish society. The fact that this Opinion omits certain aspects of the issue reflects the SBC’s deci-
sion (taken at its plenary session) to limit the scope of its analysis. It does not presuppose any concrete 
position taken by the members of the SBC either for or against the topics which are not covered. 

Given the particular characteristics of a bioethics committee, this document discusses not only legal 
arguments but more especially ethical considerations which form the basis for the proposals implicit 
in the new rules and, concretely, the proposals contained in the Draft Law. By amending or clarifying 
the rules, this document also reflects the different currents of public opinion and the ethical reasons for 
having new rules, as expressed in the Draft Law. 

The starting point for this document is the assumption that, although abortion is an unpleasant real-
ity, the State has the obligation to establish a legal framework to deal with the ethical, legal and social 
issues inherent in the decision to interrupt a pregnancy, and to ensure that the decision to abort is taken 
with the maximum personal, medical and legal safety. Given that the ultimate objective should be to 
reduce the circumstances that lead to the decision to abort, it is very appropriate that the legal frame-
work includes effective measures to genuinely improve sexual education and contraception and to help 
women who have difficulties in continuing their pregnancy.

The SBC considers that the decriminalisation of abortion, introduced in article 417 of the Penal Code 
by the 1985 Law, has not been satisfactorily interpreted or applied. At the same time, the issue of the 
reproductive autonomy of the woman has not been taken into account, since the final decision to ter-
minate pregnancy is assigned to a third party. These are two reasons for amending the current law, to 
bring it into line with legislation in most European countries. 

Available scientific data on the development of the embryo need to be taken into account when justify-
ing the termination of a pregnancy. The Committee takes the view that setting a limit of twelve weeks 
of embryonic development (or fourteen weeks of gestation) reflects the fact that it is possible to estab-
lish a qualitative difference in the ethical and legal status of the foetus before and after this date. 

The SBC considers that this qualitative difference justifies setting the permitted limit to the voluntary 
termination  of  pregnancy  at  twelve  weeks  of  embryonic  development  (or  fourteen  weeks  of  gesta-
tion). By establishing an objective time limit in this way, we safeguard the woman’s freedom to take 
her private decision. At the same time, by setting a time limit for the termination of pregnancy and 
demanding that the woman be fully informed, this solution does not leave the unborn life completely 
unprotected.

In the case of a minor aged sixteen or more, the SBC proposes that it would be incongruous to recog-
nise her autonomy and at the same time deny her the right to confidentiality. Without denying that the 
minor should be autonomous, the SBC considers that the draft law ought to provide for specific infor-

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

41

mation, tailored to the needs of the minor, including the recommendation that her parents or guardians 
should normally be informed.

With respect to conscientious objection, the SBC considers that the woman who requests the termina-
tion of her pregnancy should be guaranteed medical attention. Conscientious objection to abortion is a 
constitutional right, and it is therefore important to regulate the exercise of that right.

Further Information
Javier Arias 
Deputy Secretary of the Bioethics Committee of Spain

Address
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Pabellon 5, Avenida Monforte de Lemos 5 
28029-Madrid
Spain 
Tel: +34 918222186 
E-mail: javardi@isciii.es 
Website: www.comitedebioetica.es

42 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

Non-EU national and 
regional ethics committees

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

43

Comité National d’Ethique en Recherche

Brésil

Système pionnier au Brésil – résolution 196/96 - deuxième partie*

La résolution 196/96 a un contenu conceptuel et énonce des directives de nature bioéthique; tout en créant un 
mécanisme d’application des normes, elle établit un système opérationnel et un système (d’accompagnement) 
qui assure un contrôle social autonome et indépendant; ce système de contrôle est lié au Conseil national de 
santé, organisme de contrôle social selon la loi.

Les projets de recherche doivent être approuvés par le comité d’éthique de l’institution concernée (CEP). Ce 
comité doit être accrédité par la Commission nationale d’éthique en recherche (CONEP).

Les comités sont complètement indépendants et ne doivent obéir à aucune injonction. Ils sont de nature 
bioéthique  (le  nombre  de  membres  exerçant  la  même  profession  ne  peut  être  supérieur  à  la  moitié  de 
l’ensemble des membres) et comptent obligatoirement au moins un représentant des sujets de la recherche.

Lorsqu’un  comité  approuve  un  projet,  il  en  devient  coresponsable  au  même  titre  que  l’auteur,  et  cette 
responsabilité ne peut être déléguée pour les aspects éthiques. Des rapports trimestriels sur tous les pro-
jets sont envoyés à la CONEP. Outre un rapport annuel et final que le chercheur doit toujours présenter et 
l’obligation de ce dernier de signaler les événements contraires qui viendraient à se produire et d’en faire 
une évaluation précise, le comité peut aussi exiger des rapports partiels.

Les instituts de recherche ne libèrent les fonds que sur présentation du document d’approbation délivré par 
le comité d’éthique pour la recherche.

La résolution 196/96 n’est pas une loi, mais a force de loi. Son non-respect peut entraîner des poursuites 
devant les tribunaux ordinaires et devant le conseil de l’ordre compétent.

Un des documents importants est le consentement libre et éclairé; c’est un instrument et un document 
destiné à protéger l’être humain et non à obtenir une «exemption de responsabilité». Il doit être rédigé 
dans un langage clair et contenir toutes les informations importantes; une copie signée est remise au sujet 
de la recherche, qui disposera aussi de l’adresse et du téléphone de la personne à contacter si un problème 
survient pendant la recherche.

Pour publier les résultats de la recherche, les revues exigent une preuve de l’approbation de ces résultats.

Le chercheur doit conserver pendant au moins cinq ans les archives des protocoles et les tenir à tout moment à 
disposition du comité d’étique.

Les résultats de la recherche doivent obligatoirement être rendus publics, qu’ils soient favorables ou non.

Dans le cas de recherche sur un nouveau médicament, il convient d’assurer, si c’est opportun, l’accès au 
médicament après la fin du projet.

En cas de coopération étrangère, il y a lieu de prouver, pièces justificatives à l’appui, que le projet sera aussi 
réalisé dans le pays d’origine (ou, si ce n’est pas le cas, en expliquer la raison) et de fournir la preuve de 
l’approbation par le comité d’éthique du pays d’origine. Il est recommandé que le chercheur brésilien par-
ticipe à l’élaboration du projet; il devra obligatoirement déclarer par écrit qu’il est d’accord avec la marche 
à suivre. Il convient d’identifier le chercheur étranger responsable de la coordination du projet, de même 
que le responsable au Brésil.

Il incombe au chercheur la responsabilité d’orienter le sujet de la recherche (recherche sur des médica-
ments) pour qu’il ne participe pas à un autre projet. Un délai d’un an au moins à compter de la fin du projet 
sera respecté, à moins qu’il ne soit dans l’intérêt du sujet de participer à un autre projet, le chercheur étant 
responsable d’en évaluer les avantages.

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

45

Dans le cas de recherche sur les peuples indigènes, il ne faut pas considérer uniquement le sujet, mais tout 
son habitat. L’éventuelle exploitation de la faune, de la flore et du sous-sol, qui sont considérés comme fai-
sant partie intégrante du patrimoine du peuple indigène, est interdite.

Au-delà de la résolution 196/96, le système d’éthique compte sept autres résolutions spécifiques qui con-
cernent les recherches utilisant de nouveaux médicaments, les recherches avec coopération étrangère, les 
recherches sur la reproduction humaine, les recherches sur les peuples indigènes, les recherches en géné-
tique humaine, les recherches pluricentriques, les recherches avec création de banques de données.

Aujourd’hui,  le  système  compte  604  comités  institutionnels  (plus  de  10  000  personnes).  Près  de  90  % 
des projets de recherche sont soumis à l’approbation du comité d’éthique de l’institution; les autres (10 %) 
requièrent aussi l’approbation de la Commission nationale d’éthique pour la recherche (projets spécifiques).

Selon les estimations, près de 10 000 projets de recherche sur les êtres humains sont réalisés chaque année 
au Brésil; ces projets concernent non seulement le domaine biomédical mais aussi tous les domaines de la 
connaissance et portent sur un demi-million de sujets de recherche. 

Ce chiffre englobe tant les recherches rétrospectives dans les dossiers médicaux que les recherches sur les 
cellules souches (d’adultes).

Quelques informations supplémentaires:

-  Les membres de la Commission nationale de santé sont proposés par les comités d’éthique et nommés par 
le Conseil national de santé. La pluridisciplinarité y est assurée, et aucune profession n’est prépondérante. 
Chaque comité doit toujours compter au moins un représentant des sujets de la recherche.

-  Les cas omis sont résolus par la CONEP, dernière instance de recours.

-  Le système CONEP – CEP n’est soumis à aucun organisme corporatif ou exécutif; il jouit d’une com-

plète autonomie et est lié directement au Conseil national de santé.

-  Les comités d’éthique et la CONEP délibèrent comme un organe collégial après analyse des avis spécifiques 
à chaque projet. Au-delà des avis des membres, le CEP et la CONEP peuvent consulter des experts ad hoc.

-  La CONEP édite des périodiques intitulés «Cadernos de Ética em Pesquisa» (Cahiers d’éthique en 
recherche), qui publient des articles d’intérêt général, ainsi que les réponses aux consultations trans-
mises par les chercheurs et leur comité d’éthique.

-  Les comités doivent émettre leur avis final dans un délai maximal de 30 jours et la CONEP dans un 

délai de 60 jours.

*  Écrit et présenté par Christian de Paul de Barchifontaine, infirmier, maître en administration hospitalière et gestion de la santé, 
étudiant doctorant en soins de santé à I´université catholique portugaise (UCP), professeur de maîtrise en bioéthique du centre 
universitaire São Camilo, actuellement recteur du centre universitaire São Camilo de São Paulo au Brésil (cpb@saocamilo-sp.br), 
et William Saad Hossne, médecin, président de la Commission nationale d´éthique en recherche (CONEP) 1996-2007, actuellement 
coordinateur de la maîtrise en bioéthique du centre universitaire São Camilo de São Paulo au Brésil. 

Pour obtenir des informations complémentaires, veuillez contacter:
Dr Christian de Paul de Barchifontaine 
Recteur 
Commission nationale d´éthique en recherche (Brésil)

Adresse
Rua Raul Pompéia, 144 - 7º Andar - Pompéia - São Paulo - SP 
ZIP CODE: 05025-010 - BRAZIL 
Tél. +55 11 3465.2603 
Fax: + 55 11 3465.2612 
Courriel: cpb@saocamilo-sp.br  
Site web: www.saocamilo-sp.br 

46 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

The National Bioethics Commission

Indonesia

Indonesian National Bioethics Commission

In the early 1990s the science community in Indonesia found a way to go beyond the ‘code-of-ethics 
approach’ to a more open debate on the future path and orientation of new technologies such as stem-cell 
technology and human cloning. The community was then in a state of confusion: no real communication 
existed between the parties concerned. The communication channels between scientists, ulemas, general 
public and Government were not yet functioning effectively.

The Chairman of the Indonesian Institute of Sciences, as the Head of the Indonesian Delegation to the 
UNESCO Biennial General Conference, was actively involved in the process of formulating the Univer-
sal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights. On 17 September 2004, the Government of the Republic 
of Indonesia, by a joint decision of three Ministers (the State Minister for Research and Technology, 
Minister of Health and Minister of Agriculture of the Republic of Indonesia), established the Indonesian 
National Bioethics Commission (INBC). 

The composition of INBC reflects this first initiative, so it is now working closely with the National 
Commission of Health Research Ethics at the Ministry of Health and the Biosafety Commission at the 
Ministry of Agriculture. This commission is an independent body and its mandate is:

(1)  to advance the analysis of bioethical issues, in particular those related to bioethical principles,

(2)  to present considerations to the Government on the ethical aspects of research and development in 

the biosciences and applications of bioscience-based technologies, and

(3)  to spread general knowledge to the public.

There are 35 members on the commission. The members of the 2004-2008 INBC were initially nomi-
nated by a small Preparatory Committee for setting up the INBC. The names were identified with the 
help of various research organisations and groups. They are loosely grouped into working groups. They 
discuss issues as and when they are considered to be of great importance, to initiate thorough analysis in 
advance of adjustments to the existing legal framework surrounding the particular issues.

The Secretariat circulates Pewarta KBN (INBC Newsletter) to channel information to members, and 
from time to time ‘findings’ and ‘recommendations’ of the various international conferences (mainly 
UNESCO and other UN bodies) are presented as background to more intensive group discussions. 

Through INBC, Indonesia takes the initiative in Asia for developing a wide perspective on bioethics, 
including the environment and biodiversity. It is also within its perceived mandate to advance Islamic 
bioethics. In 2008 INBC organised the Ninth Asian Bioethics Conference of the Asian Bioethics Asso-
ciation in Yogyakarta, Indonesia. The theme of the conference was ‘Bioethics in Asia: healthy and pro-
ductive life in harmony with nature’ (www.abc-9th.blogspot.com).

INBC considers 2008 as the year when Indonesia went international, taking part in various meetings and 
conferences, encouraging its members to write more on their interpretation or representation of issues as 
seen from the Indonesian perspective, in short to contribute more. As a dialogue partner in the European 
Group on Ethics of Science and New Technologies it is now treated with utmost respect.

The 2009-2012 Work Programme of the Indonesian National Bioethics Commission:

-  To support and sustain networking among individuals and organisations in Indonesia and internationally on 

matters related to bioethics.

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

47

-  To foster dialogues in the dissemination and elaboration of the bioethics principles of the Universal 

Declaration of Bioethics and Human Rights (2005).

-  To  hold  regular  Open  Discussions  and  Workshops  with  the  various  stakeholders  and  partners1  and 

state-of-the art reviews of ‘Bioethics and development in Indonesia’.

-  To have closer relations with the various regional centres of bioethics, in particular, to support, assist, 
and follow closely the preparation by Singapore’s Bioethics Advisory Committee for the Tenth World 
Congress of Bioethics: Bioethics in a globalised world, to be held on July 2010. 

-  To  attend  the  various  international  meetings  and  conferences,  in  particular  those  in  the  work  pro-
gramme  of  the  Inter-governmental  Bioethics  Committee  of  UNESCO  (IGBC);  the  International 
Bioethics Committee of UNESCO (IBC); the Conferences of the Asian Bioethics Association; and the 
World Congress of Bioethics.

-  To take an active part in the sharing of information and open dialogue in the fields of bioethics between 
European and non-European National Ethics Councils (NECs) in a Conference organised by the Euro-
pean Commission Bureau of European Policy Advisers (BEPA), Brussels, 19 February 2009

1  Social groups comprise the nine major groups, as defined in ‘Agenda 21’, UN Conference on Environment and Development, Rio 
de Janeiro, 1992: (1) women, (2) children and youth, (3) indigenous people and their communities, (4) non-governmental organisa-
tions, (5) local authorities, (6) workers and trade unions, (7) business and industries, (8) S&T communities, and (9) farmers

Further Information
Dr Amru Hydari Nazif
Secretary
Indonesian National Bioethics Commission

Address
Jalan Gatot Subroto 10,
Jakarta 12710
Indonesia 
Tel.: +6221525711 
Fax: +62215207226 
Email: kbnindonesia@gmail.com 
Website: www.abc-9th.blogspot.com (temporary)

48 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

Pan African Bioethics Congress: COPAB

Proposal of the African Charter on Bioethics and Human and People’s Rights

‘There is a history and geography of bioethics.’1

Developments in the International Bioethics Movement in Africa are strongly marked by its geopolitical, 
social, human and physical environment.

This continent symbolises life, humanity and respect for nature, but today Africa faces the rise of hege-
monic nationalism, individualism and blinding selfishness that has no regard for life, relegating human, 
community and environmental concerns to the background, if not even to destruction. Globalisation has 
also brought geopolitical pressure, resulting in the continent’s priorities being determined without the 
involvement of Africans or with Africans under guardianship. At the same time, African public opinion 
is in favour of regional and continental integration as a way out and to raise the profile of the continent.

These concerns are addressed in the following achievements:

-  Resolution AHG/Res.254 (XXXII) of the OAU on Bioethics and the Development of Africa in Yaounde 

in July 1996; 

-  Advocacy of Africa to establish an international observatory on Ethics charged with promoting basic 

and universal human values at the Millennium Summit in September 2000 in New York;

-  The adoption of the Universal Declaration of UNESCO on Bioethics and Human Rights in October 

2005 in Paris; 

-  The 1st Pan African Bioethics Congress (COPAB) in May 2008 in Yaounde.

The COPAB sought to implement Resolution AHG/Res.254 (XXXII) of the OAU on Bioethics and the Devel-
opment of Africa adopted by the Conference of Heads of State and Government of Africa during the Summit 
of Bioethics at the 32nd Summit of the Organisation of African Union (OAU) in July 1996 in Yaounde.

This Resolution:

-  Lays down the legal, sociological and political foundations of the international bioethics movement in Africa;

-  Acknowledges that one of the missions of bioethics is to reduce or even eliminate, in the name of 
human dignity, differences in living conditions between the populations of the Northern and Southern 
hemispheres, hence the interest for the African Bioethics Movement to achieve the Millennium Devel-
opment Goals (MDGs) adopted during the Millennium Summit in September 2000 in New York by the 
United Nations General Assembly; 

-  Advocates taking legislative and other measures to implement the Resolution and create national and 
inter-African Advisory Ethics bodies to encourage exchanges of experience between such institutions.

The 1st COPAB meeting held at the National Assembly of Cameroon from 28 to 30 May 2008 focused on 
developing intellectual tools and an action plan to enable the countries and peoples of Africa to achieve 
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).

The  2nd  COPAB  meeting,  which  will  be  held  from  19  to  21  April  2010  in  Yaounde,  will  focus  on 
establishing the African Advisory Ethics Council, on outlining the platforms of the COPAB Scientific 
Commission on major projects of research, ethical dilemmas, and the development of basic texts of the 

1   Speech by Professor Jean Bernard, the acclaimed French academic, one of the great pioneers of international bioethics move-

ment in the early JIB: African International Symposium of Bioethics, Yaounde, February 1996.

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

49

Integrated Ethics Sphere for the entire African continent, particularly the proposal made by the African 
Charter on Bioethics and Human and People’s Rights addressed to the Conference of Heads of State and 
Government of the African Union.

The African Charter on Bioethics and Human and People’s Rights2

The proposed Terms of Reference for the document would be: 

A preamble, which would include references to: 

-  Africa as the cradle of mankind, home of the first civilisations and guardian of the sacredness of life; 

-  Insidious violations of life; 

-  Various forms of odious exploitation of poverty and human trafficking;

-  Disastrous consequences of turf wars, the trivialisation of violence, widespread insecurity and instabil-

ity in the continent. 

The body of this document would consist of a three-part overview of various international texts and 
instruments on bioethics and human rights, related texts and African resolutions, and lastly the various 
religious and traditional cultures of the continent.

The general provisions of the Charter would centre on the basic concepts of respect for human dignity, 
human rights, ethics, social and political governance, harmonious and sustainable development; equal 
access to care, medication, information and training; protection of vulnerable or dependent persons and 
of nature; supervision of research and production, clinical trials, experimentation; community culture, 
ethics, fairness, justice and peace and the sacredness of life.

The practical arrangements would take into account the nature of bioethics, as a field of science, open to 
research and debate. It would call for concerted action by all, within the meaning of African discourse, 
on crucial issues of life and development, particularly in view of adaptation to anthropological transi-
tions, drawing from the African cultural substrate.

Transitional arrangements would evoke the need for international cooperation and solidarity in order 
both to safeguard cultural diversity and share basic and universal human values, from the perspective of 
people’s right to self-determination. 

The final provisions would lay down the conditions for ratification, implementation and amendment of 
the Charter.

The document would be structured as follows: 

•  Preamble 

•  Chapter I: DIGNITY, HUMAN RIGHTS AND CONSENT. 

1.  Respect for the Person 

2.  Respect for Personal Integrity

3.  Right to education and information 

4.  Protection of vulnerable or disabled persons

5.  Autonomy and individual responsibility 

6.  Conditions of participation in a research program 

7.  Consent 

2 Study proposed by the Working Group established by the Cameroon Bioethics Society (CBS) in Yaounde, see composition.

50 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

•  Chapter 2: RULES AND ETHICS AND BIOETHICS CONSULTATION 

1.  Decision making in the field of bioethics 

2.  Independent committees of observation and consultation in bioethics 

3.  Dispute resolution in the field of bioethics 

4.  Respect for established practices and good manners 

5.  Assessment and risk management of research

•  Chapter 3: FRAMEWORK FOR RESEARCH 

1.  Codification of the manipulation of human embryos and human genome

2.  Respect for protocols and research programmes 

3.  Respect for ethics and professional obligations 

4.  Elaboration of experimental conditions on living 

•  Chapter 4: CARE 

1.  Collection and management of organs and tissues from living or deceased donors

2.  Codification of care provided in institutions 

3.  Codification of care received outside institutions 

4.  Codification of care in unconventional medicine 

5.  Equitable access to care and medication 

6.  Right to health 

•  Chapter 5: RESPECT OF U.S. AND CUSTOMS 

1.  The concept of family 

2.  Different concepts of death 

3.  Mutilation and stigma 

4.  The issue of euthanasia 

5.  Managing human aging as a cultural common property

•  Chapter  6:  RESPECT  AND  PRESERVATION  OF  NATURE  IN  GENERAL  AND  HUMAN 

NATURE IN PARTICULAR 

1.  Sacredness of life in African cultures 

2.  Accountability vis-à-vis future generations 

3.  Harmony between mankind, community and the natural environment.

Accompanying scientific study 

Resolution AHG/Res.254 (XXXII) of the OAU in 1996 could be valuable, through the collaboration of 
the Cameroon Bioethics Society (CBS) with the General Secretariat of the OAU, to the scientific file on 
bioethics issues and the African perception of bioethics.

Similarly, the proposal to establish an International Observatory on Ethics was supported in 2000 by the 
scientific study conducted by CBS on the Ethics of Life in the Era of Globalisation. 

The establishment of the African Advisory Ethics Council and the proposal of the African Charter on 
Bioethics and Human and People’s Rights will be accompanied by the scientific study prepared by the CBS 
on the issue of development and ethical evaluation of Africa’s priorities with regard to globalisation.

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

51

Conclusion

Establishing modern conditions for the development of life with a harmonious balance struck between 
the individual, the community and the natural environment appears, for Africans, as one of today’s major 
challenges. The goal clearly mentioned here is for Africa to cease being the continent of death it has been 
and rediscovers the ancient sacredness of all forms of life in nature. In this sense, the proposal by the 
COPAB of an African Charter on Bioethics and Human and Peoples’ Rights should be considered an 
initiative that aims to involve everyone and to mobilise all forces to recreate the best conditions of life on 
the continent. This is the challenge of sustainable and harmonious development of Africa.

Further Information
Professor Pierre Effa
Pan African Bioethics Congress (COPAB)

Address
Public Health and Bioethics Research Centre (CERB)
Cameroon Bioethics Society (CBS)
Building of ‘Pharmacie de l’Harmonie’, Bonamoussadi Road, Akwa Nord 
Cameroon 
Tel.: + 237 33 40 95 45 / +237 77 76 75 19
Email: cerbcbs@yahoo.fr, effapierre@yahoo.fr

52 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

UNZA Biomedical Research Ethics Committee

Zambia

Zambia at a crossroads on the export of samples*

Genetics research and the storage of body tissue (or biobanks) have increased the work and challenges 
faced by Research Ethics Committees (RECs) or Institutional Review Boards (IRBs). Over a year ago, 
Zambia established its National Research Ethics Committee (NHREC) under its Ministry of Health. Part 
of NHREC’s mandate is to accredit and regulate the functioning of all RECs in the country and to develop 
or strengthen the legal framework governing research with human participants. A few months ago, Zam-
bia banned the export of all human tissues until a new legal framework had been put in place. While this 
decision is very important to those who are the custodians of health in the country, it has posed great chal-
lenges to those whose research for various reasons requires the export of samples to other countries.

Auray-Blais & Patenaude (2006) have reported that some IRBs have rejected research where the storing 
of coded samples formed an integral part of the study. These protocols were rejected because the IRBs 
were concerned that participant protection would not be guaranteed and that there was the possibility of 
uncontrolled use of the body samples. The concerns being raised may be valid, as participants who con-
sent to have blood and other tissues stored do not have a full understanding of what tests can be done with 
their samples. While researchers are expected to conduct themselves in a professional and ethical manner, 
it cannot be ruled out that there are some researchers who do not. Based on the type and magnitude of 
some research being conducted in developing countries, one cannot help but conclude that some research-
ers conduct seemingly minor or harmless research just to get access to body tissue for storage, export, or 
use in unethical or unapproved research. There has been speculation that some researchers sell specimens 
to laboratories unknown to the RECs/IRBs. Given the multitude of information that scientists can derive 
from genetic studies, RECs/IRBs and, in fact, countries or governments probably ought to be concerned.

O’Mathuna (2006) has presented a very thought-provoking paper on human dignity. The author is of the 
opinion that if doctors are able to ‘facilitate’ patients to die, what happens when these same doctors con-
duct research using human participants? Would they eliminate the weaker ‘subjects’? Would they treat 
all their participants with dignity or would they use them as mere specimens and work on a ‘survival of 
the fittest’ principle? Moodley & Myer (2007) have compared HIV- and AIDS-related research in South 
Africa to the Tuskegee scandals, saying that in 1997 when HIV research escalated, predominantly white 
researchers enrolled mainly black participants. They conclude, ‘…both in South Africa and in the United 
States, the conduct of research by white researchers on people of colour has been ethically challenging 
and controversial’. O’Mathuna (2006) cautions researchers against having a repeat of the Nazi atrocities 
where health practitioners were involved.

Most developing countries would like to conduct high-tech scientific research but due to poverty and 
other limitations are unable to do so. Developed countries that show intent to do research in develop-
ing countries offer a good solution. This is because they often meet the study costs and/or provide the 
expertise. However, specimens are usually shipped out of developing countries under the ‘pretext’ that 
there are no facilities in the country where they can be adequately stored or analysed. Researchers in 
developed countries benefit far much more from this kind of research than they are willing to invest in 
host countries. Moreover, some research of this nature is submitted for ethical review without a local 
investigator on the team until advised by the REC/IRB prior to approval. In isolated cases, some local 
investigators seem to be willing to agree to endorse any procedure to the detriment of their own coun-
try or people. What is it that makes them so blind to the ethical issues in studies where they are the 
local principal investigator? Is it monetary gain or maybe the fact that they do not simply understand 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

53

the nature of the study? Or how else can one explain the ‘inability’ of some high-profile researchers to 
adequately weigh the risk-benefit ratio? Pressure on staff in academic institutions to conduct research 
and publish their findings as a requirement for promotion has tempted some researchers to compromise 
on ethical standards. 

Skene (2007) has asked whether it is ‘ethical for scientists to conduct research in another country if that 
research  would  be  unlawful,  or  not  generally  accepted  in  their  own  country?’  The  author  concludes 
that there are no ethical reasons to prevent scientists from doing research or using research findings at 
home, even if the research did not comply with laws in their own country. The same author further urges 
that laws should be more flexible to accommodate rapid scientific advances, and concludes that there is 
no legislation preventing the use of research results from developing countries even if the research, as 
described, fell short of Australian requirements. The question is: would Australia allow a researcher from 
a developing country to return the favour? 

It can be seen from the above submission that great challenges are posed by bio-banking and the export 
of samples. There is therefore a need for stringent measures to ensure that countries can protect their 
citizens. The other side of the coin is that Zambia is part of a global community participating in research, 
so any decisions concerning research should promote an environment that encourages the conduct of 
research that could inform health care. The need for balance cannot be overemphasised.

*  Submitted by Dr Esther Munalula Nkandu, BSc, MSc, PgD Int R/Ethics, PhD and Dr James Munthali, MBChB, MMedOrth, 

MCS, H.Dip.Orth, FCSOrth

References:

Auray-Blais, C. & Patenaude, J. (2006). ‘A Biobank management model application to biomedical research’, 
BMC Medical Ethics, 7:4 doi: 10. 1186/472-6939-7-4

Moodley, K. & Myer, L. (2007). ‘Health Research Ethics Committees in South Africa 12 years into democ-
racy’, BMC Medical Ethics, 8:1 doi:10.1186/1472-6939-8-1

O’Mathuna, D.P. (2006). ‘Human dignity in the Nazi era: implications for contemporary bioethics’, BMC 
Medical Ethics &:2 doi:10.1186/1472-6939-7-2

Skene, L. (2007). ‘Undertaking Research in Other Countries: National Ethico-Legal Barometers and Interna-
tional Ethical Consensus Statements’, PloS Med 4 (2):e10 doi:1371/journal.pmed.0040010

Further Information
Dr E.M. Nkandu 
Chairperson 
UNZA Biomedical Research Ethics Committee

Dr J.C. Munthali
Vice Chairperson

Address
P.O. Box 50110, 
Lusaka
Zambia 
Tel.: +260 211 256067
Email:
esther.nkandu@unza.zm 
em_munalula@yahoo.com 

james.munthali@unza.zm 
jcmunthali@yahoo.com 

54 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

European Commission

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

55

Consultation on the assessment of how 
the ‘Clinical Trials Directive’ works

DG ENTR

In  its  Communication  of  10  December  2008  to  the  European  Parliament,  the  Council,  the  European 
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on ‘Safe, Innovative and Accessible 
Medicines: a Renewed Vision for the Pharmaceutical Sector’, the Commission announced that it would 
assess the application of the Clinical Trials Directive.

This assessment would consider, in particular, various options for improving the way the [Clinical Trials] 
Directive works, with a view to making legislative proposals, if appropriate, while taking into account 
the global dimension of clinical trials.

A public consultation document along this line has been published and can be downloaded at: 
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/pharmaceuticals/clinicaltrials/clinicaltrials_en.htm

The direct link is: 
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/pharmaceuticals/clinicaltrials/docs/2009_10_09_public-consultation-paper.pdf

Responses should be sent preferably by e-mail to entr-pharmaceuticals@ec.europa.eu, or by post to Unit 
ENTR/F/2, BREY 10/114, BE-1049 Brussels.

Interested parties are invited to comment by 8 January 2010.

Further Information

Address
Unit ENTR/F/2, BREY 10/114 
Email: entr-pharmaceuticals@ec.europa.eu
Website: http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/pharmaceuticals/clinicaltrials/docs/2009_10_09_public-
consultation-paper.pdf

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

57

Consultation on the legal framework for the 
fundamental right to protection of personal data

DG JLS

The Commission, together with the representatives of the EU Data Protection Agencies (Art. 29 Working 
Group), has recently launched a public consultation on the legal framework for the fundamental right to 
protection of personal data. The aim is to collect views on the new challenges for personal data protec-
tion in order to maintain an effective and comprehensive legal framework for protecting personal data 
within the EU. The consultation asks the following three questions: 

•  Please give us your views on the new challenges for personal data protection, in particular in the light 

of new technologies and globalisation.

• 

In your view, does the current legal framework meet these challenges? 

•  What future action would be needed to address these challenges? 

Contributions can be sent to: 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice_home/news/consulting_public/news_consulting_0003_en.htm

Interested parties are invited to comment by 31 December 2009.

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

59

Call for research proposals on the role of ethics 
in EU policy and law

DG RTD

The Commission has issued a new call for proposals under the Seventh Framework Programme (Science 
in Society) regarding the role of ethics in EU policy and law. Proposals should address such issues as the 
possible divergence or convergence of ethical standards among various regions of the world, the type of 
ethical ‘expertise’ that is needed for the development of public policies, and how this expertise should be 
governed — by ethical committees or otherwise.

The call identifier is: 
FP7-SCIENCE-IN-SOCIETY-2010-1

The topics are: 
SiS-2010-1.1.1-1 The role of Ethics under EU policy and law: the EU as a global actor. 
SiS-2010-1.1.1-2 The role of Ethics under EU policy and law: EU policy in the making

Date of publication: Thursday 30 July 2009.

For further information see: 
http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/dc/index.cfm?fuseaction=UserSite.FP7CallsPage#Science in Society

Deadline for the submission of proposals: Thursday 21 January 2010 at 17.00.00, Brussels local time.

Further Information
Dr Rene von Schomberg or Dr Lino Paula

Address
European Commission 
Directorate General Research
L3 
Email: Rene.VonSchomberg@ec.europa.eu, Lino.Paula@ec.europa.eu

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

61

Consultation on the Code 
of Conduct for Responsible Nanosciences and 
Nanotechnologies Research

DG RTD

On 7th February 2008 the European Commission adopted a Recommendation on a Code of Conduct for 
Responsible Nanosciences and Nanotechnologies Research, suggesting that a revision should be made 
after two years. 

The Commission is therefore launching the present public consultation in order to receive fresh input 
from  all  individuals  and  organisations  involved  or  interested  in  nanosciences  and  nanotechnologies 
research in Europe, in particular research workers, policymakers, industry, the media and civil society 
organisations.

You can access the consultation form on SINAPSE: 
http://europa.eu/sinapse/directaccess/science-and-society/e-debates/nano-recommendation-2010/

Interested parties are invited to comment by Sunday 3 January 2010.

Further Information
Dr Philippe Galiay

Address
European Commission 
Directorate General Research 
L3 
Email: Philippe.Galiay@ec.europa.eu

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

63

International organisations

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

65

The Council of Europe’s Bioethics Division

Events

•  Research ethics in countries with an emerging or developing economy

As part of its chairmanship of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, Spain considered 
it important to initiate a ministerial conference (planned for the end of 2010) on research ethics in 
countries with an emerging or developing economy. The initiative builds on the general principles laid 
down in Article 29 of the Additional Protocol to the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine 
concerning Biomedical Research. In view of their responsibility for the tasks defined by the Conven-
tion, especially interpretation and follow-up, the Steering Committee on Bioethics (CDBI) and the 
Group of Specialists on Biomedical Research will cooperate with the Spanish authorities in preparing 
this Conference. All countries, including observers (in particular Australia, Canada, Israel, Japan, 
Mexico and USA) taking part in the CDBI’s work, will be invited to fully participate in the confer-
ence, whose aim will be to adopt a non-binding declaration formulated by all these countries.

•  Seminar on decisions relating to medical treatment in end-of-life situations

The Steering Committee on Bioethics (CDBI) of the Council of Europe will organise at the end of 
2010 a Seminar on decision-making processes relating to medical treatment in end-of-life situations. 
The objective of the seminar will be to clarify certain concepts and identify a number of areas of 
convergence on issues relating to medical treatment in end-of-life situations, which could serve as a 
basis for guidelines in the future.

•  Debate with young people

In association with French, German and Austrian National Ethics Committees, the Council of Europe 
will organise on 10-11 December 2009 in Strasbourg, a debate with high-school students from France, 
Germany and Austria on ethical issues raised by genetic testing.

Legislative activities

•  Predictivity, genetic testing and insurance: a new legal instrument in preparation

The CDBI is continuing the work on predictivity and genetic testing in insurance, with a view to 
preparing a new legal instrument. 

Other current activity

•  Preparation of a Guide for research ethics committee members 

A revised version of the draft Guide for research ethics committee members has been prepared 
by the Group of specialists in Biomedical Research (CDBI-CO-GT2) and will be presented to the 
CDBI in November 2009, with a view to opening it up for public consultation.

For more information on the above items, please consult our website: 
http://www.coe.int/bioethics

Further Information
Laurence Lwoff
Head of the Bioethics Division
Tel.: +33 (0)3 88 41 22 68
Fax: +33 (0)3 88 41 37 45
Email: laurence.lwoff@coe.int
Website: http://www.coe.int/bioethics

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

67

Division of Ethics of Science and Technology, 
Human and Social Science Sector, UNESCO

The sixteenth session of the International Bioethics Committee of UNESCO 

Mexico, 23-25 November 2009

Following its postponement for health reasons related to the A(H1N1) influenza epidemic in Mexico City, 
the Sixteenth (Ordinary) Session of the International Bioethics Committee of UNESCO (IBC) (initially 
scheduled in May 2009) will now be held in Mexico City from 23 to 25 November 2009.

The IBC is a body of 36 independent experts in the life sciences and in the social and human sciences, 
including law, human rights, philosophy, education and communication — appointed by the Director-
General of UNESCO in their personal capacity. Created in 1993, the Committee provides the only global 
forum for in-depth reflection on the ethical and legal issues raised by research in the life sciences and 
their applications, as well as encouraging the exchange of ideas and information. Its sessions are tradi-
tionally open to the public and bring together around 200 participants from different regions worldwide.

In accordance with the IBC’s work programme for 2008-2009, three main topics will be discussed during 
this session: the principle of social responsibility and health as set forth in Article 14 of the UNESCO 
Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights (2005); the issue of human cloning and interna-
tional governance; and the principle of respect for human vulnerability and personal integrity, as set 
forth in Article 8 of the Declaration. Finally, the IBC will finalise its work programme for 2010-2011 and 
will elect its new Bureau at this session.

Human Cloning and International Governance

This topic was included in the IBC’s work programme to respond to the wish of the Director-General that the 
IBC should examine the 2007 report Is human reproductive cloning inevitable: future options for UN govern-
ance, by the United Nations University Institute of Advanced Studies (UNU-IAS), and explore whether there 
is any scientific, social or political change that would justify a new initiative at international level.

After two years of work, the IBC finalised its Report on Human Cloning and International Govern-
ance and transmitted it to the Director-General of UNESCO on 9 June 2009 (Ref. SHS/EST/CIB-16/09/
CONF.503/2 Rev., available online: www.unesco.org/bioethics).

In this Report, the IBC takes the view that ‘although it may be premature for the international com-
munity to engage now in the elaboration of a new binding normative instrument aiming at harmonising 
both practices and principles in this area, the issues surrounding the international governance of human 
cloning cannot be ignored and a focused international dialogue is crucially needed. UNESCO, with its 
ethical mandate that remains unique within the United Nations system and its normative achievements in 
the field of bioethics, is in a privileged position to continue this reflection.’

Continuing the debate on cloning issues at international level is essential to foster public sensitivity and 
raise awareness and to ensure that all countries, including the developing and least developed countries, 
participate and put forward their concerns regarding this issue. 

Therefore, during its sixteenth session, the IBC will organise a working session to hold a first reflection 
on the follow-up to be given to its Report on this issue. This working session aims to provide the IBC 
with extensive brainstorming on the main issues raised during the preparation and finalisation of the 
Report, thus paving the way for the follow-up work by the IBC on this issue during the next biennium. 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

69

The working session will be organised around four presentations:

-  the presentation by Prof. (Mr) Toivo Maimets (Director of the Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology 
at the University of Tartu, Estonia, and Chairperson of the IBC Working Group on this issue) of the 
background, the IBC Report itself, and the general framework for its follow-up;

-  the presentation by Prof. (Mr) Abdallah Daar (Professor of Public Health Sciences and of Surgery and 
Co-Director,  Programme  on  Ethics  and  Commercialisation,  McLaughlin-Rotman  Centre  for  Global 
Health, University Health Network and University of Toronto) on the terminology issue, based on the 
IBC’s conclusion that the terminology used in bioethical debates is misleading and does not adequately 
describe the technical procedures used (or potentially to be used) today, and developing possible modali-
ties for redefining this terminology according to the new developments in human embryo research;

-  the presentation by Prof. (Mr) René Frydman (Head of Service, Gynaecology-Obstetrics and Repro-
ductive Medicine, Antoîne-Béclère Hospital, Clamart, France) on the ethical aspects of human cloning 
and ethical implications of new related scientific developments such as iPS cells;

-  the presentation by Prof. (Mr) Thomas Faunce (Associate Professor, College of Law and College of 
Medicine, Biology and the Environment, Australian National University) on the possible impact of 
recent scientific developments on the present international normative framework and possible different 
mechanisms for (international) governance of human cloning.

Principle of Social Responsibility and Health

The introduction of social responsibility as a founding principle of bioethics constitutes a major contri-
bution of the Declaration. The topics dealt with under this theme are sensitive ones, at the crossroads of 
important political, economic and social issues. The IBC began its reflection on this principle in 2005: 
it  established  a  specific  working  group  and  devoted  in-depth  discussion  and  reflection  to  this  theme 
throughout four consecutive sessions (in 2005, 2006, 2007 and 2008).

The aim is not to duplicate the work or debates on public health policy issues already addressed in other 
international bodies, in particular the World Health Organisation. The point is rather to determine the 
extent to which the international community and the United Nations system can address those questions 
from a bioethical standpoint, each contributing its multifaceted experience and expertise.

At its sixteenth session, the IBC will therefore attempt to finalise its work on Article 14 of the Declara-
tion. A new, revised version of the draft report, also taking into account the comments made during the 
sixth session of the Intergovernmental Bioethics Committee (IGBC) in July 2009, will constitute the 
basis for discussion at the session and hopefully lead to its finalisation.

Respect for human vulnerability and personal integrity

As a first step, a thematic conference on the principle of respect for human vulnerability and personal 
integrity was organised in conjunction with the fifteenth session of the IBC in 2008, with the aim of pro-
viding the IBC with an overview of the existing debate and reflection and with some orientations on how 
the principle could be addressed by the Committee. The presentation gave a historical and theoretical 
overview of the concept of human vulnerability and its inclusion in the Declaration, as well as the practi-
cal achievements to date in determining the specific applications of the concept.

Further to the discussion at the fifteenth session, some members of the IBC agreed to initiate work on 
this issue and the IBC will pursue its reflection on this principle at the sixteenth session.

A focus on Latin America and the Caribbean

Since the sixteenth session of the IBC will take place in the Latin American and Caribbean region, an 
entire day will be devoted to the topic ‘Bioethics in Latin America and the Caribbean: Experiences and 
perspectives’. This working session will focus on the following themes:

70 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

•  Bioethical debate and public awareness: Latin American perspective

•  Legislative measures in Latin America and the Caribbean: which implementation for the UNESCO 

Declarations in the field of bioethics?

•  Bioethics education: experiences in Latin America and the Caribbean

•  National bioethics committees in Latin America and the Caribbean: challenges and perspectives.

This working session aims to highlight the experiences in the region in the field of bioethics, its specific 
needs and the challenges for future developments. It will allow a constructive and fruitful exchange 
among the members of the IBC and other international participants, paving the way towards enhanced 
actions addressing ethical concerns raised by scientific and technological developments.

Further Information
Mrs Sabina Colombo
Programme Specialist, Bioethics Section 
Division of Ethics of Science and Technology
Human and Social Science Sector
UNESCO
1, rue Miollis
F-75732 Paris Cedex 15 
Tel. +33 1 45 68 38 03 / 39 39 
Fax + 33 1 45 68 55 15
Email: s.colombo@unesco.org
Website: www.unesco.org/shs/bioethics

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

71

Ethics and Health at WHO

The Ethics and Health Team is part of WHO’s Department of Ethics, Equity, Trade and Human Rights. 
As of 1 October 2009, the department is headed by a new Director, Dr Rüdiger Krech from Germany. 

Our main current projects and activities are the following:

Global Summit of National Bioethics Advisory Bodies

The 7th Global Summit, hosted by the French National Consultative Ethics Committee for Health and Life 
Sciences, was held in Paris on 1 –2 September 2008. The Summit consisted of sessions on 10 different 
topics including ethics and cultural diversity, transplantation of organs and tissue, digital health records, 
ethics committees and public policy. Representatives from 33 participating countries made presentations 
on the work of their committees, followed by a plenary discussion. At the end of the Summit several 
participants expressed a desire to exchange ideas on a more regular basis and to set up mechanisms, such 
as a shared database, to facilitate such exchanges. The discussions led to a greater appreciation of the 
fact that different committees face different challenges, due to the diversity of their structure, cultural 
context and health system development. More information at:
http://www.who.int/ethics/globalsummit/en/

The next Global Summit will take place in Singapore on 26–27 July 2010. 
(see: http://www.bioethics-singapore.org/ )

WHO Global Network of Collaborating Centres for Bioethics

On 19 April 2009, in a meeting hosted by the University of Chile, the WHO Global Network of Collabo-
rating Centres for Bioethics was formally launched. So far, six institutions are part of the network:

Joint Center for Bioethics, University of Toronto, Canada  
Centro Interdisciplinario de Estudios in Bioética, Santiago de Chile  
University of Miami Ethics Programs, Miami, USA  
Espace éthique AP-HP, Paris, France  
Institute of Biomedical Ethics, University of Zurich, Switzerland 
Centre for Philosophy and Public Ethics, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia

The Network will help the WHO Secretariat to implement its mandated work in the field of ethics and 
health. It will focus its collaborative activity in three key domains: public health ethics, research ethics 
and clinical ethics.

WHO Taskforce on ethical issues in Tuberculosis

Tuberculosis (TB) prevention, care and control raise important ethical and policy issues that need to 
be adequately addressed. These concerns have been accentuated by the problem of Multi-Drug Resist-
ant TB (MDR-TB) and, most recently, by the emergence and spread of Extensively Drug Resistant TB 
(XDR-TB), which is especially difficult to detect and treat. 

In 2008, the Ethics and Health Team and the Stop TB Department jointly established a taskforce on Ethics & 
TB that will guide WHO and its Member States on how to address the ethical issues arising in TB programmes. 
The goal is to develop a document entitled ‘WHO guidance on ethical issues in TB care and control.’

The taskforce gathered for its 1st meeting in December 2009 at the Joint Centre for Bioethics of the Uni-
versity of Toronto – a WHO Collaborating Centre for Bioethics. For this meeting, four background docu-
ments were produced, covering the topics of diagnosis and treatment, public health measures, research 
and the obligations and rights of health care workers, patients and communities. 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

73

A second meeting of the Task Force was held on 26–28 August 2009 at WHO in Geneva, with a view 
to developing a guidance document for TB programmes. A draft guidance document was reviewed in a 
consultation which took place on 15 October 2009 in Geneva. Further drafts will be presented at several 
meetings in the coming months, to help finalise the document. In addition, training materials for ethics 
and TB will be developed for use in workshops for programme managers and other stakeholders in order 
to build capacity at local level. 

Pandemic H1N1 2009 Influenza

In view of the ongoing H1N1 2009 influenza pandemic, WHO’s Ethics and Health team is continuing to 
address the wide range of challenging ethical issues raised by pandemic preparedness and response. The 
WHO guidance document ‘Ethical considerations in developing a public health response to pandemic influ-
enza’, published in 2007, is a widely used framework for addressing such considerations. Available at:
http://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/WHO_CDS_EPR_GIP_2007_2c.pdf

The four discussion papers, which had laid the foundations of this guidance document, have also been 
published and are available at:
http://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/cds_flu_ethics_5web.pdf
They provide an in-depth analysis of many ethical questions arising in pandemics.

Research Ethics in International Epidemic Response

In  response  to  the  request  for  additional  guidance,  WHO’s  Global  Influenza  Programme  and  the  Ethics 
and Health Team jointly convened a technical consultation on ‘Research Ethics in International Epidemic 
Response’, which took place in Geneva on 10–11 June 2009. This meeting brought together experts from inter-
national organisations, government agencies and ministries, professional medical associations, academic and 
research institutions, as well as staff from various WHO departments and Regional Offices. Their aim was to

• 

identify and elucidate the ethical issues arising from public health research and related activities dur-
ing infectious disease outbreaks, 

•  provide  WHO  with  urgently-needed  guidance  in  this  area,  with  specific  focus  on  the  question  of 

whether and how prospective ethical review should take place for these activities, and 

•  provide practical guidance to public health practitioners and researchers in the field. 

The discussion took place in the context of the current influenza A(H1N1) event (which was declared a 
‘pandemic’ on 11 June 2009, the second day of the meeting), but it was noted during the meeting that the 
suggestions and approaches developed by the group could be extended to other infectious disease emer-
gencies as well. The outcomes of the meeting will soon be available.

Manual for Research Ethics Committees

Following the implementation of several training activities in Africa, the Ethics and Health Team pub-
lished a manual on ‘Basic concepts for capacity building for research ethics committees.’ This man-
ual describes basic concepts, including ethical analysis, risk/benefit evaluation, confidentiality and the 
informed-consent process, along with the role of the research ethics committee, the organisation of a 
training programme and the issue of financial conflicts of interest. It is available in both English and 
French; the Spanish version will be published soon:
http://www.who.int/eth/Ethics_basic_concepts_ENG.pdf
http://www.who.int/eth/Ethics_basic_concepts_FR.pdf

Coordination between regulatory authorities and research ethics committees

The Ethics and Health Team has been working with the WHO department of Immunisation, Vaccines 
and Biologicals on ways to improve coordination between the ethics review of vaccine trials and the 
regulation of new vaccines at national level. Two regional networks of countries are part of this project, 

74 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009

one in Africa and another one in Asia. In September 2009, two regional meetings took place – in Abuja, 
Nigeria, and Bangkok, Thailand. Concrete recommendations were drawn up to ensure that countries 
have effective mechanisms for ethics review and regulation.

Further Information:
Ethics and Health Department of Ethics, Equity, Trade and Human Rights
World Health Organization
WHO/IER/ETH
20, Avenue Appia
CH-1211 Genève 27
Switzerland
Email: ethics@who.int

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

75

EGE Secretariat

Address
European Commission
Berl 8/285 - B-1049 Brussels
Fax: (32-2) 299 45 65
Email: BEPA-ETHICS-GROUP@ec.europa.eu

Maurizio Salvi
European Commission 
Head of the EGE Secretariat
Berl 8/282 - B-1049 Brussels
Tel: (32-2) 299 11 79
E-mail: maurizio.salvi@ec.europa.eu

Maja Prelog
European Commission 
EGE Secretariat 
Berl 08/285 - B-1049 Brussels
Tel: (32-2) 296 66 39
E-mail: maja.prelog@ec.europa.eu

Kim Hoang LE
European Commission
EGE Secretariat
Berl 8/285 - B-1049 Brussels
Tel: (32-2) 299 92 28
Email: kim-hoang.le@ec.europa.eu 

Ethically Speaking 13, December 2009 

77

How to obtain EU publications

Publications for sale:

•	

•	

•	

via EU Bookshop (

http://bookshop.europa.eu);

from your bookseller by quoting the title, publisher and/or ISBN number;

by contacting one of our sales agents directly. You can obtain their contact details on 
the Internet (http://bookshop.europa.eu) or by sending a fax to +352 2929-42758.

Free publications:

•	

•	

via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu);

at the European Commission’s representations or delegations. You can obtain their 
contact details on the Internet (http://ec.europa.eu) or by sending a fax  
to +352 2929-42758.

N
A
-
A
I
-
0
9
-
0
1
3
-
E
N

-
C

ISSN 1725-5562

Ethically speaking

A newsletter providing information
on the activities of the National Ethics Committees
compiled by the Secretariat of the European Group
on Ethics in Science and New Technologies
to the European Commission

December 2009

