§

ISSN 1725-5562

K
A
-
A
I
-
1
0
-
0
1
4
-
E
N

-
C

Ethically speaking

A newsletter providing information
on the activities of the National Ethics Committees
compiled by the Secretariat of the European Group
on Ethics in Science and New Technologies
to the European Commission

July 2010

How to obtain EU publications

Free publications:

• 

• 

via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu);

at the European Union’s representations or delegations. You can obtain their contact 
details on the Internet (http://ec.europa.eu) or by sending a fax 

Priced publications:

• 

via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu).

Priced subscriptions (e.g. annual series of the Official Journal of the European Union and 
reports of cases before the Court of Justice of the European Union):

• 

via one of the sales agents of the Publications Office of the European Union (http://publi-
cations.europa.eu/others/agents/index_en.htm).

The European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies 
to the European Commission 

Ethically Speaking 

Issue No 14 
July 2010 

Chief Editor 
Maurizio SALVI 

EUROPEAN COMMISSION 

 
 
 
Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers 
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers 
or these calls may be billed.

More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu).

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication.

Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2010

ISSN 1725-5562

© European Union, 2010
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Printed in Luxembourg

Printed on white chlorine-free PaPer

Contents

Editorial 

Göran Hermerén, President of the EGE

Contributions from members of the EGE 

Francesco D. Busnelli – ‘Towards a “European Bioethics”?’ 

Krzysztof Marczewski – ‘World bioethics dialogue: Is a common language attainable?’ 

THEMATIC SECTION: Biobanks – ethical and legal frameworks 

Australia: Australian Health Ethics Committee (AHEC) 

Austria: Austrian Bioethics Commission 

Belgium: Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics 

Brazil: National Commission of Ethics in Research (CONEP) 

Germany: German Ethics Council 

Greece: Hellenic National Bioethics Commission 

Italy: National Committee for Bioethics 

Portugal: National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences 

GENERAL INFORMATION ON ACTIVITIES of the EU national and regional ethics 
committees 

Austria: Austrian Bioethics Commission 

Belgium: Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics 

Cyprus: Cyprus National Bioethics Committee 

Denmark: Danish Council of Ethics 

Germany: German Ethics Council 

Greece: Hellenic National Bioethics Commission 

Malta: Bioethics Consultative Committee 

Portugal: National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences 

Spain: Spanish Bioethics Committee (CBE) 

United Kingdom: Nuffield Council on Bioethics 

GENERAL INFORMATION ON ACTIVITIES of the non-EU national and regional ethics 
committees 

Australia: Australian Health Ethics Committee (AHEC) 

5

9

11

15

19

21

23

25

27

29

31

33

35

37

39

41

43

45

47

49

51

55

59

61

63

65

Brazil: National Commission of Ethics in Research (CONEP) 

Canada: Commission on the Ethics of Science and Technology (CEST) 

GENERAL INFORMATION ON ACTIVITIES of the international organisations 

Council of Europe: Bioethics Division 

UNESCO: Ethics of Science and Technology Division - Bioethics Section 

67

69

73

75

77

Editorial

Göran Hermerén

The mandate of the current EGE expires in 2010, and the process of nominating members of the new 
EGE is well on its way and may be finalised when this Newsletter is published. It is therefore tempting to 
look back at the work of the EGE over the last four years. Alongside the growth in group dynamics, there 
have been important changes in the working methods of the group, in the ethical framework used and the 
way it has been applied. Important changes have also been taking place in Europe and the world during 
this period. Most of this is described in more detailed in the recently published General Activity Report 
of the EGE. Here in this editorial I will just summarise some of the changes.

Significant  advances  have  taken  place  in  science  and  new  technologies  over  the  last  four  years.  For 
example, in stem cell research, the discovery of methods to reprogramme somatic cells has changed the 
scientific and ethical landscape, and a roadmap to clinical practice is being defined. Genomic and post-
genomic analyses, sequencing, microarray analyses and studies of epigenetics have provided a deeper 
understanding of the role and limits of biology. Hundreds of products based on nanotechnologies are now 
available on the market, and in the future this technology is likely to change the conditions of human life. 
Information technologies have altered the patterns of communication and the reading habits of millions. 
The advances in ICT and the neurosciences are stunning.

These developments offer prospects for improving the lives of large sections of the world’s population 
and treating so far untreatable conditions. New, lighter and stronger nanomaterials may help to reduce 
energy needs. Supplies of pure water and energy especially in developing countries may be enhanced 
by nanotechnologies. Current and future developments in information and communication technologies 
(ICT) can help to prevent terrorist attacks. New and cheap vaccines may be produced with the help of 
methods  explored,  for  example,  through  synthetic  biology.  Food  security  and  sustainable  production 
may be enhanced by novel technologies in agriculture. These developments, which have to be based on 
a proper balance between risks and benefits, also offer new opportunities to promote important human 
values, including human freedom, quality of life, and European competitiveness and protection of con-
sumer rights.

At the same time some of these technologies may be used for surveillance, manipulation, and inadvert-
ently to increase the gap between rich and less rich countries in Europe, or between developed and devel-
oping countries. When these technologies converge, new synergies may result which call for analysis and 
a broad public debate on both the goals and methods of introducing them. In some cases the problem of 
dual use needs close attention, ethical analysis and perhaps regulation. This presents the policymakers 
with the challenge of optimising some uses of the technologies and minimising others. 

During the mandate of the present EGE (2005-2009), important political events have also taken place. 
For example, the Lisbon Treaty has been accepted by the Member States, which gives a new and more 
important status to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of EU citizens (to which the EGE also contributed 
during its previous mandate). The Common Agricultural Policy has been revised, and the Commission 
has stepped up aid to and cooperation with developing countries. Many other important changes have 
taken place in Europe and beyond. The financial crisis has demonstrated how interdependent the econo-
mies of the world are, and that a global approach is necessary to address many of the problems facing us 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

5

 
 
today — such as those raised by GM food, intellectual property rights, standards of food safety, climate 
change, medicinal products and medical devices — for the market is becoming more and more global.

As part of its remit, the EGE has produced opinions on subjects as diverse as nanomedicine, condi-
tions for funding of human embryonic stem cell research in FP 7, animal cloning for food purposes, 
new technologies in agriculture and synthetic biology. The group has also published seven issues of the 
Newsletter ‘Ethically Speaking’, promoting the dialogue between the National Ethics Councils and other 
international ethics bodies. Moreover, the EGE has arranged four public round tables, all of which have 
been published — all this is described in more detail in the following pages of this report.

In simple terms, the tasks of the EGE are to apply the norms, values and principles enshrined in inter-
national and European declarations to the problems that may face European society in connection with 
pending EU legislation and current debates in the EU. The remit includes clarifying the problems, pro-
viding background information, describing the regulatory and scientific state of the art, outlining pos-
sible courses of action and giving advice to the Commission.

In the work of the EGE, too, important changes have taken place. They are described in more detail in 
our recently published General Activity Report. In my view, the most important changes are the follow-
ing ones.

First, the topics of the opinions have changed, from focusing almost exclusively on ethical issues raised 
by trends in medical research and biotechnology to much wider issues, including cloning of animals for 
food purposes and novel methods and techniques used in farming. These subjects cannot be discussed 
without touching on difficult ethical issues related to rights and obligations, such as global and social jus-
tice, our responsibility towards the health and well-being of future generations, and animal welfare — as 
well as politically sensitive and difficult issues relating to trade, the economy and intellectual property 
rights, including problems raised by the World Trade Organisation, the General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade and the Doha round of trade negotiations.

Second, the normative framework used in the reports has shifted from using more or less traditional 
principles in biomedical ethics to a framework rooted in theories of human rights. This shift has arisen 
not just from the group’s reflections on the methods and assumptions of its work, but also from the wid-
ening focus of the work of the group. In this wider focus, issues of global and social justice and human 
rights are inevitably prominent and need to be addressed.

Third,  it  has  become  very  clear  that  many  of  the  challenges  facing  European  society  today  require 
a  wider perspective than a strictly European one. In February 2009, the first International Dialogue on 
Bioethics took place at the initiative of the EGE and hosted by BEPA, involving representatives of more 
than 40 countries. The next international dialogue on bioethics took place in Madrid in March 2010, and 
this dialogue will continue on a yearly basis. In this spirit, this newsletter will welcome contributions 
also from non-European national ethics committees.

Fourth, and in line with the above, to increase transparency the working methods of the EGE have been 
widened to include web consultations — in addition to the traditional working methods of the group: 
internal meetings, hearings of experts, commissioning special studies on background material by exter-
nal experts and arranging round tables. To enhance the efficiency of the group’s work, we have also 
worked more closely than before with the Commission. This has facilitated a better coordination of the 
various activities of the European Commission.

The ethics landscape is not static. Problems are not solved once and for all. New challenges arise continu-
ously. This is due to new developments in science and technology, to value changes in the population, 
and to new developments in ethical theory. Some of the challenges we see facing European society and 
which will need to be addressed in the future are described separately in our General Activity Report.

6 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

Finally, I think I am speaking for all members of the EGE when I conclude by saying that it has been 
a privilege to take part in the international ethics dialogue during these four years and it will be exciting 
to follow and participate in the ethics debates during the coming years.

Göran Hermerén

President, EGE 2005-2010

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

7

Contributions from 
members of the EGE

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

9

Towards a ‘European Bioethics’?

Francesco D. Busnelli

The question of the existence of a European Bioethics can be addressed by looking both at the past and 
at the future. The present time is dominated by anxiety and is plagued by an unresolved conflict between 
the need for openness to the pluralism of cultures and the awareness of a common ‘spiritual and moral 
heritage’ to be maintained and developed: this is expressed by the Preamble of the ‘Charter of Funda-
mental Rights’. 

Looking back through Roman law and the history of Civil Codes, we feel there are traces of different 
bioethical views ante litteram on the European continent. Indeed, focusing on the legal status of the 
unborn, the auctoritas of Roman law was divided into two different directions, expressing — we would 
say today — clearly differentiated bioethical options.

The direction more widespread in Europe is that of ‘German Pandektistik’ corresponding to the apho-
rism: conceptus pro iam nato habetur quotiens de eius commodis agatur. Indeed, that is a fictio that is 
found in the pages of ‘System des heutigen Romischen Rechts’ of Savigny1, who after recognising the 
‘primitive identity’ between individuals and persons, claimed the possibility for the State of ‘denying to 
single individuals… the legal capacity’: a formal concept that, when transferred into the codes, justified 
hateful racial discriminations in the recent past and today is used precisely to exclude the unborn from 
the list of individuals covered by civil codes currently in force in Europe. 

To this scenario we can contrast the ‘Iberian tradition’ which is especially widespread in Latin Amer-
ica. The Iberian tradition has inspired a ‘naturalistic’ vision, so to speak, of the unborn child who is 
defined as a persona por nacer, pessoa por nascer. A very meaningful approach is that of the monu-
mental Argentine civil code of Dalmacio Vélez Sàrsfield (1871): it states the principle that ‘all entities 
that present distinguishing signs of humanity, without distinctions of qualities or accidents, are persons’ 
(Art.  51), and that ‘the person’s existence begins at conception in the mother’s womb’ (Art. 70).

The awareness of this diversity of directions was demonstrated by Augusto Texeira de Freitas who, in 
a  note appended to his famous Esboço of the Brazilian Civil Code2, explicitly criticises Savigny’s theory 
of  fiction  quoting  the  Roman  texts  that  ‘recognise  reality  in  approximating  the  unborn  with  the  son 
already born’. Now, the new Brazilian Civil Code does not entirely refute this direction, but provides that 
‘the civil personality of the person begins from the birth with life; but the law protects, since conception, 
the rights of the unborn’ (Art. 2).

Looking back to the past, then, through the prism of the legal status of the unborn child, one could 
talk of a pioneering Latin American bioethics, which was opposed to the ‘fictionist’ approach of the 
old Europe and which is now radically opposed to the modern North American bioethics, according to 
whose dictates — as is possible to find in ‘The Foundations of Bioethics’ by H. Tristram Engelhardt — 
‘foetuses ... are examples of non-persons’, since ‘it makes no sense to speak of foetuses’ autonomy or that 
of the infant and of the severely mentally ill who have never been rational’3.

1  F.C. von Savigny, System des heutigen Romischen Rechts, II, Berlin, 1840, p. 2.
2  A. Teixeira de Freitas, Codigo Civil Esboco (1860-65), Brasilia, 1983, I, p. 83 (‘nota al articulo 22 del Esboco con precisa 

critica a Savigny’).

3 H.T. Engelhardt Jr., The Foundations of Bioethics, New York, 1986, p. 126.

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

11

 
 
Looking ahead, we can perhaps draw some lines of development around which it would be possible to 
produce a draft of a ‘European Bioethics’, to some extent foreshadowed at the level of principles by the 
‘Charter of Fundamental Rights’, which solemnly declares that it is based on ‘the indivisible and univer-
sal values of human dignity, freedom, equality, solidarity’; values that — it should be emphasised — are 
clearly different from the ‘Four Principles’ of the North American bioethics (autonomy, beneficence, 
non-maleficence, justice). 

In a purely indicative way, we can highlight three lines of development that I think are particularly sig-
nificant and help to bring into focus the relationships between bioethics and fundamental rights; between 
bioethics and economics; and finally between bioethics, environment and health.

A)  In accordance with the European tradition, the ‘Charter of Fundamental Rights’ posits ‘human dig-
nity’ as a super-principle, as against the super-principle of ‘autonomy’ in North American bioethics. 

It is no longer just the dignity solemnly affirmed in 1949 by the German Grundgesetz, which conceived 
the principle as the ‘legal bond of state power towards fundamental rights’ (Art.1); a principle that — as 
the Bundesverfassungsgericht4 was able to explain — is fundamentally an expression of ‘the moral and 
spiritual negation regarding the previous system of National Socialism’.

It is a founding principle that, without forgetting the past, is projected into the future. It is the reaffirmed 
dignity of the younger European Constitutions: from the Portuguese Constitution of 1976 which defines 
Portugal as ‘a sovereign Republic based on human dignity’ to the democratic Constitution of Romania 
(1991) that declares ‘human dignity’ as a ‘supreme value’ that ‘shall be guaranteed’. It is human dignity 
that opposes any ‘exploitation of human beings’: this is the expression, again in Europe, of the Conven-
tion on Human Rights and Biomedicine (‘Oviedo Convention’) of 1997. It is an authoritative interpreter, 
in one of its ‘whereas’, of the Additional Protocol of Paris (1998), which reconnects to that very super-
principle the prohibition of human cloning. And there is a significant confirmation when the Oviedo Con-
vention categorically indicates that ‘the creation of human embryos for research purposes is prohibited’ 
(Art.18, par. 2).

Human dignity, qualified in this way, must be carefully distinguished from the ‘dignity’ of North Ameri-
can constitutional language, where the term has a specific subjective connotation, whose substance is 
defined by each individual and thus becomes a manifestation of the super-principle of autonomy avail-
able (only) to competent subjects. 

Rather, the European conception of dignity has an objective connotation and an unlimited validity which 
allows it to refer to any human being — conscious or unconscious, able or unable of understanding and 
expressing one’s will, already born or unborn. No one can arbitrarily divest of dignity: ‘il n’existe pas de 
droit subjectif à la dignité, auquel son titulaire pourrait renoncer’5.

In short, human dignity is not left to the unchallengeable exercise of individual autonomy; it is used, if 
anything, to limit this exercise. It is again the Oviedo Convention that provides significant confirmation. 
Indeed, the emphasis rightly placed on ‘free and informed consent’ as a general condition for ‘an inter-
vention in the health field’ (Art. 5) does not go so far as to give anyone the authority to bind doctors now 
or in the future with an advance directive. Freedom does not transform itself into autonomy but, while 
still legally relevant, it involves a simple ‘expression of will’ (‘wish’, ‘souhait’), that physicians should 
‘consider’ (Art. 9).

4 BVerwG, 15 December 1981, NJW, 1982, p. 664.
5  J. Maurer, Le principe de respect de la dignité humaine et la Convention européenne des droits de l’homme, Paris, 1999, 

p. 55.

12 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

B)  The  relationship  between  bioethics  and  economics  is  characterised  by  the  rule  of  removal  of  the 
human body from the market: a rule now recognised at European level by the Oviedo Convention 
which stipulates in Art. 21 that ‘the human body and its parts shall not, as such, give rise to financial 
gain’.

This rule has its remote — and aged — precedent in a regulation inserted at the last moment in the Ital-
ian Civil Code of 1942, in the wake of an emotional legal procedure about the paid transfer of a testicle 
from a young Neapolitan student to a rich Brazilian man. Article 5, which is still in force, codified the 
total ban on ‘acts of disposition of one’s own body that cause a permanent diminution of physical integ-
rity’: a prohibition that required legislative action to allow transplants of organs and tissues, with the 
requisite guarantees of non-payment.

The ‘European way’ to transplants between living persons is thus very far from the North American ten-
dency that — to quote Henry Hansmann — ‘it is advantageous to assign as many transactions as possible 
to the category of market transactions since this economises on morality’6. It is the pattern of solidarity, 
and solidarity is not reducible simply to beneficence. The initiative of the person who ‘donates’ an organ 
is usually a manifestation of generous solidarity: Art. 19 of the Oviedo Convention clearly indicates this 
scenario when it connects the requirement of the donor’s consent with the ‘therapeutic benefit of the 
recipient’, implicitly positing a relationship of familiar or affective solidarity that European laws some-
times make explicit and circumscribe. 

C)  The issue of the relationship between bioethics, environment, and health saw the birth of a new princi-
ple in Europe. It is the ‘precautionary principle’ — specifically formulated now by the Commission of 
European Community — which aims to balance ‘the freedom and rights of individuals, industry and 
organisations with the need to reduce the risk of adverse effects to the environment, human, animal or 
plant health’. If there are risks of serious and irreversible damage — it was stated in the Declaration 
of Rio of 1992 — the ‘lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-
effective measures to prevent environmental degradation’. In short, it requires us to ‘manage scientific 
uncertainty’; and the criterion should be ‘privilégier l’hypothèse du pire, lorsqu’on peut redouter un 
dommage irréversible même à long term’: this is the conclusion reached by Geneviève Viney and 
Philippe Kourilsky in 2000 in their French Rapport au Premier Ministre7. 

It is therefore not surprising that this principle — ‘a wolf in sheep’s clothing’8 — meets with strong 
aversion in North American culture and business circles, dominated by the pragmatic principle of ‘risk 
assessment’, which tries to limit risks by identifying a ‘threshold of acceptable risk’.

What prospects are there for consolidating these lines of development? 

In a Workshop held in Rome on 23 May 2003 on the initiative of the National Bioethics Committees of 
France, Italy, Portugal and Spain, the then President of the Comité Consultatif National d’Ethique, Didier 
Sicard, concluded his report by declaring himself confident of a European ethic strongly protective of the 
person and at the same time of social solidarity ‘gît un avenir fort’, but also highlighting the danger of 
widespread attention ‘aux sirènes anglosaxonnes’.

In fact, in Europe we face the paradox that the super-principle of human dignity, invoked in Germany 
in the aftermath of the tragic end of the Second World War with the obvious aim of ‘purifying’ a soci-
ety shaken by the savagery of Nazism, is now being held up as a liturgical expression of ecclesiastical 

6  H. Hansman, Markets for Human Organs, in C.M. Mazzoni (ed.), A Legal Framework for Bioethics, The Hague — Lon-

don — Boston, 1998, p. 155.

7 P. Kourilsky & G. Viney, Le principe de précaution. Rapport au Premer ministre, Paris, 2000, p. 211.
8 H. Miller & G. Conko, Precaution: a wolf in sheep’s clothing, in Nature biotechnology, 19 (2001).

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

13

censorship of Catholicism: ‘un luxe doctrinal justifié par un but trompeur’9. These are worrying signs 
of a growing interest in a bioethics that, having dismissed the super-principle of human dignity as ‘pro-
foundly ambiguous’, looks favourably on ‘the enlargement of the area of intervention for an individual 
autonomy which should be morally responsible’. The aim seems to be, wherever possible, to rely on indi-
vidual decisions for ‘the resolution of bioethical issues’10. 

Yet what is happening in the United States is equally paradoxical. The President’s Council on Bioethics 
recently published (2008) a book on ‘Human Dignity and Bioethics’; and in particular the contribution of 
Leon Kass claims ‘a robust role for the idea of human dignity’, underlining that ‘our equal dignity resides 
not in our rights but in the more fundamental common vulnerability’11. Some years ago the editor of the 
(first and) second edition (1995) of the Encyclopaedia of Bioethics, Warren Thomas Reich, admitted that 
the American bioethical movement was going through a ‘deep crisis’ which had its origins in the very 
principles on which bioethics was based: the American Bioethics, until now ‘imprisoned in a conceptual 
framework dominated by the principle of autonomy’ must tackle the ‘challenge of vulnerability, which 
may ask us to recover from Christian tradition — as well as from other religions — the idea related to the 
need to pay more attention to the most vulnerable people rather than protecting the rights of those who 
already have power’12.

The challenge of vulnerability is destined to become decisive for the future of bioethics in the world. 
Here we may find the ‘trump card’ of European bioethics. European bioethics ‘as it is anchored in socie-
ties traditionally based on solidarity’ — this is the ‘bet’ expressed by the President of the French CCNE 
at the workshop in Rome we mentioned — can never ‘be primarily based on elimination and profit’. 
However, what is frightening is that a different bioethics that took the road of unscrupulous libertarian 
individualism might end favouring — these are still the words of Didier Sicard — ‘the use of man as 
a means dès qu’il est vulnérable’.

9 J.P. Baud, L’affaire de la main volée. Une histoire juridique du corps, Paris, 1993, p. 9.
10 E. Lecaldano, Bioetica. Le scelte morali, Bari — Roma, 2004, p. 102.
11 L.R. Kass, Defending Human Dignity , in Human Dignity and Bioethics, New York, 2008, p. 251 s.
12 W.T. Reich, Dai principi alle persone: evoluzione (necessaria) della bioetica, in Janus, 2002, p. 9 s.

14 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

World bioethics dialogue: 
Is a common language attainable?

Krzysztof Marczewski

This year we are celebrating the 65th anniversary of the end of World War II. This tragic event, or rather 
sequence or combination of events, still has great importance for many areas of our lives, including eth-
ics. Well-known examples are the Declaration of Helsinki, rooted in the Nuremberg trials, the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, or even the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. 

It  should  also  be  pointed  out  that  the  founding  of  the  European  Coal  and  Steel  Community,  and 
many other European organisations, including the European Union itself, became possible when peo-
ples  and  governments  rejected  not  only  the  methods  of  World  War  II  but  also  the  Nazi  ideology 
behind them, which bore terrible fruits that were recognised very late, for many millions too late. For 
a Frenchman (for example, Robert Schuman born in Luxembourg) to honestly care whether a German 
(e.g. Konrad Adenauer) or Italian (e.g. Alcide de Gasperi) would miss either carbon or steel, he had 
to see people in them. Unfortunately, during the Second World War, or immediately afterwards, this 
was not at all obvious. The Holocaust was possible because the Nazis rejected the human dignity or 
even humanity of Jews. We should be aware that there were similar situations and relations between 
neighbours of different nations in different places in Europe during World War II, after the war and ... 
much, much later. 

The great merit of the Founding Fathers of the European Union consisted in the fact that they restored, 
more in practice than in theory, respect for other human beings, making human dignity the cornerstone 
of a uniting Europe. It should be noted, however, that this cornerstone, like a typical part of a foundation, 
has been so thoroughly covered by further achievements that, after 40 years, some manage to discover it 
anew, as their own work. And this happened when the rejection of another nightmarish ideology, Com-
munism, also known as ‘real socialism’, led to another storey being built on the edifice of European 
unity. However, Europe is not devoid of memory. Not only does Robert Schuman have his square in the 
centre of the European quarter in Brussels, but Alcide de Gasperi is also undergoing his beatification 
process in the Catholic Church. Upon this occasion, we can return to the question of how we understand 
each other across Europe. In Polish we use the same words for church procedure leading to recognition 
as Sanctus (Saint) and for the legal procedure leading to recognising someone as a criminal (guilty). 
Linguistically, what happened with Galileo and what is happening with Schuman is described with the 
same words, but hopefully with different results. I suppose, first, that the Galileo trial is much more 
widely known than Schuman’s possible sainthood, and second, that the majority of people using only one 
language (including or even especially English-speaking people) are unaware of or at least underestimate 
the problems connected with translation. 

My intuition tells me, however, that at this point I should finish my amateur digressions on theology, and 
return to the problem of the possibility of mutual understanding in the discussion of ethics. The language 
of ethics seems to be a bit more difficult than the language of business, however.

Accordingly, we come to words and their meanings. One year ago, during the Day of Dialogue and 
Ethics in Brussels, I called for simplification of the language of this dialogue. Such simplification on 
the one hand increases the number of people who can participate but on the other hand creates a danger 
of lacking a sufficiently accurate and comprehensive description of the problems that are the subject of 
that dialogue. At this point, I wish to draw attention to an important linguistic phenomenon that can 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

15

 
 
significantly impede finding common solutions to bioethical problems. This phenomenon is different 
interpretation of the same or similar words and terms. During the Madrid meeting, Professor Ryuichi 
from Japan in his brilliant lecture drew our attention to the significant difficulty in directly relating 
the European discussion of the basic ethical concept of human dignity to the conceptions held by the 
Japanese or Koreans. I want to stress very clearly that I cannot imagine that people in Japan and Korea 
do not show mutual respect. However, they probably use a slightly different conceptual apparatus to 
express it.

In  2004,  the  European  Union  took  the  courageous  and  important  step  to  include  the  geographically 
close,  but  ‘linguistically  distant’  Slavic  countries,  Baltic  States  and  Hungary.  Sparing  the  reader  my 
amateur linguistic arguments, I would emphasise that, regardless of the genetic determinate differences 
and affinities between languages, it is very important to build communication among people of different 
languages (contemporary form presumes that all must think in English). The link between neurolinguis-
tic and genetic is just now ‘under construction’, and we must wait a little to see how deeply and closely 
connected our languages are with some predisposition in other areas of our activity. 

Here, it must be borne in mind that except for Malta and Cyprus, all the new Member States had for 
nearly 50 years been quite successfully ‘fenced in’ by the Iron Curtain. Experience of working in the 
EGE suggests that for many Europeans the new Member States still appear not only to be more distant 
than the neighbouring countries of the so-called ‘Old Union’, but also further away than America and 
Japan.

In any attempt to reduce this gap in thinking and feeling, a mutual understanding of history, or at least 
the crucial moments, is, I believe, very important. At such ‘points of concentrated time,’ certain words 
and phrases are committed to the memory of nations for many generations. Or maybe rather those parts 
of society that cherish the memory. I think that there is considerable asymmetry in this memory, how-
ever. I would cite the example of World War II. 

Less important but perhaps more well-known is that the anniversary of the end of the war in Eastern 
and Western Europe is celebrated on May 9 and May 8, respectively. However, it is noteworthy that 
this difference, directly resulting from the difference between Central European Time and Moscow 
time, for almost 50 years determined the border of the ‘Free World’. This world was well-known to 
my grandparents, but very distant throughout my childhood and youth. But this story is perhaps easy 
to understand if we just devote some time to analysing the time zones and a little more to the Yalta 
Agreements.

It is harder, but in my opinion far more important, to understand the language used for the expression of 
important ideas. And this is in my opinion a classic example of an obstacle to mutual understanding and 
agreement.

The promise of ‘blood, toil, tears and sweat’, given to British citizens by Winston Churchill, became 
well-known in many other countries, including Poland. And it is still used, in whole or in part, in 
many areas of life, such as sports or the economy. A few months earlier, the Polish Foreign Minister, 
Josef Beck, had made a speech in parliament in which he rejected Hitler’s demands. I do not expect 
that a key phrase from this speech, well-known in Polish tradition, is also known in Europe or in the 
world. But the discussions and cordial conversations I was to have among people from different coun-
tries interested in ethics, especially in the EGE, made me realise that the translation of the substance 
of this sentence faces important challenges arising not only from my poor English. The simple phrase 
‘There is only one thing in people’s lives, nations and states which is priceless. That thing is honour’, 
which ended this speech, refers to the honour of states and peoples, while in many traditions both 
honour and dignity relate primarily, if not exclusively, to individuals and families. The terms ‘honour 
of the European Union’ and ‘the dignity of the Member States’ may be possible to write, but are dif-
ficult to find even in the internet. I do not want to say that the Poles refused to submit to Hitler for 

16 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

reasons difficult to explain to other nations. Even though the call ‘we do not want to die for Gdansk’ 
was apparently quite popular in some European countries in 1939 and 1940. More importantly, it 
illustrates the need to acquire at least an elementary knowledge of the history and culture of peoples 
and countries with which we want to engage in dialogue. If we really want a dialogue… 

Further Information
Krzysztof Marczewski  
EGE member 2005-2010

Address
Institute of Bioethics, Anthropology and General Theory of Medicine WSZiA 
22-400 Zamość ul. Akademicka 4 
Poland  
krzysztofmarczewski@onet.pl

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

17

THEMATIC SECTION: 
Biobanks – ethical and 
legal frameworks

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

19

Australian Health Ethics Committee (AHEC)

Australia

Australian  Health  Ethics  Committee  has  recently  released  an  information  paper  that  describes  the 
biobank situation in Australia. The document is accessible in full at
http://www.nhmrc.gov.au/_files_nhmrc/file/your_health/egenetics/practioners/biobanks_information_
paper.pdf

In the course of 2010, Australian Health Ethics Committee will also be releasing an issues paper on com-
mercialisation of human tissue products.

Address
AHEC Secretariat 
NHMRC 
GPO Box 1421 
Canberra ACT 2601 
Email: ethics@nhmrc.gov.au 
Telephone: + 61 2 6217 9070

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

21

 
Austrian Bioethics Commission

Austria

Austrian Bioethics Commission on biobanks for medical research

In May 2007, the Austrian Bioethics Commission issued a comprehensive opinion on biobanks for medi-
cal research1, which explores the widely recognised problems and ethical issues relating to biobanks and 
medical research. These issues include questions of informed consent, data protection, individual claims 
to ownership and possession versus the common good, and cross-border legal questions concerning the 
international networking of biobanks. After examining the legal aspects, historical approaches, rules of 
professional conduct, international and EU law, constitutional and legal provisions, and cultural aspects, 
the Commission arrives at an in-depth ethical reflection on biobanks for research. It focuses on setting 
the agenda (individual interests versus the interests of society), individual safeguards (the donor’s right 
to self-determination), and institutional safeguards.

Legal framework governing biobanks for medical research

Under the current Austrian legal framework, there is no explicit regulation governing biobanks for medi-
cal research. However, it is possible to derive general principles from existing legal provisions regarding 
the donor’s right to self-determination, informed consent, privacy, and data protection for the handling 
of biological material and data.

The donor’s bodily autonomy is enshrined in many provisions of civil law2, penal law3 and administra-
tive law4. In addition, there are special regulations for research involving individuals who are incapable 
of giving consent, for example in the Austrian Medicines Act (Arzneimittelgesetz) and in the Medical 
Devices Act (Medizinproduktegesetz). In principle, however, any action affecting an individual’s bodily 
integrity requires that individual’s informed consent.

The  right  to  privacy  is  laid  down  in  data  protection  law.  The  Data  Protection  Directive  (Directive 
95/46/EC) and the Austrian Data Protection Act 2000 define the key principles — such as the principle 
of having a specified purpose or the principle of consent (individuals must consent to the processing of 
data). As a general principle, health-related information is considered sensitive data5 and as such enjoys 
a higher level of protection. The Data Protection Act ceases to apply only when the personal identity of 
the donor can no longer be established. Under certain circumstances the Data Protection Act limits the 
protection of information in the interest of research6.

The collection and archiving of samples and data in a biobank for medical research must be registered 
and approved by the Austrian Data Protection Commission. A prerequisite for the collection of samples 
and data is the informed consent of the person concerned. At present the donor’s consent needs to be 
obtained for each individual scientific project.

1  Biobanks for Medical Research, the Opinion of the Austrian Bioethics Commission of 9 May 2007 is available at:

http://www.bundeskanzleramt.at/DocView.axd?CobId=25510.

2  § 16 Austrian Civil Code; § 21 Austrian Civil Code; § 285 Austrian Civil Code; Regulations Concerning the Capacity to Act 

and Legal Guardianship, see in particular § 146c Austrian Civil Code or § 282 Austrian Civil Code.

3 § 90 Penal Code; § 110 Penal Code.
4 § 8(3) Federal Hospitals Act — KAKuG.
5 § 4(2) Data Protection Act.
6  See for example, § 9(10) Data Protection Act; § 24(3)(3) Data Protection Act; but above all § 46 Data Protection Act.

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

23

 
Further Information
Dr Doris Wolfslehner
Head of Secretariat
Austrian Bioethics Commission

Address
Austrian Federal Chancellery
Ballhausplatz 2
1014 Vienna
Austria
Tel: +43-1-53115/2987
Fax: +43-1-53109/2987
E-mail: doris.wolfslehner@bka.gv.at
Website: www.bka.gv.at/bioethics

24 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics

Belgium

Biobanks

A. Opinions

For Opinion No 42 of 16 April 2007 concerning umbilical cord blood banks, we refer to Ethically Speak-
ing, Issue 9, p. 15. Here you will find a summary of Opinion No 45 of 19 January 2009 on human body 
parts banks designed for research.

In this opinion, biobank means a collection of human body parts intended for research. These collec-
tions have existed for a long time, particularly in the anatomy and pathological anatomy departments 
of university hospitals. Mainly set up for teaching, these collections have contributed significantly to 
improving knowledge of the causes of diseases and more specifically the identification and classification 
of cancers.

The progress made in molecular biology, and in genetics and proteomics in particular, has increased 
interest in these collections. Current technologies in fact enable, DNA, RNA and proteins to be studied 
in preserved, fixed or frozen tissues, albeit with certain limitations. Combined with clinical data, samples 
from these collections are thus invaluable material for studying the mechanisms responsible for diseases 
and therefore for developing new treatment methods. For this purpose, large collections are required. 
Some now cover a country’s entire population. One of the oldest and best known is the Icelandic Health 
Sector Database, which collects clinical data and samples from a large percentage of the Icelandic popu-
lation. The management of this collection has been entrusted to a private firm ‘deCode Genetics’ which 
has itself entered into an agreement with the pharmaceutical company Roche.

The concern raised by this example has led different countries to legislate on matters concerning the 
establishment and management of biobanks. In Belgium, a law was adopted on 19 December 2008 on the 
collection of tissue and other human body parts collected both for treatment and for research purposes.

The biobanks, their establishment and the use of the collected samples raise a series of ethical questions. 

This opinion only deals with biobanks established for academic or commercial research purposes. It is 
important to distinguish situations where samples are collected specifically for research from situations 
where researchers wish to use residual material initially taken as samples for diagnostic or treatment 
purposes. 

In general, the Committee considers that the formal consent of the donor must be obtained either before 
the sample is taken, in the case of samples collected for research, or before storage in a biobank if this is 
material remaining from samples. 

When consent is given, patients must be able to determine the use to be made of their samples. These can 
be used for research into the disease from which the patient suffers or for medical research in general. 
Patients must also have the possibility to exclude certain types of research, for example research into 
potential genetic bases of behaviours. If it is impossible to obtain consent or if this requires extraordinary 
measures, a Medical Ethics Committee must rule on the interest of using the sample.

The Medical Ethics Committee must also give an opinion on the operation of the biobank, its internal 
regulations and, above all, on the scientific interest of protocols for which samples are requested. For 
example, it is responsible for verifying that the samples are used for the purpose for which they have 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

25

 
been taken. The Committee must also ensure the protection of privacy and the confidentiality of the data 
used. The size of the biobanks, the sensitive nature of the personal data associated with the samples and 
the very nature of these samples are all elements that justify the maximum protection possible.

In its opinion on human body parts banks designed for research, the Advisory Committee discusses 
the controversial question of the ownership of the samples. Do they belong to the donor, to the institu-
tion storing them (which often finances the biobank) or even to the researcher who has collected them? 
A definitive response is difficult to give, but it appears that the manager of the biobank has a major role 
to play in guaranteeing optimum use of the samples.

B.  Belgian law

The Belgian law of 19 December 2008 on the collection and use of tissue and other human body parts 
collected both for treatment and for research purposes (see Moniteur Belge (Belgian official journal) of 
30 December 2008, p. 45270) has brought Belgian legislation into line with European directives. 

Further Information

Bosson Monique 
Information Officer

Address
Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics
4 rue de l’Autonomie
1070 Brussels
Belgium
Tel.: +32(0)2.525.09.07
Fax: +32(0)2.525.09.12
E-mail: Monique.bosson@health.fgov.be
Website: www.health.fgov.be/bioeth

26 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

National Commission of Ethics in Research 
(CONEP)

Brazil

CONEP developed specific guidelines on biobanks in the Resolution 347.

NATIONAL HEALTH COUNCIL

RESOLUTION NO 347, 13 JANUARY 2005

The Plenary of the National Health Council at its 150th Ordinary Meeting, held on 11, 12 and 13 Janu-
ary 2005, under the competences and powers conferred on it by Law No 8.080 of 19 September 1990 and 
Law No 8.142, of 28 December 1990, and in view of the need to regulate the storage and use of human 
biological material as part of research projects,

HAS DECIDED:

To approve the following guidelines for the ethical analysis of research projects that involve the storage of 
materials or the use of materials stored in previous research:

1.   For research projects envisaging the storage of human biological materials for future research, in 
addition to the items specified in Resolution CNS No 196/96, the following shall be submitted:

1.1.   A statement of reasons explaining the need for and advantage to be gained by future uses of 

the material; 

1.2.   The  consent  of  the  research  subjects  who  donated  the  biological  material,  authorising  its 

storage; 

1.3.   A statement that all new research to be carried out using the material will be submitted for the 
approval of the institution’s Research Ethics Committee and, where appropriate, to CONEP, 
the Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa (National Board of Ethics in Research);

1.4.    Rules or regulations drawn up by the deposit institution for the storage of human biological 

material. 

2.   The biological material shall be stored under the responsibility of the deposit institution, whose 
rules or regulations shall be approved by the institution’s Research Ethics Committee and include: 

2.1.   The names of those responsible for the storage of the material and authorisation for its use;

2.2.  Mechanisms that guarantee secrecy and respect for confidentiality (codification); 

2.3.   Mechanisms that allow for contact with donors in order to provide them with information 
in their interest (e.g. results of exams for clinical follow-up or genetic counselling) or for the 
purpose of obtaining specific consent for use in a new research project; 

3.   Storage may be authorised for a period of 5 years where the project is approved by the Research 
Ethics Committee and, where necessary, by CONEP, and may be renewed at the request of the 
deposit institution, accompanied by a statement of reasons and a report of the research activities 
carried out with the material. 

4.   In the case of research involving more than one institution, there shall be agreement between the 

participating institutions covering the handling and use of the material stored.

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

27

 
5.   Where the biological material bank is stored or compiled outside Brazil, the legislation governing 
the dispatch of material abroad shall apply, and the regulations shall be submitted for analysis by 
the Research Ethics Committee regarding compliance with the requirements of item II.

5.1.   The Brazilian researcher and institution shall be regarded as owners of the bank, with the 
right to access it for future research. In this way the material stored may not be considered 
the exclusive property of a deposit country or institution. 

6.  On the use of stored samples:

6.1.   Stored samples may be used in new research projects approved by the Research Ethics Com-

mittee and, where appropriate, by CONEP;

6.2.  Research proposals involving the use of stored material shall include:

a)  A statement of reasons for the use of the material;

b)   A description of the collection and storage system, with the date of commencement or the 

period;

c)   A copy of the Free and Clarified Consent Term (Termo de Consentimento Livre e Esclare-
cido – TCLE) obtained during the research project in which the material was gathered, 
including authorisation for storage and possible future use, if storage was on the basis of 
research approved after Resolution CNS No 196/96; and

d)   A specific Free and Clarified Consent Term for new research: where it is impossible to 
obtain specific consent for further research (death of the donor, previous unsuccessful 
attempts to make contact, etc.), statements of reasons shall be submitted as part of the 
procedure for evaluation by the Research Ethics Committee, which shall decide whether 
or not to waive the individual consent requirement.

6.3.   In the case of biological material for which there are ANVISA (National Health Surveillance 

Agency) rules regarding storage, those rules shall also be complied with.

HUMBERTO COSTA 
Chair of the National Health Council

Counterpart to Resolution CNS No 347 of 13 January 2005 under the Delegation of Competence 
(Delegação de Competência) of 12 November 1991.

HUMBERTO COSTA 
Minister of State for Health

Further Information
Dr Christian de Paul de Barchifontaine
Recteur
Commission nationale d´éthique en recherche (Brésil)

Address
Rua Raul Pompéia, 144 - 7º Andar - Pompéia - São Paulo - SP
ZIP CODE: 05025-010 - BRAZIL
Tél. +55 11 3465.2603
Fax: + 55 11 3465.2612
Courriel: cpb@saocamilo-sp.br 
Site web: www.saocamilo-sp.br

28 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

 
 
 
 
German Ethics Council

Germany

Biobanks 

1)  Information on activities concerning biobanks

The German Ethics Council deals with biobanks in its second Opinion ‘Human Biobanks for Research’, 
which was published on 15 June 2010. 

Human biobanks are collections of samples of human body substances (e.g. tissue, blood, DNA), which 
are electronically linked to personal data and in particular to health information on the donors. They play 
a central role in research on the causes and mechanisms of a large number of illnesses and their treatment 
and are a vital resource for biomedical research. The rapid development in this research area prompted 
the German Ethics Council to address the topic again, after both the former National Ethics Council 
and the Study Commission ‘Ethics and Law of Modern Medicine’ of the German Bundestag [the Lower 
House of the German Parliament], issued earlier Opinions on biobanks.

Biobanks raise ethical and legal questions which extend from the protection of individual rights to the 
global  control  of  research  infrastructures.  The  Gendiagnostikgesetz  [Gene  Diagnostics  Act],  which 
entered into force in February 2010, does not deal with these questions. At present, therefore, research 
biobanks are governed only by general legal provisions. In view of the growing challenges, the German 
Ethics Council regards it as necessary to create specific provisions for human biobanks.

Previous methods to protect the interests of donors were essentially based on the donors’ informed con-
sent.  However,  biobanks  have  special  structural  features  that  mean  an  individual’s  consent  can  give 
only limited protection, since it is given against the background of limited information. The concept of 
consent should therefore be supplemented by institutional and procedural rules which both set objective 
limits and also permit flexibility for research with biobanks.

In its Opinion, the German Ethics Council proposes a five-pillar model for biobank regulation. It includes 
recommendations on introducing biobank secrecy, on defining permissible use, on involving ethics com-
missions, on quality assurance and on transparency. It is the aim of the recommendations to provide 
a suitable legal framework for the interests and rights of personality of the donors, to achieve more legal 
certainty for biobank research and at the same time to facilitate research.

The first and most important pillar of this model is the introduction of biobank secrecy. This should 
restrict the processing and transmission of samples and related data for the duration of their existence 
to the purposes of scientific research and guarantee that they are inaccessible to all non-research third 
parties. The core of biobank secrecy should be provisions identical to those applying to doctors: a duty 
of professional discretion; a right to refuse to give evidence for the operators, personnel and users of 
biobanks; and a prohibition of access to samples and data for all persons and institutions outside science, 
including the state. The second pillar of the model is about defining permissible use of biobank materi-
als and data. As now, the consent of the donors should continue to be essential for the use of samples 
and data in biobanks. However, donors should also be able to make their samples and data available for 
scientific research for an indefinite period, without restriction to a specific research project or a specific 
field of research. 

As the third pillar of the model, the Ethics Council recommends involving ethics commissions, firstly 
to provide for cases where personal samples and data are to be used or donors are to be recontacted, and 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

29

 
secondly in order to periodically evaluate the activities of biobanks which are not restricted in subject 
and duration.

The fourth pillar relates to quality assurance. Donors’ rights should be protected by appropriate organisa-
tional structures and procedures, and there should be systematic evaluation of all biobanks not narrowly 
restricted in subject and duration. 

As its fifth pillar, the Ethics Council calls for a number of measures to guarantee the transparency of the 
goals and procedures of a biobank. These include complete documentation and regular publication of the 
biobank’s activities, and setting up a publicly accessible biobank register.

The  Ethics  Council  also  recommends  that  internationally  binding  standards  of  protection  should  be 
introduced. In its Opinion, the Council presents a number of proposals for safeguarding biobank secrecy 
when samples and data are exchanged with cooperation partners abroad.

In a supplementary position statement, four members of the Council recommend that the proposed pro-
visions should not apply to thematically and temporally restricted collections, where it is not planned to 
transmit samples and data for other use, as in the case of academic projects for university dissertations 
and  theses.  They  fear  that  otherwise  there  could  be  a  legislative  and  administrative  burden  for  such 
projects. So although these Council members agree with increased regulation of large-scale biobanks, 
they believe that for thematically and temporally restricted collections the existing provisions to protect 
data and donors are sufficient. 

The Opinion may be downloaded at http://www.ethikrat.org.

2)  Information on the ethical and legal framework for biobanks in Germany

Biobanks for research in Germany are governed by general rules for data protection, civil law and panel 
law and, where physicians are involved, by general medical regulations. There is currently no specific 
ethical or legal framework for biobanks. In addition to the ethical recommendations in the Opinions of 
the former National Ethics Council and the Study Commission ‘Ethics and Law of Modern Medicine’, 
there have been Opinions of the Central Ethics Commission of the German Medical Association ZEKO 
(2003) and the Independent Centre for Privacy Protection Schleswig-Holstein (2009) dealing with ethical 
aspects of biobanks.

Further Information
Dr Joachim Vetter 
Head of Office 

Address
German Ethics Council  
Jaegerstrasse 22/23 – 10117 Berlin 
Tel.: +49/30/20370-242 
Fax: +49/30/20370-252 
Email: vetter@ethikrat.org  
Website: www.ethikrat.org 

Ulrike Florian
Press and public relations officer

German Ethics Council
Jaegerstrasse 22/23 – 10117 Berlin
Tel.: +49/30/20370-246
Fax: +49/30/20370-252
Email: florian@ethikrat.org
Website: www.ethikrat.org

30 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

Hellenic National Bioethics Commission

Greece

A) Biobanks for biomedical research 

The first large-scale biobank in Greece is currently being set up at the BioMedical Research Founda-
tion of the Academy of Athens by a partnership between the Foundation and the General Secretariat for 
Research and Technology. It will be financed by national and EU funding. It is expected to be in opera-
tion by 2012. At present, although not biobanks in the strict sense, there are at least 38 collections of 
biological material in Greece, held mainly at universities or hospitals. The size of these collections ranges 
from less than 100 to 200 000 samples, and the type of material kept in each collection varies: various 
types of tissue, bodily fluids, DNA or RNA. 

Greece  does  not  have  specific  legislation  governing  biobanks,  but  the  following  existing  legislation 
applies: 

•  Articles of the Constitution for the protection of privacy (Art. 9), the protection of health and 
genetic identity (Art. 5), and the protection of public health as an obligation of the state (Art. 21). 

•  The Data Protection Act (2472/1997), which covers biobanks, since data relating to a person’s 

health are considered sensitive (Art. 2). 

•  The Code of Medical Ethics (Act 3418/2005), when physicians are involved in the collection of 
material. In particular, specific articles of the act refer to the physician’s obligation to maintain 
confidentiality and to the right of the patient to free and informed consent. 

•  The Medically Assisted Reproduction Act (3305/2005), in the case of banking of reproductive cells 

and tissue. Storing this type of material is allowed for reproductive purposes only. 

•  Health System Reform Act (2071/1992), in particular the articles relating to the rights of hospital 

in-patients. 

One of the central ethical and legal issues in biobanking is ascertaining whether appropriate consent 
has been obtained from the donors of the biological material. Current Greek legislation for the protec-
tion of sensitive personal data requires that consent should be freely and explicitly given and that donors 
should receive ‘information as to the purpose of processing, (…) the recipient or categories of recipients 
of personal data (…)’. Under the law, such consent may be revoked at any time though without retroac-
tive effect. Such requirements for consent can be very restrictive for a biobank, as, given the nature of 
biobanking, the samples will be used for a long time and it is not possible to predict either the range of 
research projects they will be used for or the researchers that will be involved. Nevertheless, a solution 
may be found in a provision of the law stating that: ‘data can be lawfully processed for research and sci-
entific purposes on the condition that it is anonymised’. 

In 2006, the Hellenic National Bioethics Commission (HNBC) issued an Opinion on Human Biobanks1. 
In its opinion, the Commission stresses the importance of biobanks for scientific advancement and the 
promotion of public health, and supports the promotion of biobanking. It takes the view that several 
issues specific to biobanking and not covered by the Data Protection Act need to be addressed. It there-
fore suggests that special authorisation is needed for the creation of biobanks, preferably from a central 
public authority, in addition to authorisation from the data protection authority. 

1  On Banks of Biological Material of Human Origin (biobanks) in Biomedical Research: http://www.bioethics.gr/document.

php?category_id=55&document_id=367.

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

31

 
B) Forensic biobanks 

Greek legislation currently does not allow the creation of forensic genetic fingerprint databases or any 
other type of forensic biobanks. Under the Greek Penal code (Art. 200A: Analysis of DNA) biological 
material can be collected for DNA analysis (from those suspected of criminal offences involving vio-
lence or sexual assault or of taking part in organised crime), but it must be destroyed after analysis. In 
addition, DNA fingerprints must be destroyed at the end of the judicial process, whatever the outcome. 

Greece has taken on the obligation, by signing relevant EU treaties, to create forensic DNA databases, 
provided that civil rights are adequately protected. The Data Protection Authority will be involved in any 
future changes to current legislation to allow the creation of such forensic DNA databases. 

The HNBC has issued an opinion on genetic fingerprints2. It is in favour of DNA forensic databases 
provided it includes only fingerprints of those convicted for crimes for which genetic fingerprinting was 
deemed necessary, and fingerprints of others who have not been convicted of crimes but have freely 
consented. 

Ariadne L. Hager-Theodorides, 
Senior Scientist at the HNBC

References

National Bioethics Commission, On the Use of Genetic Fingerprints in Criminal Procedure, Opinion 
and Report, 2001 

National Bioethics Commission, On Banks of Biological Material of Human Origin (biobanks) in Bio-
medical Research, Opinion and Report, 2006 

Sandor J, Drakopoulou A, Bard P, The Legal Regulations of Biobanks, National Report: Greece, CELAB 
Paper Series, 2009, ISBN 978-963-87714-9-0.

2  On the Use of Genetic Fingerprints in Criminal Procedure:

http://www.bioethics.gr/document.php?category_id=55&document_id=101.

Further Information
Ms Marianna Dracopoulou
Head of Secretariat

Address
47, Evelpidon str.
11362- Athens- Greece
Tel.: +30-210-88.47.700, Fax: +30-210-88.47.701
E-mail: Secretariat@bioethics.gr
Website: www.bioethics.gr

32 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

National Committee for Bioethics

Italy

Biobanks: bioethical and biolegal aspects

1.  Opinions issued by the Italian Committee for Bioethics on biobanks

At  its  plenary  session  on  9  June  2006,  the  Italian  Committee  for  Bioethics  approved  an  Opinion  on 
Biobanks and research on human biological material. The opinion looks at the ethical and legal prob-
lems associated with the use of human biological material in research and examines two documents: the 
draft recommendation of the Steering Committee on Bioethics of the Council of Europe (2006) and the 
Opinion of the Italian Committee for Biosafety and Biotechnologies on Guidelines for the creation and 
certification of biobanks (2006).

The two documents outline the principles to be followed by researchers in the use of biological material, 
balancing the interests of individual donors of biological material, the interests of society as a whole, 
and those of the researchers themselves. The most important ethical issues are: the duty to evaluate risks 
and benefits, which must precede any participation in a research protocol; specific informed consent of 
the donor regarding the nature and extent of the use of the biological material itself; no direct or indi-
rect remuneration of the donor; prohibition of any kind of individual or social discrimination based on 
knowledge of data deriving from conserved samples; right to access and check personal details; right to 
anonymity of samples and data, provided that non-anonymous (i.e. identified and coded) use of the bio-
logical material or associated data is in the interest of donors and freely accepted by them.

The Committee for Bioethics agrees with the recommendations of both documents on these points. It 
also endorses the distinction between ‘collections of biological material’ and ‘tissue banks’: the first are 
specialised collections of material, while the second have a wider aim of providing a service to research-
ers, even external to the body that promotes and manages the bank. The Committee underlines that 
informed consent must not be limited to immediate use, but considers that future uses must be consistent 
with those for which the sample was taken. The Committee, moreover, points out the need and urgency 
of legal regulation in Italy to establish criteria for the founding and organisation of biobanks (without 
however imposing too rigid or detailed rules that would be ignored or rapidly rendered outdated by con-
crete needs) and supports the idea of carrying out a preliminary census of collections of biological mate-
rial and the tissue banks already held by public and private healthcare facilities, and setting up a National 
Register. 

The Committee stresses, furthermore, that biobanks are likely to grow in scale, from local to national, 
and from national to European, which might have an effect on ethical issues, engendering a shift in 
attitudes towards less individualism and a new sense of solidarity between groups and generations, for 
a common resource to be made available on the basis of rules for democratic participation.

Together with the National Committee for Biosafety, Biotechnologies and Life Sciences, the Committee 
for Bioethics approved an Opinion on Collection of biological samples for research: informed consent on 
16 February 2009. This opinion deals with the ethical problems of preserving samples beyond the time 
necessary to achieve the aim for which the sample was collected and the use of samples for purposes 
other than those initially intended. It is important to consider the different situations that arise, whether 
the samples are collected or deposited anonymously, or whether they are still identifiable (through pro-
tection codes). 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

33

 
It is important that the model of consent ensures that donors are informed about the future use of the 
biological material and about the procedures followed to protect personal data. Informed consent has 
to balance the interests of society and the protection of personal information. The main guidelines may 
be summarised as follows: 1) the donation of biological samples for research purposes cannot have any 
lucrative purpose; 2) the dissemination of knowledge obtained from the collection of samples must edu-
cate citizens towards solidarity; 3) the information must be clear, true, precise and communicated in 
a way that does not lead to false hopes; 4) informed consent must be specific; 5) the local Ethics Commit-
tees must include a geneticist, in case the research is carried out on preserved samples and is of genetic 
interest.

2.  Regulations in Italy

In Italy there is no specific and systematic legal framework in this field, although biobanks are attracting 
the attention of policymakers. 

On 15 July 2004 an agreement was signed between the Ministry of Health and the regions, including the 
autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano, on Guidelines on genetic activities. A legislative decree of 
19th August 2005 (No 191) implements Directive 2002/98/EC to set quality and safety standards for the 
collection, testing, processing, storage and distribution of human blood. Law No 219 of 21 October 2005 
governs blood transfusions and products. An ordinance of the Ministry of Health (13 April 2006) regu-
lates the use of stem cells and umbilical cord blood.

Italian  regulation  governing  human  samples  and  associated  data  is  contained  in  data  protection  acts 
(laws and decrees), which also cover the exchange (import/export) of biological material for research 
uses. On 22 February 2007, the Italian Data Protection Authority issued a General Authorisation for the 
Processing of Genetic Data. This authorisation applies to the processing of genetic data and to the col-
lection and use of biological samples for health care and research purposes. This authorisation originally 
came into force in April 2007, and has since been extended until 30 April 2010. There is now a debate on 
further extending or modifying it. 

Further Information
Prof. Laura Palazzani
Vice President of the Italian Committee for Bioethics, Full Professor of Philosophy of Law at Uni-
versity Lumsa

Address
Comitato Nazionale per la Bioetica
via della Mercede 96 – 00197 Roma — Italy (Europe)
Tel.: 0039-0667794601
Fax: 0039-0667794686
E-mail: cnbbioetica@palazzochigi.it; palazzani@lumsa.it
Website: www.governo.it/BIOETICA/

34 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences

Portugal

The ethical and legal framework governing biobanks in Portugal

In Portugal, Law No 12/2005 of 26 January 2005 regulates personal genetic and health information. 
Under  this  law,  ‘genetic  databases’  and  ‘DNA  and  other  biological  product  banks’  are  regulated  for 
genetic testing and health-related research. However, the legislation required to put the law into practice 
has not yet been enacted. 

Regarding personal information and data protection, Law No 67/98 of 26 October transposes Directive 
95/46/EC of 24 October 1995 into national legislation. Personal data are defined as any information, 
regardless of its nature, that can identify a particular individual, directly or indirectly — a wide con-
cept that includes genetic information. The law addresses data treatment and circulation, in which free 
informed consent is a key requirement.

The National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences (CNECV) has issued Opinions No 37/CNECV/01 
and No 43/CNECV/2004 on personal genetic information — available online at www.cnecv.pt (in Por-
tuguese only).

On March 12 2005 a new Government took office with a majority formed by the Socialist Party follow-
ing parliamentary elections. Part of its programme was to engage more effectively in fighting crime and 
promoting better penal justice. To this end, a national genetic database for individual identification was 
to be set up.

Following opinions issued by the CNECV and the National Committee for Data Protection (CNPD), 
as well as a parliamentary debate in which the opposition parties reiterated several ethical and legal 
objections, Law No 5/2008 of 12 February 2008 was approved, thus enabling the creation and main-
tenance of public DNA profile databases and associated biobanks for civil identification and forensic 
purposes.

Under this law, a ‘biobank’ is any repository of biological samples, or their derivatives, obtained exclu-
sively for identification purposes.

In its Opinion No 52/CNECV/2007 on the legal system for DNA profile databases, the CNECV based its 
arguments on a report reviewing the state of the art in DNA profiling, in addition to a thorough overview 
of other European databases. 

The fundamental ethical principles of autonomy, vulnerability and proportionality were at the forefront 
of the debate within the CNECV. Specific issues discussed included: the selection and inclusion criteria 
for DNA profiles, ownership and access to information; security, privacy and confidentiality; storage of 
samples and data; international data sharing; cost-effectiveness; and public debate and consultation.

In its Opinion, the CNECV recognised DNA databases as an important tool in civil identification and 
criminal investigation and as a means of reinforcing the power and efficacy of the state in matters of 
public security.

However, the construction and maintenance of DNA databases was regarded as a possible menace to 
citizens, even more so due to the sensitive nature of the information. Even technical limitations and the 
possibility of error can turn into ethical issues.

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

35

 
Bearing these considerations in mind, the CNECV issued several caveats and recommendations. 

Parliament enacted the law shortly thereafter. Some of the CNECV’s recommendations, namely those 
regarding informed consent, were taken into account. Other issues, such as the maintenance and custody 
of samples, were not considered. Provision for private custody of biological samples was introduced just 
before the law was passed in Parliament.

The Opinion is available online at www.cnecv.pt (in English).

Further Information
Miguel Oliveira da Silva, President 
mos@cnecv.pt 

Michel Renaud, Vice-President 
mrenaud@cnecv.pt 

Cíntia Águas, Executive Secretary 
caguas@cnecv.pt

Address
National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences
Avenida D. Carlos I, n.º 146 – 2º Esq.
1200-651 LISBOA (PORTUGAL)
Tel.: +351 213 910 884
Fax: +351 213 917 509
E-mail: geral@cnecv.pt 
Website: www.cnecv.pt

36 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

GENERAL INFORMATION  
ON ACTIVITIES of the  
EU national and regional 
ethics committees*

*  For further information on EU national and regional ethics committees please see 

http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/international_bioethics_dialogue/docs/IDB_brochure.pdf

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

37

Austrian Bioethics Commission

Austria

New Commission tackles ethical issues in direct-to-consumer genetic testing

Having defined its work programme for the first half of its fifth two-year term in November 2009, the 
Austrian Bioethics Commission spent its first six months actively implementing its plan. As the first 
topic  in  its  new  formation,  the  Commission  chose  to  tackle  the  ethical  issues  surrounding  direct-to-
consumer (DTC) genetic testing. The Commission issued its opinion on 10 May 20101. 

Direct-to-consumer genetic testing

The notion direct-to-consumer refers to the possibility for companies to offer their customers products 
and services directly on the internet without intermediaries. For potential clients, DTC presents an oppor-
tunity to purchase products and services directly from the provider regardless of national boundaries and 
to some extent without national regulatory oversight. A relatively new area in DTC services, namely 
genetic self-testing on the internet, poses a number of ethical challenges. While the detailed requirements 
laid down in the Austrian Gene Technology Act2 for genetic testing regarding quality assurance of the 
genetic analysis, informed consent, counselling, and protection of privacy apply to tests performed in 
health care settings in Austria, they do not apply to genetic self-tests conducted with companies located 
outside Austrian jurisdiction. Against this background, the Austrian Bioethics Commission considered 
it imperative to discuss and communicate the various problems surrounding such services to the general 
public and potential customers in the form of an opinion.

In  general,  due  to  the  lack  of  protection  provided  by  national  regulatory  oversight,  the  Commis-
sion  sounds  a  note  of  caution  with  regard  to  genetic  self-tests  on  the  internet.  More  specifically,  it 
recommends: 

• 

• 

the consultation of specialists in the field when there is reason to suspect a monogenic disease (for 
example, hereditary breast cancer, some forms of colorectal cancer, Huntington’s disease (chorea), 
etc.), in order to obtain comprehensive counselling; 

refraining in principle from tests for possible polygenic multifactorial diseases, which are strongly 
influenced by exogenous factors, since the diagnostic value of such tests is currently too low to 
have any clinical significance.

If people nevertheless opt for genetic testing on the internet, the Commission recommends 

•  prior consultation of a physician experienced in genetics and in the procedure of genetic testing;

•  not sending for testing under any circumstances test samples from minors or persons who are 

incapable of consent. 

Additionally, the Commission recommends that relevant professional interest groups such as medical 
associations provide their membership with material for continuing education on the genetic, legal and 
ethical dimensions of genetic testing on the internet. 

1  German version of the opinion ‘Stellungnahme der Bioethikkommission zu Gen- und Genomtests im Internet’, 10 May 2010, 

available at: http://www.bundeskanzleramt.at/site/3458/Default.aspx.

2  Austrian Gene Technology Act (Gentechnikgesetz (GTG)). BGBl. Nr. 510/1994. Overview in English available at:

http://www.bmg.gv.at/cms/site/standard.html?channel=CH0808&doc=CMS1217417300079.

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

39

 
Events past and future

In the reporting period, the Austrian Bioethics Commission organised three scientific conferences: 

• 

• 

• 

‘Bioethics Law’ (‘Loi bioéthique’) in cooperation with the French Embassy in Vienna, 
14 December 2009;

‘Research Ethics and Research Law’ (‘Forschungsethik und Forschungsrecht’) in cooperation with 
the Institute for Ethics and Law in Medicine at the University of Vienna, 14-15 January 2010;

‘Aging  in  Europe‘  (‘Altern  in  Europa’)  in  cooperation  with  Bildungshaus  St.  Virgil,  Salzburg, 
18-19 February 2010.

On 31 May 2010 the Austrian Bioethics Commission will hold its second international conference on 
the topic Bioethics and Women. The conference, entitled Bioethics and Women Revisited: Clinical Tri-
als, will focus on women’s perspectives on the clinical research agenda, future challenges in gender 
medicine, the gender perspective in international scientific medical journals, and research in vulnerable 
groups.

Further Information
Dr Doris Wolfslehner
Head of Secretariat
Austrian Bioethics Commission

Address
Austrian Federal Chancellery
Ballhausplatz 2
1014 Vienna
Austria
Tel: +43-1-53115/2987
Fax: +43-1-53109/2987
E-mail: doris.wolfslehner@bka.gv.at
Website: www.bka.gv.at/bioethics

40 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics

Belgium

About the Committee

After  a  period  during  which  the  Belgian  Advisory  Committee  on  Bioethics  dealt  only  with  current 
affairs, the ‘new’ Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics was set up on 1 February 2010 for a four-
year term (2/02/2010-1/02/2014).

The current composition of the Committee can be found on the website  
www.health.fgov.be/bioeth (heading on the right, ‘more about this topic’: ‘current composition of the 
Committee’)

Further Information
Bosson Monique
Information Officer

Address
Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics
4 rue de l’Autonomie
1070 Brussels
Belgium
Tel.: +32(0)2.525.09.07
Fax: +32(0)2.525.09.12
E-mail: Monique.bosson@health.fgov.be
Website: www.health.fgov.be/bioeth

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

41

 
Cyprus National Bioethics Committee

Cyprus

The Committee

The Cyprus National Bioethics Committee (CNBC) was established in 2001 by Law No 150 (I) of 2001 
providing for the establishment and functioning of the National Bioethics Committee.

Its mandate is to constantly monitor, survey, systematically analyse and evaluate the issues and problems 
associated with scientific research, advances in and applications of biotechnology, biology, medicine, 
genetics and pharmaceutics, and human intervention in biological processes and the human genotype, 
and to investigate their moral, deontological, social, humanistic and legal dimensions.

The CNBC is an independent body not subject to administrative supervision by any ministry, agency, 
department or service and has the powers conferred on it by law.

It has 13 members, including the chairperson. The members represent different professions and disci-
plines, and are appointed by the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Cyprus for a four-year term. At 
least four members must come from the humanities and social sciences, four must be from the medical 
and biological sciences, and four members must be from any other science or profession or be distin-
guished for their contribution in any area of activity in science and society.

By law, CNBC is the body responsible for bioethical review of all research protocols involving human 
subjects in Cyprus (both biomedical and clinical research). In order to carry out its task, the CNBC has 
adopted  more  or  less  unchanged  the  World  Health  Organisation’s  ‘Operational  Guidelines  for  ethics 
committees that review biomedical research’ as the basis of its guidelines for ethics committees review-
ing biomedical research involving human subjects in Cyprus. These were promulgated on 31 May 2005 
(Κ.Δ.Π. 175/2005).

In accordance with these guidelines and with the authority conferred on it by Law No 150 (I)/2001, the 
Committee has set up the following three Bioethics Review Committees:

I. 

 The Bioethics Review Committee for biomedical research on human beings and their biological 
substances,

II.  The Bioethics Review Committee for clinical trials on medicinal products for human use, and

III.   The Bioethics Review Committee for biomedical research on human beings and their biological 

substances and clinical trials on medicinal products for human use.

The Bioethics Review Committees review protocols relating to:

•  biomedical research on human beings and their biological substances,

•  clinical trials on medicinal products for human use, and,

• 

research on medical devices applied to human beings.

The role of the Bioethics Review Committees is to:

(1)   contribute  to  safeguarding  the  dignity,  rights,  safety  and  well-being  of  all  actual  or  potential 

research participants,

(2)  ensure independent, competent and timely review of the ethical aspects of proposed studies,

(3)  review research proposals before research begins.

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

43

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The CNBC appoints the members of the Bioethics Review Committees, monitors, directs and coordi-
nates their work and reviews their decisions following the specific procedures set out in the operational 
guidelines (Κ.Δ.Π. 175/2005).

Current work and forthcoming opinions

•  Obtaining informed consent from minors for participation in research protocols.

Previous opinions

1.  Opinion of the Cyprus National Bioethics Committee on obtaining informed consent from adults, 

issued 01/12/2009 (available in Greek only).

2.  Opinion on the establishment and use of human biobanks and registries of human biological sam-

ples for research purposes, issued 23/06/2009 (available in Greek and in English).

3.  Opinion on the use of ionising radiation in medical practice, issued 12/05/2009 (available in Greek 

and in English).

4.  Opinion on palliative care for terminally ill and dying patients, issued 01/07/2008 (available in 

Greek and in English).

5.  Opinion on genetically modified organisms, issued 03/04/2008 (available in Greek and in English).

6.  Opinion on prenuptial testing for thalassaemia before the conclusion of a civil wedding, issued 

24/03/2008 (available in Greek only).

7.  Opinion on predictive health information for the conclusion of health and life insurance contracts, 

issued 22/01/2008 (available in Greek and in English).

8.  Opinion on medically assisted human procreation (05/03/2007) (available in Greek only).

9.  Opinion on PGD and sex selection of in-vitro procreated embryos, issued 01/11/2006 (available in 

Greek only).

10. Opinion on human cloning, issued 12/09/2006 (available in Greek only).

11. Opinion on human organ donors registries issued 19/07/2006 (available in Greek only).

12. Opinion on cord blood banking, issued 27/04/2004 (available in Greek only).

13. Opinion on transplantation of biological substances of human origin, issued 14/04/2003 (available 

in Greek only).

14. Opinion on the use of preimplantation genetic diagnosis, issued 20/10/2003 (available in Greek 

only).

Further Information

Rena Vrahimi- Petridou
President, the Cyprus National Bioethics Committee

Address

Nikou Kranidioti Engomis
Medical Centre 1st Floor
2411 Engomi Cyprus
Tel.: +357 22 809038 / +357 22 809039
Fax: +357 22 353878
Email: cnbc@bioethics.gov.cy
Website: www.bioethics.gov.cy

44 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

Danish Council of Ethics

Denmark

The Ethics of Man and Machine — cyborgs and robots

The popular Danish multimedia website devoted to man and machine – now in English! The Danish 
Council of Ethics is soon to open its English website on the ethics of man and machine. Look out for it 
in August 2010.

Aiming  to  support  popular  ethical  debate,  the  Danish  Council  of  Ethics  has  launched  a  multimedia 
website on technology that challenges the boundary between man and machine. What are the ethical 
issues involved in hooking up robot parts directly to the human brain? And what will we do once robots 
become so intelligent that they are like us?

The Danish Council of Ethics has for some time provided a platform for public debate in Denmark, It has 
now put forward its recommendations on cyborg technologies and on ‘social robots’. At the same time, 
its entire website and recommendations are being made available in English.

The English website will open in August — and its launch will be accompanied by a bonus online inter-
view about the pitfalls of robotic enhancement with the world-famous political scientist and philosopher 
Dr Francis Fukuyama.

In its 2005 deliberations on the ethical aspects of implanting IT technology in the human body, the Euro-
pean Group on Ethics (EGE) suggested that national ethical councils should promote debate on these 
issues. The Danish Council of Ethics has done exactly that with success. Now the Council is opening an 
English version of its website www.homoartefakt.dk — thereby transforming it into a platform for pan-
European debate about man–machine ethics and technology. 

At the forefront of ethical debate

It will be many years before we can upgrade our bodies with night vision or superior intelligence, and 
perhaps this will never happen. It will also be many years before it becomes hard to tell a person from 
a robot. And perhaps that will never come about either.

But the integration of man and machine is not a futuristic scenario. It is a high-priority field of research 
in the EU, the USA and Japan. In Denmark, the government has decided to invest large sums in the 
development of robotic technologies to support the care of the elderly. Likewise, robotic care technolo-
gies  and  research  into  interfaces  between  the  human  neuronal  system  and  robotic  devices  are  high-
priority fields in EU research programmes. 

The  Danish  Council  of  Ethics  holds  that  the  time  is  right  for  discussing,  in  ethical  terms,  what  are 
the  desired  purposes  of  such  technology  —  and  what  are  not,  The  Council’s  multimedia  website 
www.homoartefakt.dk is especially conceived for dissemination and debate. It contains a film, several 
interviews with European researchers, a lot of background articles and ethical recommendations from 
the Council. 

Links:  
www.homoartefakt.dk 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

45

 
Further Information
Thomas Laursen 
Project leader 
The Danish Council of Ethics

Address
Ravnsborggade 2-4 
2200 Copenhagen 
Denmark 
Tel.: (+45) 3537 5833 
Fax: (+45) 3537 5755
E-mail: info@etiskraad.dk 
Website: www.etiskraad.dk

46 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

German Ethics Council

Germany

First Opinion — Anonymous relinquishment of infants: tackling the problem

The German Ethics Council published its first Opinion, entitled ‘Anonymous relinquishment of infants: 
tackling the problem’ on 26 November 2009.

The aim of ‘baby drops’, which have existed in Germany since 1999, and facilities for anonymous birth, 
was to prevent the abandoning and killing of infants. Estimates indicate that since these two facilities 
were introduced some 500 children have effectively become foundlings with permanently anonymous 
origins. The existing facilities for anonymous birth raise serious ethical and legal problems, in particular 
because they violate the rights of the children concerned to a knowledge of their origins and to a rela-
tionship with their parents. Moreover, experience to date suggests that women at risk of killing or aban-
doning their newborn babies are not affected by the availability of these facilities. The ethical and legal 
problems linked with anonymous relinquishment of infants are discussed in detail in the Ethics Council’s 
Opinion.

Public  bodies  for  child  and  youth  welfare,  independent-sector  institutions  and  conflicted-pregnancy 
counselling centres offer a wide range of effective assistance on a statutory basis to women, including 
women in extreme emergency situations. They also ensure that their children do not remain in ignorance 
of their origins and biological family. However, this assistance is not always taken up.

The German Ethics Council aims, by means of its recommendations, to help create a situation where 
pregnant women and mothers can receive the most effective assistance possible in an emergency, without 
violating the rights of others — specifically, those of their children.

The Ethics Council recommends that the existing baby drops and facilities for anonymous birth be abol-
ished. This should be accomplished by a process conducted jointly by all bodies with the relevant politi-
cal responsibility. As an accompanying measure, more publicity should be given to the existing legally 
permitted facilities for helping pregnant women and mothers in situations of emergency or conflict. In 
addition, action should be taken to enhance trust in the legal facilities available. 

As a further means of helping pregnant women and mothers in emergency situations, the Ethics Council 
suggests the introduction of a ‘law on the confidential relinquishment of infants with temporarily anony-
mous registration’. This would create a statutory foundation for aiding women in a serious situation of 
distress or conflict who feel that they need to conceal the fact of their maternity, by providing especially 
easy access to facilities to help them solve their problems by counselling and ongoing assistance with 
a guarantee of absolute confidentiality.

In its recommendations, the Ethics Council points out that in cases of immediate physical danger to the 
life and health of mother and child, it is undisputed that, on the basis of the duty to render assistance, 
the law governing emergency situations legitimises the provision of medical care for a woman in child-
birth even if she fails to disclose her identity. However, this obligation does not extend to the systematic 
availability of facilities for anonymous relinquishment of infants independently of the existence of an 
individual acute emergency situation, such as baby drops or facilities for anonymous birth, or to support 
with the preservation of anonymity once the acute emergency is over.

In cases where infants are nevertheless relinquished anonymously, the German Ethics Council con-
siders certain minimum measures for protection of the rights of both the child and the parents to be 
necessary — in particular, immediate notification of the child’s birth to the youth welfare centre, 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

47

 
and the appointment of a guardian independent of the institution where the child was relinquished 
anonymously.

In a supplementary position statement two members of the Council indicated that, while they agreed 
with the Council’s recommendations — in particular, that the availability of facilities for the anonymous 
relinquishment of infants should be abolished — they did not consider the statutory provision for confi-
dential birth proposed by the Council to be necessary, because the aim of offering women a confidential 
space to overcome their emergency situation could already be achieved by means of the existing legally 
permitted easy-access counselling and assistance services.

A group of six members noted in a dissenting position statement that they could not accept the recom-
mendation that the existing facilities for the anonymous relinquishment of infants should be closed down 
immediately or gradually, because in their view these facilities might, for the small number of parents 
and women who were unable to avail themselves of the counselling centres, constitute a last resort offer-
ing a potential alternative to abandoning their children to their fate without anyone to care for them.

The Opinion can be accessed at http://www.ethikrat.org.

Further Information
Dr Joachim Vetter 
Head of Office 

Address
German Ethics Council  
Jaegerstrasse 22/23 – 10117 Berlin 
Tel.: +49/30/20370-242 
Fax: +49/30/20370-252 
Email: vetter@ethikrat.org  
Website: www.ethikrat.org 

Ulrike Florian
Press and public relations officer

German Ethics Council
Jaegerstrasse 22/23 – 10117 Berlin
Tel.: +49/30/20370-246
Fax: +49/30/20370-252
Email: florian@ethikrat.org
Website: www.ethikrat.org

48 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

 
Hellenic National Bioethics Commission

Greece

A. Most recently issued opinion (19 April 2010)

The Commission has recently issued an opinion on ‘Consent in the physician-patient relationship’. 
It  will  be  translated  into  English  and  published  on  the  English  pages  of  the  Commission’s  website 
(www.bioethics.gr). 

Please note that the full text (in pdf format) of all opinions and reports issued by the Commission, in 
English, can be found at the following URL:

http://www.bioethics.gr/category.php?category_id=55, or can be requested from the secretariat, 
Secretariat@bioethics.gr.

B.  Current work

Currently, the Commission is discussing the issue of ‘Infectious diseases: Public health and autonomy’. 

C. Working with others

The Commission recognises the importance of learning from others and sharing knowledge and best 
practices. 

In January 2010, the Commission followed up on previous communication with the Minister of Public 
Health, regarding the unregulated operation of cord blood banks in Greece, and suggested specific meas-
ures to be adopted. 

Furthermore,  the  Commission  was  invited  to  participate  in  the  public  consultation  organised  by  the 
National Commission of Human Rights on the issue of HIV carriers in Greece. The meeting was organ-
ised following the Greek Supreme Court’s ruling regarding the dismissal of an HIV-positive employee. 

D. New seminars series on bio-law 

In February 2010, the Commission launched its first seminar series on bio-law. This initiative, which 
addresses mainly young forensic scientists, aims to inspire participants in their work and to support the 
development of the new field of bio-law in Greece. 

The seminars are held once a month at the Commission. Participants take turns to present their work on 
a specific bioethical issue, followed by discussion led by a commentator. So far there have been presenta-
tions on the following subjects: ethical status of the foetus, euthanasia, clinical trials and biobanks. 

E.  Communicative tools

Since October 2008, the Commission’s newsletter BIO-ETHICA has proved to be a most valuable tool 
for the Commission’s communication with the general public. The newsletter includes announcements, 
news and events involving the Commission, international news related to bioethics, book reviews, and 
information on local and international bioethics meetings or conferences. It is sent to an extensive list of 
recipients in Greece at the end of every month. 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

49

 
F.  Publications

The Commission is trying to promote the establishment of research ethics committees in Greece and has 
published a Guide on Research Ethics for the biological sciences. This publication will be distributed to 
all research foundations and universities in Greece.

G. Presentations in 2010 (from January 2010 to May 2010)

The Commission regularly participates in meetings held in Greece or abroad to discuss bioethical issues. 

The Commission has attended — by invitation — the following international meetings:

Date

Conference/Meeting

Title

Participant/s

3-4 March 2010

14th NEC FORUM,
Madrid, Spain

‘International 
Clinical Trials’

4-5 March 2010 

Second Meeting of the 
European Commission 
International Dialogue on 
Bioethics, Madrid, Spain

‘Second Meeting 
of the Interna-
tional Dialogue on 
Bioethics’

Professor George Maniatis, 
Deputy Chairman of the 
Commission

Mrs Marianna Dracopoulou 
Head of Secretariat

Professor George Maniatis, 
Deputy Chairman of the 
Commission

Further Information:
Mrs Marianna Dracopoulou
Head of Secretariat

Address
47, Evelpidon str., 11362- Athens- Greece
Tel.: +30-210-88.47.700
Fax: +30-210-88.47.701
E-mail: Secretariat@bioethics.gr
Website: www.bioethics.gr

50 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

Bioethics Consultative Committee

Malta

Ordinary and Extraordinary Treatment — Hydration and Nutrition 

As this is not an easy question to answer, we need to break it down by attempting to establish correct 
definitions and then considering the correct application of the definitions to the ethical issue involved. It 
is important to add at this juncture that the right to life should be considered as a fundamental right but 
not an absolute right (although it may be said to be quasi-absolute).

We  should  start  by  defining  what  treatment  is  ordinary  and  what  is  extraordinary  (proportional  and 
disproportional are alternative terms). Doctors mistakenly tend to use the terms to refer to ‘standard’ or 
‘non-standard’ forms of treatment. For ethicists, however, these words have different meanings. ‘Ordi-
nary’ is often used to describe those means of prolonging life which are available, offer a reasonable 
hope of benefit and do not cause unbearable pain and suffering. In contrast, the term ‘extraordinary’ is 
used to describe those means or measures which are not usually available, do not offer a reasonable hope 
of benefit and cause unbearable pain and suffering1. 

A  treatment  that  is  standard  for  a  certain  class  of  patient  is  more  likely  to  be  ‘ordinary’,  or  morally 
required, than a treatment that is non-standard. However, this does not always hold true. There may be 
reasons why the standard treatment is not morally required for an individual patient2. There is no obliga-
tion for a patient to take extraordinary or disproportionate measures to promote life and health if these 
measures will involve excessive burden. For example, one might think of the pain or discomfort that can 
accompany some medical treatments or the financial cost of the treatments to the patient, family, hospital 
or health service in general3. 

A treatment or life-sustaining measure can be extraordinary because it is too painful, frightening, haz-
ardous or disruptive for the patient, or too burdensome financially for the patient, family, hospital or 
health service, which must also consider other patients who would benefit more from the same resource 
allocation4.

A treatment can be extraordinary because it is simply futile. Those who are dying of one illness have no 
obligation to accept treatment for a second life-threatening one that is at a less advanced stage. Often, 
however, a treatment will be extraordinary not because that treatment is in any way futile, but because its 
burdens will be disproportionate to the benefits it will bring. Borderline cases may be resolved by seek-
ing the help of the competent patient to evaluate them5. 

Another view is that ordinary means of preserving life consist of medical treatment that offers a rea-
sonable hope of benefit for the patient or that can be obtained or used without excessive pain, burden, 
or expense. Extraordinary treatment is then medical treatment that cannot be used or obtained without 
excessive expense, pain or other burden or which does not offer a reasonable hope of benefit6. 

1  ‘Ordinary and extraordinary means of prolonging life’, The Linacre Centre for Healthcare Ethics, extract from Life and 
Death in Healthcare Ethics, Routledge, 2000. http://www.lifeissues.net/writers/mis/mis_01prolonginglife.html [07.01.2010].

2 Ibid.
3 Ibid.
4 Ibid.
5 Ibid.
6 Agius, E., ‘Problems in Applied Ethics’, from Friggieri, J., (Ed.), Philosophical Studies, University of Malta, 1994, p. 26.

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

51

 
Two important considerations are the effectiveness and benefit of the proposed treatment. An effective 
treatment is one which demonstrably alters the natural history of an illness or alleviates an important 
symptom. A beneficial treatment is one which brings some good to the patient, not only medical benefit 
but also in terms of quality of life. Treatment may be effective but not beneficial by simply prolonging 
the life of a patient while at other times it might be both effective and beneficial. The key word here is 
benefit to the patient!7

We should respect the desire and freedom of patients not to have their lives prolonged unnecessarily by 
extraordinary means, that is to say in cases where artificial means for the prolongation of life could or 
should be stopped, especially when there is no hope whatsoever that health can be regained. We should 
maintain a sharp distinction between cases where there is a real chance of serving human life and other 
cases where medical treatment would simply be a means to interfere with death or to artificially extend 
the process of death8.

‘But one is normally held to use only ordinary means — according to circumstances of persons, places, 
times and culture — that is to say, means that do not involve any grave burden for oneself or another. 
A stricter obligation would be too burdensome for most men and would render the attainment of the 
higher, more important good too difficult. Life, death, all temporal activities are in fact subordinated to 
spiritual ends. On the other hand, one is not forbidden to take more than strictly necessary steps to pre-
serve life and health as long as one does not fail in some more serious duty’9.

Taken in this sense, extraordinary treatment addresses the shortening of agony or even of a fatal disease 
through planned withdrawal or omission of life-prolonging treatment. The intention is not to prolong 
suffering, which is considered to be opposed to the idea of dying in dignity and peace. Considerations of 
mere utility should not be allowed to enter the picture here10.

In its declaration on euthanasia the Congregation for Catholic Faith states that ‘it is also permissible to 
make do with the normal means that medicine can offer. Therefore one cannot impose on anyone the obli-
gation to have recourse to a technique which is already in use but which carries a risk or is burdensome. 
Such a refusal is not the equivalent of suicide; on the contrary, it should be considered as an acceptance 
of the human condition, or a wish to avoid the application of a medical procedure disproportionate to the 
results that can be expected, or a desire not to impose excessive expense on the family or community. 
When inevitable death is imminent in spite of the means used, it is permitted in conscience to take the 
decision to refuse forms of treatment that would only secure a precarious and burdensome prolongation of 
life, so long as the normal care due to the sick person in similar cases is not interrupted. In such circum-
stances the doctor has no reason to reproach himself with failing to help the person in danger’11. 

The next part of this argument is more difficult to establish. This pertains to the question of whether 
artificial hydration and nutrition itself constitutes ordinary or extraordinary treatment, therefore allow-
ing it to be withdrawn if it is considered to be extraordinary. Many scholars have said that it is legitimate 
to withdraw intravenous feeding in particular circumstances, on the assumption that it is not a case of 
ordinary means12. There are different views as to whether such treatment is ordinary and extraordinary, 
with some scholars agreeing and others disagreeing. 

7 Ibid.
8 Häring, B., Medical Ethics, St. Pauls, UK, 1991, p. 132.
9 Pius XII, A.A.S., 49 (1957), 1031-1032.
10  Häring, B., Medical Ethics, op. cit., p. 137. See also Thielicke, H., ‘Ethische Fragen der modernen Medizin’, in Archive für 
klinische Chirurgie, 321 (1968), 13, with regard to intention. ‘Of course it does make a great difference whether I accept an 
evil or a questionable result as a by-product of my therapeutic intention or seek it directly as a good in itself’.

11 Declaration on Euthanasia, 30. From Elizari Basterra, F.J., Bioethics, St. Pauls, UK, 1994, p. 190.
12  Kelly, G., Medico-Moral Problems, Catholic Hospitals Association, St. Louis, 1958, 130; McFadden, J.C., Medical Ethics, 

F.A. Davis, Philadelphia, 1957, 246-247; Healy, G., Medical Ethics, Loyola, Chicago, 1956, 80.

52 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

‘There are those who believe that respect for human life demands that we continue feeding seriously ill 
people, even artificially, and that includes people in irreversible comas, because feeding and hydration 
are part of the minimum care that compassion demands. On the other hand, there are theologians and 
philosophers who maintain that recourse to artificial nutrition and hydration does not involve the same 
moral obligation as the natural process of ingesting solids and liquids. This is a medical technique more 
akin to treatment than to everyday care’13. We might mention for example, the case of Tony Bland, a per-
son in PVS (persistent vegetative state, where only the brain stem remains functioning whereas all higher 
brain functions have ceased) for five years after the Hillsborough football disaster of 1989. Although 
there was a difference of opinion medically, the High Court eventually ruled that feeding should be seen 
as medical treatment rather than elementary care and that its withdrawal was lawful in this case. 

Two main issues need to be considered for finding a solution to this dilemma. The first constitutes the 
notion of the dying patient. What is a dying patient? Two criteria can guide us here. Is a return to normal 
life relatively possible? And will the patient be ultimately independent from the technology? Add to this 
the question of whether there is reasonable hope of benefit. The answer to these questions will determine 
whether we can consider such treatment as optional or appropriate.

The second issue is the nature of artificial hydration/nutrition: is it a medical procedure or simply pro-
portionate care for basic human needs? Many medical ethicists say that such a procedure falls under 
the heading of a medical procedure, as it requires skilled medical intervention. In that case it should be 
handled ethically in the same way as other normal medical procedures. 

If the patient is not viewed as dying, then hydration/nutrition should be seen as ordinary care and its 
omission would therefore be considered inappropriate. If, on the other hand, the patient is dying and if 
artificial hydration/nutrition is considered as a medical procedure, then its withdrawal is considered to 
be a procedure performed in order to let nature take its course14. ‘When artificial feeding is futile and 
useless, it can be considered as extraordinary and consequently morally justifiable to be withheld or 
withdrawn. There is no moral obligation to use extraordinary means of treatment; our obligations extend 
only to the provision of ordinary means’15. 

Although we need to have a presumption in favour of providing nutrition and hydration to all patients16, 
we need to take into account the individual characteristics of patients and their circumstances, as this is 
the key to the issue. Clinical studies have shown that although artificial nutrition and hydration (AHN) 
may benefit terminally ill patients, it may actually also cause suffering and indeed itself shorten life if 
carried out in inappropriate circumstances. This is because of certain problems. First, the insertion of 
a gastrostomy tube (PEG) has been associated with an indirect and direct increase in aspiration pneumo-
nia and death. Secondly, there is no evidence that the use of a PEG tube for terminal patients improves 
nutritional status or prevents pressure sores. Some studies have linked the use of PEG tubes to a higher 
incidence of sores. Thirdly, there is strong evidence to suggest that the use of PEG and NG (naso-gastric) 
tubes not only does not decrease the likelihood of infections in terminal patients but actually increases it. 
Fourthly, since emaciated patients show slower functional improvements, nutritional intervention at the 
end of life may not make much of a difference and is in fact ineffective for the frailest patients. Lastly, 
evidence suggests that tube feeding does not prolong the lives of most terminal patients, with some stud-
ies in fact showing a decrease in the length of survival for tube-fed patients.

13 From Elizari Basterra, F.J., Bioethics, St. Pauls, UK, 1994, p. 191, quoting Durand, G., and Saint-Arnaud, J.
14 Agius, E., ‘Problems in Applied Ethics’, op. cit., p. 29.
15 Ibid.
16  US Conference of Catholic Bishops, Ethical and Religious Directives for Catholic Health Care Services, 4th ed. (Wash-
ington, D.C.: USCCB, 2001). ‘There should be presumption in favour of providing nutrition and hydration to all patients, 
including patients who require medically assisted nutrition and hydration, as long as this is of sufficient benefit to outweigh 
the burdens involved to the patients’.

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

53

Some studies show that end-stage patients do not seem to experience feelings of hunger or thirst and, in 
those that do, relief can be achieved better by oral means. Other studies show that tube-fed patients in 
terminal stages of life may have to make use of the amino-acids from their muscles to supplement nutri-
tion, leading to quicker emaciation and death, while voluntary fasting leads to the production of ketones 
from fat breakdown and these may be used as an energy source. Hydration and nutrition might also feed 
a tumour, making it grow faster and escalate pain and suffering, while oral food and water is enough to 
relieve discomfort. Clearly, therefore, the clinical reality is that ANH may cause more physical harm than 
good for many patients in the terminal stages, and without careful consideration of the clinical facts of 
individual cases, we may harm patients more than help them if we feed and hydrate them artificially17. 

Dr Michael Asciak MD, M.Phil. 

17  Sanders, A., ‘The Clinical Reality of Artificial Nutrition and Hydration for Patients at the End of Life’, from The National 

Catholic Bioethics Quarterly, Vol. 9, Num. 2, Summer 2009, Philadelphia.

Further Information
Dr. Michael Asciak
Chairman
Bioethics Consultative Committee

Address
J60, Sodales
Triq l-Akkwedott
Birkirkara, Malta
Tel.: 0035621446784
E-mail: michael.asciak@gov.mt

54 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences

Portugal

The Portuguese National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences — new term of office and current 
activities

Legal basis and mission

An Ethics Council is a privileged place for reflection on the ethical issues raised by progress in the life 
sciences. To debate, give advice, recommend and stimulate the reflection are some of its essential tasks.

The need for a bioethics committee was felt early at national level. Set up in 1990 under Law No 14/90 
of 9 June 1990, the National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences (CNECV — Conselho Nacional de 
Ética para as Ciências da Vida) now operates under Law No 24/2009 of 29 May 2009.

The CNECV is an independent consultative body functioning under the Portuguese Parliament since 
2009.  Its  mission  is  to  analyse  and  give  opinions  on  the  ethical  problems  that  arise  from  scientific 
progress in the fields of biology, medicine or health care and in the life sciences in general.

The CNECV is composed of 19 members from a wide variety of backgrounds, ranging from the human 
or social sciences to the fields of medicine or biology. Its members are appointed by Parliament and by 
the Portuguese Government, as well as by other bodies representative of civil society. Each member is 
appointed for a term of five years. The CNECV’s work is supported by an Executive Secretary.

The CNECV’s new composition

The CNECV’s fourth and current term of office began on 30 July 2010. Shortly thereafter the council 
members elected their president and vice-president in September 2010. 

Council Members

Miguel Oliveira da Silva (President)

Michel Renaud (Vice-President)

Agostinho Almeida Santos

Ana Sofia Carvalho 

Duarte Nuno Vieira 

Francisco Carvalho Guerra

Isabel Santos

Jorge Reis Novais

Jorge Sequeiros

José Germano Rego de Sousa 

José Lebre de Freitas 

Lígia Amâncio

Lucília Nunes

Maria do Céu Patrão Neves

Maria de Sousa

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

55

 
Pedro Fevereiro 

Pedro Nunes

Raquel Seruca

Rosalvo Almeida

Activities in 2009 

Last  opinion  of  the  third  term  of  office  —  During  2009,  the  CNECV  issued  its  Opinion 
No 57/CNECV/2009 regarding ‘Patients rights to information and informed consent’.

This  coincided  with  the  end  of  the  CNECV’s  third  term  of  office.  The  opinion  was  in  response  to 
a request addressed by both the Parliament Health Committee and the Parliamentary Group of the Social 
Democratic Party.

The CNECV’s opinion was based on an analysis of the draft law in question, rather than a thorough 
reflection on the subject, although the importance and need of such a debate was recognised. The key 
points of this opinion were: 

•  The distinction between patient rights to personal health information and unrestricted access to 

clinical files was not clear.

• 

Individual autonomy was overemphasised as the main ethical principle. The role of the family was 
not taken into consideration.

•  Detailed directives — both the ‘living will’ and the ‘healthcare proxy’ — were addressed in two 

general provisions.

Following the CNECV’s opinion, the draft law was not scheduled for a final vote.

Fourth term

Current activities

Besides  its  routine  activities,  the  Council  often  receives  requests  for  clarification  and  opinion  from 
national and international bodies, secondary school pupils, undergraduate and postgraduate students, 
researchers and people in general. The following activities are in preparation:

National Seminar (26-27 November 2010, Lisbon)

The CNECV is currently organising its XIth National Seminar. This year the seminar will address ‘Nan-
otechnologies and Genetically Modified Organisms: Science, Ethics and Society’. Distinguished national 
and international speakers will participate (www.cnecv.pt). We hope this will provide an opportunity for 
a pluralastic debate about ethical issues concerning these new technologies, from a scientific, media and 
general public perspective.

Joint meetings

•  Joint bioethics meeting CNECV / CBE- Spanish Bioethics Committee (November 2010)

•  Joint  session  UNESCO  /  CNECV  on  the  Fifth  Anniversary  of  the  Universal  Declaration  on 

Bioethics and Human Rights (November / December 2010).

The CNECV online

The CNECV website has been recently overhauled – www.cnecv.pt – as a key channel for communica-
tion between the CNECV and society. The site is also available in English.

56 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

Bioethics Documentation Centre 

The CNECV has a Bioethics Documentation Centre, which is open to the public.

It has recently been acquiring national and foreign books and journals as part of its constant efforts to 
update its document collection. 

The Documentation Centre also contains national and foreign periodicals, including volumes of pub-
lished opinions and studies from other European ethics councils and EU organisations.

Forthcoming Opinions

The CNECV has recently started work on the following topics:

•  Ethical issues involving animals for research

•  Ethical use of water resources

•  Ethical aspects of public health

•  Health information and health care informatics

•  Post-mortem autopsies by family request

Previous opinions are available on www.cnecv.pt (in Portuguese and English).

Further Information
Miguel Oliveira da Silva, President 
mos@cnecv.pt 

Michel Renaud, Vice-President 
mrenaud@cnecv.pt 

Cíntia Águas,Executive Secretary 
caguas@cnecv.pt

Address
National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences
Avenida D. Carlos I, n.º 146 – 2º Esq.
1200-651 LISBOA PORTUGAL
Tel.: +351 213 910 884
Fax: +351 213 917 509
E-mail: geral@cnecv.pt 
Website: www.cnecv.pt

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

57

Spanish Bioethics committee (CBE)

Spain

Document on Good Practices in Scientific Research

The latest document released by the Bioethics Committee of Spain (CBE) is a document about good 
scientific practices.

The preparation of the document was approved at the Plenary Session of the CBE on 5 May 2009, in 
accordance with Law 14/2007, 3 July 2007, on Biomedical Research.

The document was published on 5 May 2010, with the aim of promoting responsible behaviour in the 
exercise of scientific research.

Spain is one of the few countries that still lack specific regulation to prevent problems involving scien-
tific integrity. This is why this document is highly important.

The Codes of Good Scientific Practices (CGSP) are a collection of rules, advice and commitments to 
be followed by researchers, research centres, funding bodies and even scientific societies. The objective 
is to improve the quality of research and prevent possible integrity problems such as fake research or 
plagiarism. 

In order to avoid such problems, scientific activity must be honest, transparent and responsible. 

Through the Codes of Good Practices, the Bioethics Committee of Spain seeks to highlight the need to 
adhere to a set of values for the adequate planning and development of science. While they are not legally 
binding, they constitute essential guidelines for all bodies engaged in scientific research.

The document has not only been published in the media, but also been sent to the Ethics Committees of 
Clinical Research, to all Ethics Committees of the Spanish Universities and to research centres.

Even though all these bodies have been acquainted with this document for only a short period of time, it 
seems to enjoy wide acceptance. 

Some of the main recommendations in the document:

-  The need to regulate through the Codes of Good Scientific Practices any conflicts of interest affecting 

both the boards of directors and the research committees in organisations.

-  The importance of promoting good scientific practices through courses and training for researchers.

-  The need to create an independent arbitration body with national competence to deal with problems of 

scientific integrity in Spain, serving both the community and scientific organisations.

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

59

 
Further Information
Javier Arias
Deputy Secretary of the Bioethics Committee of Spain

Address
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Pabellon 5, Avenida Monforte de Lemos 5
28029-Madrid, Spain
Tel: +34 918222186
E-mail: javardi@isciii.es
Website: www.comitedebioetica.es

60 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

Nuffield Council on Bioethics

United Kingdom

Introduction

The Nuffield Council on Bioethics was established by the Nuffield Foundation in 1991 to identify, exam-
ine and report on the ethical questions raised by recent advances in biological and medical research. 
Since 1994, it has been funded jointly by The Nuffield Foundation, the Medical Research Council and 
The Wellcome Trust. The Council’s role is to respond to public concern about aspects of biomedicine 
and biotechnology; to provide independent advice to policy makers; and to stimulate debate in bioethics.

Report: the ethics of dementia

The Council’s most recent report was Dementia: ethical issues, published on 1 October 2009. The report 
presents an ethical framework to help those who face dilemmas in connection with the day-to-day care 
of a person with dementia, and makes recommendations in the following areas:

•  promoting autonomy and well-being through an ethical approach to dementia care

• 

including people with dementia in society 

•  making decisions about the care and treatment of people with dementia 

•  dealing with day-to-day ethical dilemmas in care

• 

• 

recognising the needs of carers

research funding and participation.

Since the report was published, it has been debated in the media, among policy makers, and by those 
working at the frontline of dementia care.

Other current work includes: 

Medical profiling and online healthcare: the ethics of ‘personalised’ healthcare in a consumer age

This Working Party, chaired by Professor Christopher Hood, is considering the ethical issues raised by 
developments that promise increasingly personalised healthcare. For example:

• 

• 

• 

individuals can now pay to have their DNA analysed for a range of health risks;

imaging services such as CT and MRI scans that look for abnormalities indicating disease can be 
bought directly by consumers; and

the number of websites offering health advice, personal health records and medicines for sale has 
increased.

These developments can give people increased choice and control over their health. Some may provide 
reassurance that they are healthy, or detect disease at an earlier stage. However, they may also create 
needless confusion or anxiety, or lead to unnecessary invasive procedures that carry additional risks. 
A report with recommendations for policy will be published in October 2010.

New approaches to biofuels

Biofuels are renewable liquid fuels derived from plant or animal material. There have been concerns 
about the effect of biofuel production on, for example, food security and the environment, especially in 
the developing world. 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

61

 
New types of biofuels are being developed which aim to address these concerns. Rather than using food 
crops to produce biofuels, in the future we may be able to use algae, trees, the inedible ‘woody’ parts of 
plants, and agricultural waste. In addition, scientists are working to increase the yield of biofuel crops 
and  improve  the  production  process,  in  order  to  maximise  the  energy  output  of  land  and  reduce  net 
greenhouse gas emissions.

The Council set up a Working Party in October 2009, chaired by Professor Joyce Tait, to explore the 
ethical issues that arise in the drive to find new types of biofuels. The Working Party’s consultation, held 
from December to March, received around 90 responses. A report will be published in spring 2011.

Human bodies in medicine and research

In January 2010, the Council set up a Working Party to explore the ethical issues raised by the provision 
of bodily material for medical treatment and research, and by participation in human subject research 
trials. The Working Party, chaired by Professor Dame Marilyn Strathern, launched a consultation in 
April 2010. Questions included:

•  How far should we as a society go in encouraging or even incentivising people to provide material? 

•  What control should a person providing material have over its future use? 

•  Can  useful  comparisons  be  made  with  people  taking  part  in  ‘healthy  volunteer’  clinical  trials 

where people ‘give over’ their body for a short time for research purposes?

The Council has also been awarded a Wellcome Trust public engagement grant to hold a one-day delib-
erative workshop with recruited members of the public to discuss the topic of human bodies in medicine 
and research. Following these and other consultative activities, a final report with recommendations to 
policy makers will be published in autumn 2011.

Further Information
Hugh Whittall
Director, Nuffield Council on Bioethics

Address
The Nuffield Council on Bioethics
28 Bedford Square
London WC1B 3JS
Tel.: +44 207 681 9619
Fax: +44 207 637 1712
Email: bioethics@nuffieldbioethics.org
Website: www. nuffieldbioethics.org

62 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

GENERAL INFORMATION 
ON ACTIVITIES 
of the non-EU national  
and regional ethics 
committees*

*  For further information on non-EU national and regional ethics committees please see 

http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/international_bioethics_dialogue/docs/IDB_brochure.pdf

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

63

Australian Health Ethics Committee (AHEC)

Australia

Information on relevant activities of the Australian Health Ethics Committee

1.  Year of establishment of NEC 

1991

2.  Remit of NEC

  The functions of AHEC, as set out in Section 35(3) of the NHMRC Act, are:

• 

• 

to advise the Council on the ethical issues relating to health; and 

to develop and give the Council human research guidelines under subsection 10(2) of the NHMRC 
Act; and 

•  any other functions conferred on the Committee in writing by the Minister after consulting the 

CEO; and 

•  any other functions conferred on the Committee by the NHMRC Act, the regulations or any other 

law. 

One of the CEO’s functions under the NHMRC Act is to inquire into, issue guidelines on, and advise 
the community on ethical issues relating to health. This function includes the issuing of human research 
guidelines.  Under  Section  10(2)  of  the  NHMRC  Act,  the  Council  may  only  provide  human  research 
guidelines to the CEO under Section 9(1) precisely as developed by AHEC.

In the course of its activities, AHEC consults extensively with individuals, community organisations, 
health  professionals  and  governments,  and  undertakes  formal  public  consultation  when  developing 
guidelines. AHEC may also provide advice on international developments in health ethics issues. 

3.  Composition of NEC

(Chair)

Person with understanding of the concerns of people with a disability 

Person who has expertise in religion

Person who has expertise in philosophy

Person with experience in clinical medical practice

Person with expertise in the health needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders

Person who has experience in nursing or allied health practices

Person with knowledge of the ethics of the medical profession

Person who has expertise in the law

Person who has experience in public health research

Person with expertise in the field of medicine, genetics and the law

Person with understanding of health consumer issues

Person who has experience in medical research

Person who has experience in social science research

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

65

 
 
4.  List of the last three NEC’s opinions 

1.  Using the National Statement: Payment to participants in research, particularly clinical trials

2.  Ethical Issues involved in the Transition to Palliation and End of Life Care for People with Chronic 

Conditions: Issues Paper 

3.  Ethics and the Exchange and Commercialisation of Products derived from human tissue: An Issues 

Paper and draft model framework.

5.  List of the next two future topics covered by NEC’s opinions 

1.  Major Health Issues Likely to Arise (MIHLA’s)

2.  Frame work for Consideration of Ethical Issues in Health Policy

6.  Chairperson

Dr Sandra Hacker AO (Chair) 

Further Information

Address
AHEC Secretariat
NHMRC
GPO Box 1421
Canberra ACT 2601
Email: ethics@nhmrc.gov.au
Telephone: + 61 2 6217 9070

66 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

National Commission of Ethics in Research 
(CONEP)

Brazil

Information on relevant activities by CONEP

Registration  and  follow  up  the  activities  of  the  Ethics  Committees  in  Research  of  the  Research 
Institutions.

There are 602 institutional committees registered in the NEC that include the participation of about 
11 000 committee members.

The NEC considers, after consulting the local committee, all the proposals of thematic areas (research 
with foreign cooperation, human genetic research, research with indigenous people, research on human 
reproduction, formation of biological databases).

The NEC has developed specific guidelines for each topic among areas.

The NEC is linked to the National Health Council, which is the organ of social control.

Mr. Christian de Paul de Barchifontaine

Further Information
Dr Christian de Paul de Barchifontaine 
Recteur
Commission nationale d´éthique en recherche (Brésil)

Address
Rua Raul Pompéia, 144 - 7º Andar - Pompéia - São Paulo - SP
ZIP CODE: 05025-010 - BRAZIL
Tél. +55 11 3465.2603
Fax: + 55 11 3465.2612
Courriel: cpb@saocamilo-sp.br 
Site web: www.saocamilo-sp.br

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

67

 
Commission on the Ethics of Science 
and Technology (CEST)

Canada

PUBLICATIONS AND EVENTS

Position statement on Genetic Use Restriction Technologies

The document entitled An Ethical Examination of Genetic Use Restriction Technologies (GURTs) was 
published in summer 2009. It is a supplement to the 2003 position statement For the ethical management 
of GMOs. 

After  discussing  the  problems  related  to  the  international  moratorium  on  field  trials  of  GURTs  and 
describing the relevant scientific and legislative context, the Commission examines the potential impact 
on different stakeholders and links in the food chain, namely the environment, research and develop-
ment, seed companies, farmers, consumers and developing countries.

The Commission makes four recommendations, two of which involve maintaining the moratorium. The 
third draws on some relevant recommendations from the position statement on GMOs and highlights 
the preconditions for the assessment of GURTs - if conclusive, transparent data came to light that justi-
fied the lifting of the moratorium, then specific conditions would have to be met before field trials were 
authorised. The final recommendation calls for further research before placing on the market.

The supplement is available in French and English on the CEST website.

Position statement on psychotropic drugs 

The Commission’s sixth position statement entitled Psychotropic Drugs and Expanded Uses: An Ethical 
Perspective was published in autumn 2009. 

It describes the social, socio-political and legal context surrounding these drugs. These medicines play 
an important role in therapy. In fact they have helped to improve the quality of care and expand knowl-
edge about mental and neurological diseases. New generations of psychotropic drugs are also raising 
enormous hopes among the healthy, particularly with regard to maintaining memory and cognitive func-
tions, and increasing concentration and emotional stability. This enthusiasm is reflected in the interest 
in over-the-counter medicines that produce the same effects. However, there is still limited knowledge 
about the brain, the way these drugs work and their long-term side-effects on the central nervous system. 

The Commission has identified four values in this area: the protection of individual health and safety, 
autonomy and the affirmation of individual freedom, equity and representations of the human being. 
After giving its ethical assessment, the Commission addresses eleven recommendations and two caution-
ary notes to decision-makers in Quebec and Canada.

The position statement is available in French and English on the CEST website.

Position statement on assisted procreation

The position statement Ethics and Assisted Procreation: Guidelines for the Donation of Gametes and 
Embryos, Surrogacy and Pre-implantation Genetic Diagnosis was published in October 2009.

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

69

 
This paper follows a request made in September 2007 by the Quebec Ministry of Health and Social Serv-
ices to carry out ‘a thorough analysis of the ethical issues and societal values associated with assisted 
procreation’. The Minister also wished the Commission to examine the issues in light of public debates. 
A three-part public consultation was therefore carried out, consisting of an online consultation, a call for 
submissions and hearings.

In line with its terms of reference, the Commission focused on contributing to work already under way 
in the Ministry of Health and Social Services and providing an in-depth analysis of the ethical issues 
related to three practices in the extensive field of scientific research into assisted procreation: gamete and 
embryo donation, surrogacy and pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD).

On the basis of its assessment, the Commission outlines 19 recommendations addressed specifically to 
the Quebec Government. Nine are on the donation of gametes and embryos, one on surrogacy and the 
other nine on pre-implantation genetic diagnosis.

The position statement is available in French and English on the CEST website.

Third Assembly of the Youth Commission

The Youth Commission met for its third year in April 2009 to discuss the theme of cyberbullying in 
schools. The resulting position statement Cyberbullying: An Ethical Examination Made by Young People 
was launched in November 2009 at the International Science and Society Forum at the Cégep [post-
secondary college] Limoilou in Quebec. 

The Youth Commission starts its paper by presenting some statistics on the role played by information 
technologies in young people’s lives. On one hand, it highlights the use of these new technologies and, on 
the other, it denounces cyberbullying and identifies the values involved. 

Five recommendations are put forward to prevent cyberbullying and provide a better framework for the 
development of new information technologies.

The position statement is available in French and English on the CEST website.

Following the Youth Commission Assembly and the publication of its position paper on cyberbullying, 
CEST had a play written on the subject. The play, called Top Net!, is being performed in secondary 
schools in Quebec, thanks largely to a partnership with some Quebec police forces. 

International activities of CEST

The Commission took part in the international ‘Brain Matters’ conference in Halifax, Nova Scotia in 
September  2009.  During  the  event  the  Commission’s  President  and  a  research  officer  presented  the 
paper Psychotropic Drugs And Expanded Uses: An Ethical Examination Made By The Commission de 
l’éthique de la science et de la technologie. 

In July 2009 the President and the Secretary-General of CEST attended the États généraux francophones 
de la Bioéthique [Bioethics Assembly of French-speaking countries]. They subsequently took part in the 
Sixth Session of the Intergovernmental Bioethics Committee (IGBC) at UNESCO headquarters in Paris.

In November 2009 they participated in the 16th Session of the International Bioethics Committee in 
Mexico and also attended the European Commission-UNESCO Conference on Joint Action for Capacity 
Building in Bioethics.

70 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

WORK IN PROGRESS AT CEST

Nanotechnology and the agri-food sector

The Commission has recently started work on a supplement to its position statement Ethics and Nanote-
chnology: A Basis for Action which was published in 2006. The subject was chosen following a request 
from the Quebec Ministry for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. The paper will focus on the use of nan-
otechnologies in the agri-food sector. 

The supplement is timely given the speed at which research is moving in this field.

Nanotechnologies are a source of both fear and hope, particularly when it comes to the industrial produc-
tion of agricultural products for human consumption. The Commission will therefore take account of the 
many issues raised by scientific research in examining the ethical problems involved, such as freedom of 
choice for consumers, sharing the benefits of research, the impact on public health, sustainable develop-
ment and preserving biodiversity. 

The supplement should be published towards the end of 2010.

End of life and dignity

The Commission’s interest in matters related to the end of life, euthanasia and assisted suicide is not new. 
In autumn 2009 the Commission was invited to participate as an expert in the work of the Select Com-
mittee on Dying with Dignity. The Committee was asked to prepare a report for the Quebec National 
Assembly and produce a reflection document with a view to public consultation on the matter.

The Commission is taking this opportunity to clarify the key concepts relating to the end of life. The 
document will be available on the Commission’s website at the end of June 2010. A position statement 
on the issues and values supported by these key concepts will follow. This paper should be ready by 
autumn 2010.

Fourth Assembly of the Youth Commission

The  Vancouver  Winter  Olympics  have  influenced  the  choice  of  theme  for  the  Youth  Commission  in 
Winter 2011. ‘Ethics and sport’ will be the subject of the discussion. Although it may appear beyond 
reproach, sport is not immune to ethical problems. The expression ‘ethics in sport’ is immediately asso-
ciated with all forms of doping (conventional, techno-doping, gene doping).

Authors writing about ethics in sport have however raised other issues, such as sexual assault, harass-
ment, sports injuries and the return to competition, parental pressure, influence in the trainer-athlete 
relationship and eating disorders, as well as violence in the form of bullying and physical attacks. Other 
issues should be added to this list. They include sex discrimination and unequal access for the disabled, 
visible minorities and indigenous peoples. Ethical questions are also raised by initiation practices in 
sport.

The work of the new Youth Commission should be published in autumn 2011.

This document was prepared with the help of Katerine Hamel and Joanie-Kim McGee-Tremblay (com-
munication officers).

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

71

Further Information
Nicole Beaudry MA, notary
Secretary-General 
Commission de l’éthique de la science et de la technologie (Quebec, Canada)

Address
1200 route de l’Église, 3rd Floor
Office 3.45
Quebec (Quebec) G1V 4Z2
Tel.: + 418 528-0965
Fax: + 418 646-0920
E-mail: ethique@ethique.gouv.qc.ca
Website: www.ethique.gouv.qc.ca

72 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

GENERAL INFORMATION 
ON ACTIVITIES 
of the international 
organisations

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

73

Bioethics division

COUNCIL OF EUROPE

On 15 March 2006, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted Recommendation 
(2006) 4 on research using biological materials of human origin (see attached).

The  Recommendation,  prepared  by  the  Steering  Committee  on  Bioethics  of  the  Council  of  Europe 
(CDBI), builds on the principles embodied in the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and the 
Dignity of Human Beings with regard to the Applications of Biology and Medicine (CETS No 164, 1997, 
Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine) and in its Additional Protocol concerning biomedical 
research (CETS No 195, 2005). While recognising the importance of freedom of research, the purpose 
of the Recommendation is to specify and safeguard the fundamental rights of individuals whose biologi-
cal materials are removed to be stored for research purposes. It also applies to the full range of research 
activities in the health field involving the use of biological materials of human origin that were removed 
for another purpose. A whole chapter is dedicated to biobanks.

Article 26 of this Recommendation states that the text ‘should be re-examined not more than five years 
after its adoption’, i.e. in 2011 at the latest. 

At its 36th plenary meeting, in view of the major developments in the field covered by the Recommenda-
tion, particularly where biobanks were concerned, the CDBI decided it was important to secure informa-
tion on:

• 

• 

these developments in the various countries, in both legal and practical terms, 

the impact of the Recommendation, 

•  any difficulties with implementing it.

At the same meeting, the CDBI decided to hold a seminar on biobanks in 2011 to obtain and exchange 
the requisite information, especially with those directly involved in managing biobanks, and to exam-
ine a number of questions in the light of developments in this field. The conclusions of the seminar are 
planned to be used for re-examining the Recommendation.

Further Information
Laurence Lwoff
Head of the Bioethics Division

Address
Tel.: +33 (0)3 88 41 22 68
Fax: +33 (0)3 88 41 37 45
Email: laurence.lwoff@coe.int
Website: http://www.coe.int/bioethics

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

75

 
Ethics of Science and Technology 
Division – Bioethics Section

UNESCO

Assisting Bioethics Committees (ABC)

Introduction

The Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights adopted in 2005 is a universal framework 
that includes both principles and procedures. Principles such as: Human Dignity and Human Rights, 
Benefit and Harm, Autonomy and Individual Responsibility, Informed Consent, Social Responsibility, 
etc. Procedures relate to addressing bioethical issues and decision-making, the establishment of Ethics 
Committees, risk assessment and management, and transnational practices, among others. 

Article 19 of the Declaration is devoted to ethics committees and states:
‘Independent,  multidisciplinary  and  pluralist  ethics  committees  should  be  established,  promoted  and 
supported at the appropriate level …’

UNESCO has decided to devote its efforts to support member states in establishing bioethics commit-
tees at national level, and has developed a specific programme to that end, called the ‘ABC Project: 
Assisting Bioethics Committees’. There is no official definition of such committees as far as UNESCO 
is concerned, thus allowing for great diversity In fact, their names currently vary and there are subtle 
differences in their role and deliverables.

Nonetheless, there are some core features that UNESCO regards as necessary in order to consider a body 
as a ‘National Bioethics Committee’ and to be included in the ABC Project. Such a committee must:

•  Be a national platform for bioethical development in the country

•  Be newly established or established but willing to have a broader mandate

•  Systematically and continually address the ethical dimensions of (a) medicine and the health sci-

ences, (b) the life sciences, and (c) associated technologies

•  Be a group (with a chairperson and members) that meets on a regular basis

•  Focus on issues that are not simply factual but normative

•  Not be merely a research ethics committee, but play a broader role in policy advice, public debate 

and education

•  Operate at national level with government recognition

Assisting Bioethics Committees Project (ABC)

Main objective: To reinforce the bioethics infrastructure in member states by facilitating the establish-
ment of national bioethics committees (NBCs), and, once established, enhancing their technical capaci-
ties. The project is intended to bring about change in member states. It involves three steps:

Step I. 

Exploration and assessment of the existing bioethics infrastructure in each country

Step II.  Technical support for the establishment of a national bioethics committee

Step III.  Technical support for long-term sustainability

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

77

 
 
 
 
a.  Technical capacity-building training

b.  Partnerships, internships and networking

c.  Provision of practical information

Step II. Technical support for the establishment of the national bioethics committee

After  assessment  of  the  bioethics  infrastructure  in  the  country,  the  project  aims  to  provide  practical 
recommendations to establish national bioethics committees, taking into account the country’s needs 
and domestic specificities. An exploratory meeting is held to facilitate discussion among key national 
stakeholders about the needs of the country, optimal arrangements for the committee and practical steps 
to be taken towards its establishment. The mission includes UNESCO staff and international experts, 
who also assist in drafting a plan of action. Once the committee is established, its official inauguration 
is accompanied by:

•  a bioethics awareness-raising public event involving multiple stakeholders

• 

the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding with UNESCO for technical capacity-building 
support over a period of three years

Step III. Technical support for sustainability

a.  Technical capacity-building training (3 courses in 3 years)

  Year 1 

•  First training course: Working Methods of National Bioethics Committees

•  Building up relevant documentation and providing UNESCO guides developed specifically with 

this aim.

•  Training of the Committee’s secretariat

•  Three teams of experts: English-, French- & Spanish-speaking.

  Year 2 

•  Second training course: Bioethics — Principles and Practices (based on UNESCO’s Core Cur-

riculum in Bioethics)

•  Public event to disseminate the work of the committee

  Year 3

•  Specialised ethics training (ethics education, legal provisions, etc.)

•  Actions to ensure the long-term sustainability and viability of the committee

Step III. Technical support

This includes: facilitating the establishment of long-term partnerships between experienced and newly 
established national bioethics committees; arranging internships for the secretariat members of newly 
established committees, hosted by experienced committees; and supporting networking opportunities at 
regional and international level.

Networking  is  understood  as  practical  and  ongoing  regional  collaboration  between  experienced  and 
newly  established  national  bioethics  committees.  The  joint  JACOB  meeting  held  in  Mexico  City  on 
26-28 Nov 2009 between the European Commission and UNESCO reflects their efforts to foster partner-
ships and the exchange of experiences between national bioethics committees. 

78 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

 
 
 
Present state of the ABC Project

Countries that have already established a NBC

Colombia (2009)

Ivory Coast (2002)

El Salvador (2009)

Gabon (2008)

Ghana (2009)

Guinea (2007)

Jamaica (2009)

Kenya (2009)

Madagascar (2007)

Mali (2009)

Oman (2009)

Togo (2007)

Countries considering the establishment of a NBC

Bangladesh

Botswana

Cap-Verde

Chad

China

Comoros

Malaysia

Malawi 

Mauritius

Niger

Nigeria 

Trinidad and Tobago

NBCs that have signed a MoU with UNESCO (first training course held in 2009) 

Ivory Coast (first course Dec. 2009)

Gabon (first course June 2009)

Ghana (first course Jan. 2009)

Guinea (first course April 2009)

Jamaica (first course March 2009)

Kenya (first course Nov. 2009)

Togo (first course Jan. 2009)

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

79

Second training course in ethics based on UNESCO’s Bioethics Core Curriculum 
(scheduled for 2010)

Ivory Coast (20-25 Sep. 2010)

Gabon (14-19 June 2010)

Ghana (autumn 2010)

Guinea (autumn 2010)

Jamaica (Nov. 2010)

Kenya (May 2010)

Madagascar (autumn 2010)

Togo (6-12 Sep. 2010)

Further Information
Dr Dafna Feinholz Klip 
Chief of Bioethics Section
Ethics of Science and Technology Division 
UNESCO

Address
1, rue Miollis 75732 
Paris cedex 15, France
Tel.: +33(0)145 68 49 94
Fax: +33(0)145 68 55 15
E-mail: d.feinholz@unesco.org
Website: www.unesco.org/bioethics

80 

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010

The Secretariat of the EGE

Address
European Commission
Berl 5/118 - B-1049 Brussels
Fax: (32-2) 299 45 65 
Email: BEPA-ETHICS-GROUP@ec.europa.eu

Maurizio SALVI
European Commission 
Head of the EGE Secretariat
Berl 5/115 - B-1049-Bruxelles
Tel :(32-2) 299 11 79
E-mail: Maurizio.SALVI@ec.europa.eu

Maja PRELOG
European Commission 
Policy Officer – Science and Ethics 
Berl 5/120-B-1049 Bruxelles
Tel : (32-2) 296 66 39
E-mail: Maja.PRELOG@ec.europa.eu

Kim-Hoang LE
European Commission
Berl 5/118-B-1049 Brussels
Tel: (32-2) 299 92 28
Email: Kim-Hoang.LE@ec.europa.eu

Maria Alberta RIBEIRO
European Commission
Berl 5/118-B-1049 Brussels
Tel: (32-2) 295 09 01
Email: Maria-Alberta.RIBEIRO@ec.europa.eu

Ethically Speaking 14, July 2010 

81

How to obtain EU publications

Free publications:

• 

• 

via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu);

at the European Union’s representations or delegations. You can obtain their contact 
details on the Internet (http://ec.europa.eu) or by sending a fax 

Priced publications:

• 

via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu).

Priced subscriptions (e.g. annual series of the Official Journal of the European Union and 
reports of cases before the Court of Justice of the European Union):

• 

via one of the sales agents of the Publications Office of the European Union (http://publi-
cations.europa.eu/others/agents/index_en.htm).

§

ISSN 1725-5562

K
A
-
A
I
-
1
0
-
0
1
4
-
E
N

-
C

Ethically speaking

A newsletter providing information
on the activities of the National Ethics Committees
compiled by the Secretariat of the European Group
on Ethics in Science and New Technologies
to the European Commission

July 2010

