N
J
-
3
0
-
1
0
-
4
6
1
-
E
N

-

C

R
e
p
o

r
t
o

f

t
h
e
2
n
d

m
e
e
t
i
n
g
o

f

r

t
h
e
E
u
o
p
e
a
n
C
o
m
m

i
s
s
i
o
n
’
s

I

n
t
e

r

n
a

t
i
o
n
a

l

The role of 
ethics in 
international 
biomedical 
research

Report of the 2nd meeting 
of the European  
Commission’s  
International Dialogue  
on Bioethics

Madrid, 04-05 March 2010

l

i

D
a
o
g
u
e
o
n
B
o
e
t
h
c
s

i

i

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to obtain EU publications

Free publications:

•	 via	EU	Bookshop	(http://bookshop.europa.eu);

•	 	at	the	European	Commission’s	representations	or	delegations.		

You	can	obtain	their	contact	details	on	the	Internet	(http://ec.europa.eu)	or		
by	sending	a	fax	to	+352	2929-42758.

Priced publications:

•	 via	EU	Bookshop	(http://bookshop.europa.eu);

 Priced subscriptions (e.g. annual series of the Official Journal of the European 
Union and reports of cases before the Court of Justice of the European Union):

•	 	via	one	of	the	sales	agents	of	the	Publications	Office	of	the	European	Union	(http://

publications.europa.eu/others/agents/index_en.htm).

The role of 
ethics in 
international 
biomedical 
research

Report of the 2nd meeting 
of the European  
Commission’s  
International Dialogue  
on Bioethics

Madrid, 04-05 March 2010

Chief Editor 
Maurizio SALVI 

Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers 
to your questions about the European Union.
Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11

(*)  Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers or these calls 

may be billed.

More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu).

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication.

Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2010

ISBN 978-92-79-16590-0 
doi:10.2796/12463

© European Union, 2010

Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Printed in Luxembourg

Printed on elemental chlorine-free bleached PaPer (ECf)

Table of contents

1. Introduction ................................................................4

1.1  European Commission’s International Dialogue on Bioethics (EC IDB) .................... 4
1.2  Remit of the EC IDB .................................................................................................. 5
1.3  European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE) ....................... 6

2. Second meeting of the EC IDB .................................9

2.1  Agenda of the meeting .............................................................................................. 9
2.2  Report ..................................................................................................................... 11
2.3  Speeches and presentations .................................................................................. 23

2.3.1  Welcome speeches ........................................................................................ 23

•  Prof Göran HERMEREN, President of EGE ........................................................ 23
•  Ms Victoria CAMPS, President of Comité de Bioética de España ....................... 33

2.3.2  Key note speeches ........................................................................................ 35

•  Mr Margaritis SCHINAS, Principal Adviser,  

Deputy Head of BEPA “EU as a community of values” ....................................... 35

•  Sir Michael MARMOT, Director of International Institute 

for Society and Health “Equity, solidarity and global governance”  ...................... 40

•  Mr António fernando CORREIA DE CAMPOS, MEP,  

European Parliament’s Science and Technology  
Options Assessment Panel (STOA) “Ethics and EU”  .......................................... 60

2.3.3  Presentations ................................................................................................. 64

•  Argentina ........................................................................................................... 64
•  Australia ............................................................................................................ 73
•  Brazil  ................................................................................................................ 81
•  Canada ............................................................................................................. 86
•  China  ................................................................................................................ 97
•  Egypt  .............................................................................................................. 108
•  India  ............................................................................................................... 113
•  Indonesia  ........................................................................................................ 137
•  Japan  ............................................................................................................. 147
•  Mexico ............................................................................................................ 159
•  PABIN  ............................................................................................................. 171
•  Philippines  ...................................................................................................... 178
•  Russia  ............................................................................................................ 202
•  South Africa  .................................................................................................... 213
•  Council of Europe  ........................................................................................... 218
•  UNESCO  ........................................................................................................ 222
•  World Health Organisation ............................................................................... 236

2.4 List of participants........................................................................................... 242

Secretariat ..................................................................246

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

3 

 
 
1. Introduction

1.1  European Commission’s International 

Dialogue on Bioethics (EC IDB)

In the science and new technologies sector the Commission is promoting a responsible use 
of science and technology, both within the European Union (EU) and worldwide. The goal of 
the Commission is to strike a balance between ethical and socio-cultural diversity, both at 
EU level and globally in other regions of the world, while also respecting internationally rec-
ognised fundamental values. The international dialogue platform is therefore conceived as 
a tool to cluster Chairs of National Ethics Councils (NEC) or equivalent bodies from different 
regions of the world in order to allow a better exchange of information and communication  
between  the  above  mentioned  bodies  and  facilitate  interactions  and  links  between  the 
 European Commission (EC) and the Bodies above.

On february 19, 2009 the first meeting of the international dialogue in bioethics organised 
by European Commission (BEPA) took place, following the request of the European Group 
on Ethics of science and new technologies (EGE). The event was chaired by the President 
of the EGE, Prof. Göran Hermerén, and the Chair of the National Ethics Council of the EU 
Member  State  holding  the  Council  Presidency  and  representing  the  EU  27  NEC  forum, 
Prof. Josef Kuře. Invited participants at this event included Dr Noёlle Lenoir, former french 
Minister of European Affairs, the Chair of the European Parliament’s Scientific Technology 
Options Assessment commission (STOA), Mr Philippe Busquin, the Commissioner for edu-
cation, training, culture and youth, Mr Ján figel, Members of the EGE, Chairs of 15 non-EU 
NEC, Chairs of the EU 27 NECs, and representatives of international organisations (Council 
of Europe, UNESCO, World Health Organisation). The Chairs of NECs attending the meeting 
agreed unanimously on having this event organised on an annual basis, with the EC leading 
this initiative and providing its Secretariat. 

The Second meeting of the International Dialogue on Bioethics, organized by the European 
Commission (BEPA), took place on 4th and 5th March 2010 in Madrid, Spain, under the aus-
pices  of  the  Spanish  rotation  EU  Council  Presidency  and  the  Spanish  National  Bioethics 
Council. The event was chaired by the President of the EGE, Prof. Göran Hermerén, and the 
Chair of the National Ethics Council of the EU Member State holding the Council Presidency 
and representing the EU 27 NEC forum, Ms Victoria Camps.

Participants at the event included: Mr Margaritis Schinas, Deputy Head of the President’s 
Bureau of European Policy Advisors –BEPA- European Commission;  Ms  Victoria Camps, 
President  ES  NEC,  Mr  António  fernando  Correia  de  Campos,  Member  of  the  European 
Parliament’s  Scientific  Technology  Options  Assessment  commission  (STOA),  Sir  Michael 
Marmot, Director, International Institute for Society and Health and Rapporteur of the WHO 
report  on  ‘social  determinants  of  health’,  as  well  as  the  Presidents  of  the  NECs  from  41 

4 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

 
Countries  from  five  continents  and  the  Heads  of  the  bioethics  sectors  of  the  Council  of 
 Europe (Ms Laurence Lwoff), UNESCO (Ms Dafna feinholz) and the WHO (Ms Marie-Charlotte 
Bouësseau).

1.2  Remit of the EC IDB

The EC International Dialogue on Bioethics intends to achieve the following goals:

• To cluster Chairs of National Ethics Councils or equivalent bodies from different regions 

of the world.

• To allow a better exchange of information and communication between the above men-

tioned bodies.

• To  facilitate  interactions  and  links  between  the  European  Commission  and  the  Bodies 

above.

The EC International Dialogue on Bioethics aims to facilitate the sharing of information and 
open dialogue in the fields of ethics of science and technology and bioethics between EU 
and non-EU NECs.

The EC International Dialogue on Bioethics will be chaired by the President of the European 
Group on Ethics of science and new technologies (EGE) and the Chair of the forum of EU27 
National Ethics Councils (NEC forum) under rotation Council Presidency.

The  EC  International  Dialogue  on  Bioethics  will  meet  on  annual  basis.  The  Platform  will 
be  financed  by  the  European  Commission  (Bureau  of  European  Policy  Advisers  –  BEPA,  
(1  person  per  NEC  will  be  reimbursed  –  travelling  and  accommodation).  The  Secretariat 
will  be  provided  by  the  Bureau  of  European  Policy  Advisers  (BEPA)  with  responsibility  to 
coordinate interactions and facilitate the sharing of information and open dialogue. The first 
General Secretary of the Platform will be Mr Salvi (BEPA, Head EGE Secretariat).

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

5 

 
1.3  European group on Ethics in Science  

and new Technologies (EgE)

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE) is an independ-
ent, pluralist and multidisciplinary body which advises the European Commission on ethical 
questions relating to sciences and new technologies, either at the request of the Commis-
sion or on its own initiative. The European Parliament and the European Council may draw 
the Commission’s attention to questions which they consider to be of major ethical impor-
tance.

The  EGE  is  composed  by  15  Members  that  participate  in  their  personal  capacities  and 
are asked to advise the Commission independently from any outside influence. In order to 
face the ethical issues that are arising with the rapid advances in science and technology, 
the Members represent a broader range of professional competences in different disciples 
such as, inter alia, biology and genetics, medicine, pharmacology, agricultural sciences, ICT, 
law, ethics, philosophy, and theology. The identification and selection of the EGE Members 
is made on the basis of an open call for expressions of interest published in the Web. The 
EGE issues Opinions after hearings and discussions with the main experts of the fields. for 
every full Opinion to be issued by the Group, a public roundtable is held before the Opinion 
is adopted, to which representatives of the Institutions of the European Union, experts of 
the fields, parties representing different interests, including NGOs, patients and consumer 
organizations and industrial stakeholders, are invited to participate in the debate.

On May 28, 2008 President José Manuel Barroso asked the European Group on Ethics of 
science  and  new  technologies  (EGE)  to  issue  an  Opinion  on  the  ethical,  legal  and  social 
implications raised by synthetic biology. In May 2009 the EGE held a roundtable on ethics of 
synthetic biology followed by the publication of its proceedings, in order to raise the profile 
of the group’s work and to increase the participation of civil society. Representatives of rel-
evant stakeholders and interest group attended (90 representatives).

for the preparation of the Opinions above 9 EGE meetings1 were organised in 2009, with 
several expert hearings (16 experts). The EGE adopted its Opinion on November 17, 2009.

In  its  Opinion  the  EGE  identifies  and  addresses  ethical  concerns  particularly,  but  not  ex-
clusively,  from  the  point  of  view  of  safety  and  security.  Beyond  this,  the  ethical  reflection 
addresses  justice,  governance,  science  and  society  dialogue,  intellectual  property  and 
concepts of life. In its Opinion the EGE proposes a number of specific recommendations 
on  synthetic  biology,  addressing,  inter  alia,  issues  related  to  safety;  impact  assessment 
of environmental applications; use of synthetic biology for alternative energy supply in EU 
Member States, labelling of specific synthetic biology products, such as cosmetics and tex-
tiles; ethics considerations for approval and marketing of drugs and medical products that 

1   http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/activities/index_en.htm

6 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

 
may result from synthetic biology protocols; biosecurity, prevention of bioterrorism and dual 
use; governance framework for synthetic biology, identifying the relevant stakeholders and 
indicating their responsibilities; patenting; trade and global justice (WTO rules, import and 
export etc.); public debates, support basic research in the fields of biology, chemistry, en-
ergy, materials science, and engineering, as well as applied and interdisciplinary research, 
including  on  the  paradigm  shift  in  understanding  concepts  of  life  (with  also  philosophical 
and religious input).

The EGE also met the Czech National Ethics Council (NEC) and the forum of EU27 NEC 
under the premises of the Czech Presidency (04-05 June 2009, Prague) and held a similar 
meeting during the Swedish Presidency (17-18 Sept 2009 in Stockholm). Political personali-
ties involved: 1) Czech Presidency: Mrs. Dana Jurásková, Czech Minister of Public Health; 
2) Swedish Presidency: Mr Göran Hägglund, Swedish Minister for Health and Social Affairs.

EGE Opinions and publications are available at:  
http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/avis/index_en.htm

Details on EGE activities are available at:  
http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/activities/index_en.htm

EGE remit and composition are published at:  
http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/mandate/index_en.htm

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

7 

 
members of the EgE (2005 – 2010)

Prof. Emmanuel AGIUS, Professor of Moral Philosophy and Moral Theology, faculty of 
Theology, University of Malta

Prof. Diána BánátI, Professor of food Safety, Director General of the Central food 
Research Institute, Hungary

Prof. Francesco BUSnELLI, Professor of Civil Law, Professor at Scuola Superiore di 
Studi Universitari e di Perfezionamento S. Anna of Pisa, Italy

Dr. Anne CAmBon-thomSEn, Research Director, CNRS, Head of a Research Team on 
Genetics and Public Health, Inserm U558, Toulouse, france

Prof. Rafael CAPURRo, Information Ethics, University of Media, Stuttgart, Germany

Prof. Inez de BEAUFoRt, Professor of Health Care Ethics, Erasmus Medical Centre, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands

Prof. Jozef GLASA, Professor of Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, Hepatology and 
Medical Ethics/Bioethics at the Slovak Medical University in Bratislava, Slovak Republic

Prof. hille hAKER, Professor of Moral Theology and Social Ethics, Goethe University, 
frankfurt, Germany

Prof. Göran hERmERÉn, Professor of Medical Ethics, faculty of medicine, Lund 
University, Sweden (Chairman)

Prof. Julian KInDERLERER, Professor of Intellectual Property Law, University of 
Cape Town, Professor of Biotechnology & Society, University of Technology, Delft, The 
Netherlands, Chair, Task Group on Public Perception of Biotechnology, European federation 
of Biotechnology, former Director, Sheffield Institute of Biotechnology Law and Ethics

Prof. Krzysztof mARCzEwSKI, Chef Supervisor of the Department of Nephrology, 
Endocrinology and Metabolic Disease, Pope John Paul II Regional Hospital Zamość, Head 
of the Department of Medical Ethics, Skubiszewski Medical University of Lublin, Poland

ms Paula mARtInho DA SILvA, Lawyer, President of the National Council of Ethics for 
the Science of Life, Portugal (Vice-Chairman)

Prof. Linda nIELSEn, Professor of Law, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

Prof. Pere PUIGDomEnèCh, Research Professor of CSIC, Director of the Plant 
Molecular Genetics Laboratory, CSIC-IRIA, Barcelona, Spain.

Prof. Günter vIRt, Professor of Moral Theology, University of Vienna, Austria

8 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

 
2. Second meeting  

of the EC IDB

2.1 agenda of the meeting

march 4th, 2010

Chair: President of EGE, Prof Göran hermerén
14.30 – 15.00  welcome
• President of EGE: Prof Göran Hermerén
• President ES NEC: Ms Victoria Camps (EU Council Rotation Presidency)

15.00 – 15.30  Key note 
Mr Margaritis Schinas, Principal Adviser, Deputy Head of BEPA  
“EU as a community of values”

15.30 – 16.00  Key note 
Sir Michael Marmot, Director of the International Institute  
for Society and Health “Equity, solidarity and global governance”

16.00 – 16.20  Debate

16.20 – 17.40  how to handle conflict between international  
regulatory regimes?
• Prof Qiu Renzong, China (SARS) (10 min)
• Ms Catherine Tansey, Canada (SARS) (10 min)
• Prof Manuel Ruiz de Chavez, Mexico (swine flu) (10 min)
• Debate (30 min)

17.40 – 18.00  Coffee break

18.00 – 18.30  Key note 
Mr António fernando Correia de Campos, European Parliament’s Scientific  
Technology Options Assessment commission (STOA) «Ethics and EU»

18.30 – 19.30  International initiatives
• CoE, Ms Laurence Lwoff (10 min)
• Unesco, Ms Dafna feinholz (10 min)
• WHO, Ms Marie-Charlotte Bouësseau (10 min)
• Debate (30 min)

21.00 official Dinner

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

9 

 
march 5th, 2010

Chair: President ES nEC, ms victoria Camps
09.30 – 11.40 Ethics review and biomedical research in emerging and  
developing countries - case studies
• Prof Daniel Du Toit, South Africa (10 min)
• Prof Leonardo De Castro, The Philippines (10 min)
• Prof Christian de Paul de Barchifontaine, Brazil (10 min)
• Prof Boris Yudin, Russia (10 min)
• Prof Umar Anggara Jenie, Indonesia (10 min)
• Prof Vijay Kumar, India (10 min)
• Ms Otilia Vainstock, Argentina (10 min)

Debate (30 min)

11.40 – 12.00 Coffee break

12.00 – 13.30 what ethics frame for a global governance of  
biomedical research?
• Prof Ibrahim Badran, Egypt (10 min)
• Prof Ryuichi Ida, Japan (10 min)
• Dr Timothy Dyke, Australia (10 min)
• Prof Chifumbe Chintu, PABIN (10 min)
• Debate (30 min)

13.30 – 13.45 Closing ceremony
• President of EGE: Prof Göran Hermerén
• President ES NEC: Ms Victoria Camps
• IDB Secretary: Mr Maurizio Salvi

13.45 -14.30 Lunch

10 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

 
2.2  Report

‘the role of ethics in international biomedical research’ was the theme for the second 
international  dialogue  on  bioethics,  held  in  Madrid  on  4-5  March  2010.  This  paper  intro-
duces a summary report of that meeting with a section explaining the Bureau of European 
Policy Advisers’ (BEPA) involvement in this work. 

preamble

BEPA launched its international activities in bioethics on 28 and 29 November 2007, when 
it hosted the 7th meeting of the United Nations (UN) Inter-Agency Committee on Bioethics, 
a  forum  for  debate  and  exchange  of  information  between  UN  Agencies  and  International 
Organisations in the field of bioethics and human rights. It was the first time the European 
Commission (EC) hosted the UN Committee. 

Subsequently, in 2008, BEPA decided, with the backing of the EC President’s Cabinet, to 
establish an International Dialogue on Bioethics (IDB), clustering the Chairs of National Eth-
ics Committees of 15 non-EU countries and the Chairs of National Ethics Committees of all 
EU Member States. 

The initiative contributed towards implementing measures set out in the 2008 EC work pro-
gramme: ‘the Commission will be focusing on delivering core policies for the globalisation 
agenda being fully aware that internal and external policy goals are intertwined as never be-
fore, underpinning the need for a modern and integrated vision on how to project, promote 
and protect Europe’s interests and values successfully’.

The first meeting of the International Dialogue on Bioethics

On 9 february 2009, BEPA organised the first meeting of the European Commission’s In-
ternational Dialogue on Bioethics. The event was chaired by the President of the European 
Group on Ethics of science and new technologies (EGE), Prof. Göran Hermerén, and the 
Chair of the National Ethics Council (NEC) of the European Union Member State holding the 
Council Presidency and representing the EU 27 NEC forum, Prof. Josef Kuře. 

Dr  Noёlle  Lenoir,  former  french  Minister  of  EU  Affairs,  delivered  a  keynote  speech  after 
the  opening  by  the  Chair  of  the  European  Parliament’s  Scientific  Technology  Options  As-
sessment  commission,  Mr  Philippe  Busquin,  and  Mr  Ján  figel’,  Commissioner  for  educa-
tion, training, culture and youth. This meeting brought together EGE Members, the Chairs 
of  15  non-EU  National  Ethics  Councils2,  the  Chairs  of  the  National  Ethics  Councils  of  the 
27 Member States of the European Union, and representatives of international organisations. 
The Chairs of NECs unanimously agreed to hold an International Dialogue on Bioethics on an 
annual basis, with the EC (BEPA) leading the initiative and providing its Secretariat.

2    Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, Philippines, Russia, South 

Africa, USA, and PABIN.

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

11 

 
The second meeting of the International Dialogue on Bioethics

On March 4 and 5, 2010, the second meeting of the International Dialogue on Bioethics, 
organised  by  BEPA,  took  place  in  Madrid,  Spain,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Spanish  EU 
Council  Presidency  and  the  Spanish  National  Bioethics  Council.  The  event  was  chaired 
by the President of the European Group on Ethics of science and new technologies (EGE), 
Prof. Göran Hermerén, and the Chair of the National Ethics Council (NEC) of the EU Member 
State holding the Council Presidency and representing the EU 27 NEC forum, Ms Victoria 
Camps. 

Keynote speakers included Mr Margaritis Schinas, Deputy Head of BEPA; Mr António fern-
ando Correia de Campos, Member of the European Parliament’s Scientific Technology Op-
tions  Assessment  commission  (STOA);  Sir  Michael  Marmot,  Director  of  the  International 
Institute for Society and Health, and Rapporteur of the World Health Organisation (WHO) 
report on social determinants of health. Participants included the Chairs of the National Eth-
ics Councils from 41 Countries from five continents and the Heads of the bioethics sectors 
of the Council of Europe (Ms Laurence Lwoff), UNESCO (Ms Dafna feinholz) and the WHO 
(Ms Marie-Charlotte Bouësseau). 

The  Chairs  of  the  EU27  National  Ethics  Councils  and  the  Chairs  of  14  non-EU  National 
 Ethics Councils (Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Japan, 
Mexico,  Philippines,  Russia,  South  Africa,  and  the  Pan-African  Bioethics  Initiative  (PAB-
IN)  discussed  issues  related  to  ethics  of  biomedical  research,  with  specific  emphasis  on 
epidemics (SARS, HIV) and the role that ethics plays in global governance of science and 
technology.  The  initiative  was  intended  to  facilitate  global  dialogue  and  international  links 
between relevant EU and non-EU National Ethics Councils, and to promote the importance 
of fundamental values across the breadth of EU policies, in collaboration with internation-
al  organisations  working  on  bioethics  issues  (for  example  Council  of  Europe,  WHO  and 
UNESCO). 

Summary report of second meeting

Welcome  speeches  were  given  by  Göran  hERmERÉn,  President  of  EGE,  victoria 
CAmPS, President of Spain’s NEC, and Javier ARIAS DIAz on behalf of Jose Jeronimo 
NAVAS PALACIOS, Director of Instituto de Salud Carlos III.

mr margaritis SChInAS, Principal Adviser, Deputy head of BEPA, gave a keynote 
speech entitled ‘EU as a community of values’. Mr Schinas divided his speech in three parts: 

• entry into force of Lisbon Treaty;
• linking ethics to the political priorities of the European Commission (EC), mentioning its 

recent adoption of the EU 2020 strategy; 

• relevance for the field of ethics. 

Mr Schinas said the Lisbon Treaty would have permanent consequences for the role the 
EU will play in international policies, since it provides a constitutional basis for the establish-

12 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

 
ment of a European External Action Service and would provide the Union with a single legal 
personality. The changes will strengthen the European Union’s negotiating power, making 
it more effective on the world stage and a more visible partner for third countries and inter-
national organisations. The Treaty introduced the European Charter of fundamental Rights 
into EU primary law, also elaborating the whole range of civil, political, economic and social 
rights of European citizens. 

Mr Schinas explained that in the political guidelines presented by President Barroso to the 
European Parliament and the European Council it is clearly stated that the European Union 
is founded on precisely these rights. It is in this light that the priorities for the newly estab-
lished Commission will be developed: making a successful exit from the crisis; leading on 
climate action and energy efficiency; boosting new sources of growth and social cohesion to 
renew our social market economy; advancing a people’s Europe with freedom and security; 
and opening a new era for global Europe. He also explained that, in line with the  EUROPE 
2020  Strategy,  actions  in  the  science  and  society  sector  must  involve  growth  based  on 
knowledge  and  innovation:  improving  European  productivity  by  increasing  research  and 
development and innovation performance, better exploiting the potential of information and 
communication  technologies  and  creating  a  digital  single  market,  raising  education  out-
comes and promoting  skills.  Mr  Schinas also  advocated that  the International  Debate  on 
Bioethics is fully compatible with the spirit of the Lisbon Treaty and will be further reinforced 
during the Barroso II College.

Sir michael mARmot gave a keynote speech on ‘Equity, solidarity and global gov-
ernance’. He gave an overview of social determinants of health and their relevance to health 
policies at national and international level. He gave numerous examples of existing dispari-
ties in public health and life expectancy. He said lifestyles and social inequalities deeply af-
fected the health of individuals and that there were disparities not just among countries, but 
also within cities (Glasgow was analysed as a case study). 

Sir Marmot cited data on how improvements in public health had been achieved over time, 
but said that inequalities had nonetheless increased in relative and absolute terms in several 
EU Member States (e.g. Spain). He concluded that creating a fair society where social de-
terminants of health were properly addressed should be put at the heart of all policy-making 
at  European  Union  and  international  level.  Sir  Marmot  proposed  six  policy  objectives  to 
improve health status internationally:

• give every child the best start in life;
• enable all children, young people and adults to maximise their capabilities and have con-

trol over their lives;

• create fair employment and decent work for all;
• ensure a healthy standard of living for all;
• create and develop healthy and sustainable habitat and communities;
• strengthen preventive measures for public health protection. 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

13 

 
To achieve these goals, he said two major policy avenues would have to be implemented, 
namely: equality and health equity in all policies, and effective evidence-based delivery sys-
tems.

Keynote speeches were followed by a general discussion. Topics discussed included: 

• effectiveness of real-life policies, 
• role of the EU and international organisations in addressing public health issues, 
• the principle of subsidiarity and national sovereignty in national public health policies (in-

cluding public health economics),

• the need for further research on the link between ethics and public health policies, 
• issues  related  to  promotion  of  public  health  in  the  EU  and  relevance  of  the  principle  of 

subsidiarity, 

• challenges of information society and ageing for European and international public health 

policies.

The meeting continued with presentations on how to handle conflict between international 
regulatory  regimes  by  representatives  of  the  National  Ethics  Councils  of  China  (SARS), 
Canada (SARS), and mexico (swine flu). 

Prof. Qiu REnzonG (China) reported on actions taken in China during SARS epidemic. 
He explained that when these had occurred, no target legislation existed to deal with ethics 
reviews of SARS clinical trials. But during and after the epidemics, the Chinese government 
promulgated  the  Regulation  on  SARS  Prevention  and  Control  (2003);  the  Regulation  on 
Response to Emerging Events of Public Health (2003); and revised the Law on Prevention 
and Control of Communicable Diseases (2004). 

ms Catherine tAnSEy (Canada) reported on actions taken in Canada during the SARS 
epidemic. She explained that Canadian Research Ethics Boards (REBs) were inundated with 
protocols, many REB board members and office workers not available, REBs were not able 
to meet face-to-face; there was ambiguity about the status of teleconferences with regard 
to decision maker processes, and no mechanism to deal with procedural issues. She said 
that  an  ideal  model  to  face  epidemics  (as  far  as  REB  work  is  concerned)  would  involve 
increased  diligence  consistent  with  ‘special  scrutiny’,  and  more  procedural  flexibility.  The 
model would be proportional to the perceived risks and specific circumstances associated 
with a research protocol, as defined in the Canadian Tri-Council Policy Statement.

Prof. manuel RUIz DE ChAvEz (mexico) reported on actions taken in Mexico during 
swine flu epidemic. He explained that Mexico was the first country to declare the presence 
of sustained transmission of the new A (H1N1) influenza virus that threatened the health and 
lives of the population. Consequently, the government took action according to the following 
principles:

• protection and preservation of public health; 
• ensuring as much continuity as possible regarding socioeconomic dynamics. 

14 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

 
The Mexican experience had shown that the leadership of health authorities was subject 
to particularly close scrutiny during times of crisis and should therefore be sustained with 
work derived from previously consensual decision-making. Such legitimacy was essential to 
ensure public support. He said it could be attained by involving the public in the pandemic 
preparedness process, which consists of leadership, awareness-raising, training, continuity 
strategies, drills, and having effective communication and message channels. These proc-
esses ensured continuity of institutional operations, coordination with clients, suppliers and 
allies, and effective assessment methodologies. Such a course of action would guarantee 
effective, consistent public support, while enhancing the credibility of the authorities. 

These presentations were followed by a general discussion on issues raised.

The second part of the meeting started with a keynote speech by mr António Fernando 
CoRREIA de CAmPoS mEP, Science and technology options Assessment (StoA) 
on ‘Ethics and the EU.’ He spoke on the EU as a community of values, with the goal of 
moving towards an open dialogue on science and ethics. He argued that a global society 
needed  more  significant  updated  research  about  rights,  casuistry,  utilitarianism,  pragma-
tism  and  other  very  basic  concepts  whose  dimensions  are  essential  to  serious  and  rel-
evant thinking in bioethics. He said STOA strongly supported the European Commission’s 
International  Dialogue  on  Bioethics,  and  other  initiatives  to  encourage  responsible  use  of 
science and technology. As far as the ethical assessment of science and technology was 
concerned, he said the independence of advisory bodies was a key element to ensure and 
maintain more public trust for opinions adopted. Mr Correia de Campos also stressed the 
importance of building bridges among stakeholders involved in science and technology and 
the need to take active and pragmatic action to facilitate the embedding of ethics in science 
and technology, respecting the democratic rights of EU citizens to take part in the complex 
debate.

He said there was a difficult ongoing debate on DNA recombinant technologies regarding 
the  ethical  legitimacy  of  science  and  technology.  Other  discussions  needed  on  the  ethi-
cal legitimacy of technology tools were on stem cells, and information and communication 
technologies. Proper regulation on science and technologies needed to include bioethics. A 
balance between scientific freedom and responsible use of research and development had 
to be found and implemented. Open fora and discussions were essential for this; bioethics 
should not be captured by unilateral positions, including religious or political. Equity, solidar-
ity and ethics had to be promoted, together with research and pragmatic approaches for 
concrete policy options in uses of science and technologies.

The conference continued with short presentations on international initiatives, given by Lau-
rence  Lwoff,  Council  of  Europe  (CoE)  (drafting  of  a  new  international  declaration  to 
prevent double standards), Dafna Feinholz, UnESCo (Universal declaration on bioethics 
and  human  rights,  Assisting  Bioethics  Committees  (ABC)  project,  and  marie-Charlotte 
Bouësseau, who (strengthening capacity in the Member States, collaboration with NECs, 
and issuing guidelines on ethics issues). 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

15 

 
Dr Laurence LwoFF reported on a recent Council of Europe initiative to draft a new in-
ternational declaration to prevent double standards in international bioclinical research. This 
initiative was launched in 2009 in the framework of the Spanish Chairmanship of the Com-
mittee of Ministers of the CoE. It involves CoE members and states and observer States, 
relevant intergovernmental organisations and the European Commission. Dr Lwoff said the 
initiative aimed:

• to prevent double ethics standards in international research trials; 
• to take into account specific difficulties for implementing principles considered as universal; 
• to identify measures to give effect to those principles;
• to promote equity in biomedical research activities. 

The  above  Declaration  might  be  adopted  by  representatives  of  governments  in  2011.  It 
would define moral and political commitment rather than be legally binding. 

Dr Dafna FEInhoLz, UnESCo reported on UNESCO activity on NEC capacity- building, 
the Assisting Bioethics Committees (ABC) project. She explained that the project aimed to 
reinforce bioethics infrastructure in UNESCO Member States through facilitating the estab-
lishment of national bioethics committees, and, once established, through the enhancement 
of their technical capacities.

Dr feinholz also reported on a recent UNESCO-EC conference on capacity building of eth-
ics committees (Mexico City, 2009). She said participants had agreed on the following con-
clusions for the promotion of international cooperation for knowledge-sharing and mutual 
capacity-building among National Bioethics Committees: 

• encourage  countries  to  establish  independent,  multidisciplinary  and  pluralist  bioethics 

committees at the national level; 

• promote regional bioethics networks that actively facilitate exchange of knowledge and 

best practices concerning bioethical issues of common concern; 

• explore ways to bring together existing bioethics networks to foster exchange of knowl-

edge and ideas about emerging trends and challenges in various regions. 

Dr  marie-Charlotte  BoUëSSEAU  reported  on  who  activities  intended  to  strengthen 
capacity on ethics in WHO member states, seeking systematic collaboration with National 
Ethics Councils and issuing guidelines on ethics issues. She reported on WHO documents 
that had recently been adopted, such those on as ethics and the public health response to 
pandemic influenza, HIV care and treatment. Work was ongoing to finalise WHO guidelines 
on ethics and pandemic influenza, and Research Ethics Committees (REC). She gave infor-
mation on WHO networking activities and said a WHO NEC global summit would take place 
in July 2010 in Singapore.

The presentations of the above speakers were followed by a general discussion.

16 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

 
On  friday,  March  5th  the  meeting  continued  with  short  presentations  of  case  stud-
ies  on  ethics  review  and  biomedical  research  in  emerging  and  developing  countries  by 
Prof. Danie Du toit (nEC South Africa); Prof. Leonardo De Castro (nEC Philippines);  
Prof.  Christian  de  Paul  de  Barchifontaine  (nEC  Brazil);  Prof.  Boris  yudin  (nEC 
 Russia); Prof. Anggara Umar Jenie (nEC Indonesia); Prof. vijay Kumar (nEC India);  
and ms otilia vainstok (nEC Argentina). 

Prof.  Daniel  DU  toIt  (South  Africa)  explained  that  the  SA  NEC  (NHREC)  was  estab-
lished in 2006 and its mandate covers a number of specific sectors: determine guidelines 
for the functioning of health RECs; register and audit RECs; set norms and standards for 
conducting  research  on  humans  &  animals,  including  norms  &  standards  for  conducting 
clinical trials; adjudicate complaints about functioning of RECs & hear any complaint by a 
researcher who believes that s/he has been discriminated against by a REC; refer to relevant 
statutory  health  professions  council  matters  involving  violation  or  potential  violation  of  an 
ethical or professional rule by a health care provider; institute such disciplinary action as may 
be prescribed against any person found to be in violation of any norms and standards or 
guidelines set for the conducting of research in terms of the National Health Act (NHA); and 
advise  national  department  and  provincial  departments  on  any  ethical  issues  concerning 
research.  future  activities  would  include:  formally  auditing  RECs;  revision  of  National  Re-
search Ethics Guidelines; supporting RECs (e.g. facilitating capacity-building such as train-
ing, funding activities, networking of REC chairs); and raising the profile of the organisation 
among stakeholders. Animal welfare and protection in clinical trials were specific working 
areas with the NHREC. 

Prof. Leonardo DE CAStRo (the Philippines) reported on several case studies involv-
ing the approval of research trials by the competent research ethics council in the Philip-
pines. Difficulties arose when ethics review requests had to be implemented by multi-centre 
research  sponsors.  He  said  sponsors  sometimes  refused  to  change  their  research  pro-
tocols when asked to do so by the REC for an ethics audit, for instance, by modifying an 
informed consent form. He said there were also issues of potential conflicts of interest for 
NEC and REC members concerning reviews of trials, and drew attention to difficulties that 
could arise from organ transplant collaborative (or multicentre) trials.

Prof. Christian DE PAUL DE BARChIFontAInE (Brazil) explained that the establish-
ment of the Brazilian Unified Health System (Sistema Único de Saúde — SUS) in the year 
1990  was  accompanied  by  a  significant  expansion  in  the  private  health  care  system  and 
health  services.  In  2002,  19.9 %  of  the  population  was  covered  by  private  health  insur-
ance while the budget of the Brazilian Unified Health System was approximately 3.7 % of 
Brazilian  GDP  (DATASUS,  2006).  The  ethical  protection  of  participants  in  human  clinical 
trials was among the primary responsibilities of ethics committees on research with human 
participation. In Brazil, an application for review of the National Constitution was one of the 
results of the political changes underway at the time. Therefore, a revised Constitution with 
enhanced respect for human rights was promulgated in 1988. The amendments included a 
new Code of Medical Ethics also covering medical research (Code of Medical Ethics, 1988). 
In 1988, the National Health Council (Conselho Nacional de Saúde — CNS) ratified the first 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

17 

 
guidelines for medical research in CNS Resolution 1/88. In 1995, a revision of the Resolution 
and the National Health Council (CNS) was proposed. The new guidelines were published 
in Resolution CNS 196/96 in October 1996 and formally approved by the National Health 
Council and the Ministry of Health. They are now well-established and followed throughout 
the country. Their adoption also led to the creation of the National Commission for Ethics in 
Research (CONEP, 2000), responsible for evaluating ethics issues in all research involving 
human beings. Prof. Barchifontaine called for more educational and vocational training on 
bioethics for REC and NEC members. He also said that much needed to be done to improve 
the understanding of basic research among the general public, both as regards the money 
spent and the participation of human subjects in research trials. 

Prof. Boris yUDIn (Russia) reported on a vaccine trial in Volgograd. He explained that vac-
cination was rather controversial in Russia, and that there were many active opponents. Some 
grounds for their activities were created by the federal Law ‘On Immunoprophylaxis of Infec-
tious Diseases’ (1998). The law sets out citizens’ rights including: the right to obtain complete, 
objective  information  on  the  need  for  immunisations  from  medical  practitioners;  the  right  to 
refuse vaccinations and the consequences of refusal; possible post-vaccinal complications and 
free therapy in case of such complications. The law protects those who for some reason were 
unvaccinated against unjustified discrimination. It states that vaccinations have to be carried 
out with the consent of citizens, parents or other legal representatives, and are administered 
only to those who have no medical contraindications. Prof. Yudin said it was still rather difficult 
to comply with the law in everyday life. One of the problems stemmed from the fact that many 
parents, health professionals and personnel of preschool institutions were not familiar with its 
provisions. 

Prof. Umar AnGGARA JEnIE (Indonesia) addressed the issue of ethics and traditional 
medicine.  He  said  Indonesian  Traditional  Medicines  (ITM),  used  for  medical  or  cosmetic 
purposes,  were  mostly  developed  from  Hindu,  Buddhist,  Chinese  and  Islamic  traditional 
medicines. Islamic traditional medicine has existed since ancient times, and is widely used 
throughout the country. Indonesian government formally recognizes only modern medicines 
for prevention and curing diseases. Using traditional medicines are neither forbidden nor al-
lowed. Its means that the Indonesian government does not take integrative principle (where 
traditional  medicines  and  medication  are  legally  recognized  by  the  government,  hand  in 
hand with the modern ones), but instead takes tolerance principle to the traditional medi-
cines (the government formally recognizes only modern medicines, but allows the people 
to  take  traditional  medicines  or  medication,  on  the  basis  of  personal  needs  and  respon-
sibilities).  The  government  policy  however,  supports  the  development  of  traditional  medi-
cines and some research centres for traditional medicines have been established in many 
state-own  universities  and  are  supported  by  government  funds3.  The  rights  to  existence, 
usage  and  sustainability  of  traditional  medicine  are  ensured  by  bioethics  principles.  ITM 
is regarded by the government as national cultural heritage, and therefore it needs to be 

3    The main aim of those centres is to bring traditional medicines into the modern ones, by isolating, purifying and 
structural elucidating of the active compounds within the herbs, and doing pharmacological as well as clinical 
trials of those pure compounds.

18 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

 
preserved and developed. The use of ITM by people, which have already been consumed 
since hundreds years ago, is not forbidden, but it is not allowed either. The government is 
supporting research on ITM which aims to convert those traditional medicines into modern 
dosage-form drugs.

Dr  vijay  KUmAR  (India)  explained  that  the  Indian  Council  of  Medical  Research  is  the 
central body in India for the formulation, coordination and promotion of biomedical research 
under the Department of Health Research at the Indian Ministry of Health and family Wel-
fare. It was first established in 1911 as the Indian Research fund Association (IRfA), and 
then renamed in 1949 as the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) with considerably 
expanded  functions.  According  to  Dr  Vijay  Kumar,  the  ICMR’s  remit  is  to  undertake  and 
support basic, epidemiological, applied and operational research in areas of national public 
health importance, using tools including those of modern biology. With regard to research 
ethics, he said that this was a new specialty. Ethical review was still rudimentary in many 
institutions. Improvements were needed with regard to: a) informed consent administration, 
given the inherent difficulties due to prevalence of illiteracy, too many languages, or lack of 
time for health professionals to explain; b) bioethics education (not yet in the medical cur-
riculum); c) legislation (lack of proper legislation to regulate human experiments) and com-
munity consultation (on issues such as product availability/access, etc.). The ICMR is playing 
a lead role in spreading bioethics awareness by preparing guidelines, workshops, training 
for ethics committee members, educational programmes, and public debates on contem-
porary issues. He recommended strict adherence to ethical guidelines, systematic use of 
scientific  and  ethical  reviews,  work  on  bioethics  training,  counselling  for  patients,  action 
to provide adequate care and protection for vulnerable groups, and the sharing of results 
with all involved in research. He said ethics should be an integral part of every biomedical 
research project, participants should be protected from harm, and appropriate legislation 
should be in place to ensure that this happens.

Prof. otilia vAInStoK (Argentina) explained that, since its creation in 2001, Argentina’s 
National  Committee  of  Ethics  in  Science  and  Technology  (CECTE)  has  developed  as  an 
independent multidisciplinary body. At the request of government bodies, public and private 
institutions  and  individuals,  it  examines  ethical  issues  relating  to  research  and  the  ethical 
implications of policies and regulations. CECTE identifies ethical questions raised by new 
developments in science and technology. It addresses areas in which science has a respon-
sibility for wider social concerns and it draws up recommendations and reports in all fields 
of scientific research and new technologies, including research bioethics. Issues involving 
bio-medical research are analysed by ethics committees within the bodies where the re-
search takes place.

Argentina is actively engaged in research cooperation with EU countries: such international 
activities require a correspondingly international approach to ethics. In that context, the EC 
International Dialogue on Bioethics (IDB) has become an important tool for giving ethics a 
greater  role  in  the  international  governance  of  science  and  technology.  A  sustained  effort 
should be made to build up a common language for an IDB. A useful first step might be to 
examine and debate specific cases. As a practical exercise, a very brief presentation of cases 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

19 

 
involving international policies may be a useful way to start a discussion on the ethical frame-
works, principles, norms and main concepts applied and the policies involved. 

Prof. Vainstok explained that CECTE has worked on the access to and use of scientific data 
in the public domain (2008), and in particular the ethical issues raised by the accessibility 
of scientific data from the clinical testing of pharmaceutical drugs not covered by patents. 
CECTE has also analysed the way that intellectual property law has increased in breadth 
and scope over the last 30 years, and the ethical and legal concerns it raises regarding ac-
cess to the benefits of science and technology. In particular, CECTE has focused on the 
implications for the healthcare of vulnerable sections of the population in developing coun-
tries.  CECTE  has  also  worked  on  risk  assessment  and  management  in  nanotechnology. 
This research is carried out in developed countries, but information on the risks involved in 
NT should be openly shared. Professor Vainstok argued that this policy area could be an 
important field for international cooperation on ethics and that EC IDB could be a tool to 
facilitate synergies between national ethical committees worldwide.

A discussion followed presentations, focusing on possibilities for global cooperation.

The theme of the second part of the meeting was: ‘What ethics frame for a global govern-
ance of biomedical research?’ Presentations were made by Prof. Ibrahim Badran (nEC 
Egypt), Prof. Ryuichi Ida (nEC Japan), Dr timothy Dyke (nEC Australia), and Prof. 
Chifumbe Chintu (PABIn). 

Prof. Ibrahim BADRAn (Egypt) argued that a responsible and ethically sound approach 
to new applications of science and technology needed to be carefully defined. In Egypt, sci-
entific progress had induced researchers to re-consider rules that had applied in Pharaonic, 
Greek, Roman and Islamic civilisations, for example, as regards organ, tissue and cell re-
search, and transplantation. According to Dr Badran, in Egypt, the practice of medicine is 
well accepted as it is conceived to be, as believed in Islam, morally dependent on God’s 
mercy. Prof. Badran said current biomedical practice in Egypt was based on a number of 
documents, such as WHO, UNESCO and WMA declarations and codes of practice, Helsinki 
declaration, and CIOMS guidelines, as well as the Islamic code formulated in Kuwait (1980). 
He also argued in favour of global governance in biomedical research, for instance, in: cell, 
tissue and organ transplantation; genetically coded drugs; global drug trade and counterfeit 
drugs; and modern drug production related to nanotechnology.

Prof.  Ryuichi  IDA  (Japan)  said  that  global  governance  involved  issues  related  to  diver-
sity of cultures, social systems, spirituality and power, but also that some universal values 
could be identified, such as human life, human dignity, fundamental rights and freedoms. 
He argued that the main elements to consider included: universality in diversity; social val-
ues;  family,  community,  ethnic  groups,  religions  and  spiritualities  (Buddhism,  Christianity, 
Hindu,  Islam,  Confucianism  etc.).  There  were  differences  in  values  regarding  human  life 
and death. Prof. Ida then addressed some specific Japanese examples, such as individual 
autonomy vs. the wishes of the family in organ donation, requirement of double consent, 
human dignity in reproductive human cloning, and the status of the embryo as a germ of 

20 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

 
human life (not a ‘thing’, nor a human being). He argued that key concepts to reach the goal 
of a global approach to ethics of science and technology include international dialogue and 
harmonisation. He said that understanding differences was a key step since, for example, 
Japanese values on human life and the human body might be different to those elsewhere, 
and that since different value systems, cultures, and ethics co-exist, one system should not 
be privileged above others. International dialogue and global summits would assist mutual 
understanding, he argued. There was, he said, a need to clarify the content of some terms 
in  international  documents,  such  as  human  dignity,  human  being,  human  body,  life,  fam-
ily, etc. He defended the notion of community of vales while advocating the importance of 
cultural diversities (different application in each of cultural context of universal values). He 
drew attention to the ethical complexity of international multi-centre or joint research, and 
said dialogue on its own would not resolve this. He recommended the following steps to 
harmonise fundamental values worldwide: 

• declaration of core general principles;
• declaration of principles in particular fields;
• framework convention of basic principles;
• unifying national rules and standards.

Prof. Ida suggested the actors who should be involved in the process: individual countries, 
which might cooperate; international organisations, e.g. EC, UNESCO, WHO, CoE; the sci-
entific  community,  e.g.  International  Stem  Cell  forum;  P3G  (Public  Population  Project  in 
Genomics); as well as NECs, the Ethics Community, International Bioethics Association and 
patients’ organisations. 

In conclusion, he said it was time to accelerate the task of establishing global ethical gov-
ernance, as developments in biomedicine were proceeding apace and would not be con-
strained pending agreement on such governance.

Dr timothy DyKE (Australia) said the Australian framework for research governance was 
largely based on three national standards (underpinned by a range of guidelines), that con-
sidered research governance, ethical conduct of human research, and ethical conduct of 
animal  research.  The  standard  for  the  ethical  conduct  of  human  research  (the  National 
Statement  on  Ethical  Conduct  in  Human  research  (2007))  sets  out  the  responsibilities  of 
institutions and of human research ethics committees and includes consideration of: princi-
ples of ethical conduct; themes including risks and benefits; consent; ethical considerations 
specific to research methods or fields; ethical consideration specific to participants; proc-
esses of governance and ethical review.

He said compliance with ethics requirements was monitored through funding body agree-
ments.  Dr  Dyke  noted  the  development  in  Australia  of  a  harmonised  approach  to  ethical 
review of multi-centre human research. He proposed that a set of international standards in 
the three areas of research governance and conduct, human research and animal research 
would be appropriate. 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

21 

 
Prof. Chifumbe ChIntU (PABIn) said the AIDS pandemic, the resurgence of tuberculosis 
and the virulence of malaria had resulted in collaborative research between the developed 
and developing world. Most African countries had formed their own institutional and national 
ethics committees to examine research according to their own situation, including their cul-
tural values. The Pan African Bioethics Initiative (PABIN) had been a catalyst in the formation 
of some of these committees.

He explained that most African NECs operated without national legal guidelines on how and 
what biomedical research should be conducted. In the circumstances, they had turned to 
international  guidelines,  e.g.  the  Helsinki  Declaration  and  WHO  guidelines,  indicating  will-
ingness to accept global norms. Currently, a number of countries had drawn up their own 
national codes on biomedical research (e.g. South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda and Kenya). He 
said the situation was improving. Now REC committee members required training, and ethics 
review processes needed to be evaluated and updated. Several actions on bioethics were 
ongoing, e.g. EC Networking for Ethics on Bioethics Research in Africa; WHO — Strategic 
Initiative for Developing Capacity in Ethics Review; ethics training institutions in South Africa. 
It was now a general requirement in Africa that research proposals be approved by institu-
tional or national ethics committees. Constant dialogue among policy makers, researchers 
and communities was taking place as new ethical issues arose. 

Presentations were followed by a general discussion on the issues raised.

The 2nd EC IDB officially ended with closing ceremony speeches by Göran hERmERÉn, 
President of EGE, maurizio SALvI, General Secretary of the EC IDB, and victoria CAmPS, 
President of ES NEC.

maurizio SALvI PhD
Secretary General EC IBD
Bureau of European Policy  
Advisers (BEPA)
Head EGE Secretariat
European Commission

22 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

 
prof göran hERmERÉn

2.3  Speeches and presentations

2.3.1  Welcome speeches

Prof Göran HERMERÉN, 
President of EGE

International Dialogue on Bioethics

introduction

The financial crisis which peaked last year reminded us of how interconnected and in-
terdependent  we  are,  especially  economically.  There  is  a  need  for  global  dialogues  in 
many areas, including on ethical issues. There is extensive cooperation on health care 
and medical research, both within Europe and between Europe and other parts of the 
world. food is imported and exported, so food safety standards need to be harmonised 
and so forth.

’International dialogue’ could mean several things and the purpose of such dialogues can 
also vary. The minimum requirement is, obviously, that the participants come from different 
countries. One possible goal is for participants to present their views on certain issues and 
provide some historical and cultural background, so that the differences between countries 
participating become understandable. Another possible objective could be harmonisation, 
an attempt to find a common denominator. However, this second objective will not be pur-
sued here. We have come together to learn from each other.

A global approach is necessary to address many of the problems facing us today, for exam-
ple those raised by GM food, intellectual property rights (IPR), food safety standards, food 
security, climate change, medicinal products and medical devices. The market is becoming 
more and more global. At the same time, collaboration between research and health care 
centres within and outside Europe is increasing. Issues of global justice are becoming more 
urgent and more pressing.

The general challenges we all have to face can be grouped together into three partly overlap-
ping categories: environmental protection, economic development and social progress. The 
restrictions imposed on possible courses of action are that environmental protection and 
farming should be sustainable, economic development should be fair and social progress 
should be in line with cultural traditions but should also improve living conditions for more 
people, be compatible with human rights and allow humans to flourish.

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

23 

prof göran hERmERÉn

historical background

The International Dialogue on Bioethics (IDB) is an initiative requested by the EGE and pro-
posed formally by BEPA in 2006. It aims to facilitate information-sharing and an open dia-
logue on bioethics between European and non-European National Ethics Councils (NECs).

In addition to the members of the EGE, the chairs of 15 non-EU NECs — including India — 
are invited, along with the chairs of the EU27 NECs. Representatives of international organi-
sations (UN agencies, the Council of Europe, etc.) are granted observer status.

The first meeting took place in Brussels on 19 february 2009. forty-two countries were rep-
resented. This meeting in Madrid is, thus, the second. The International Dialogue will meet 
once a year and will be financed by BEPA, on behalf of the European Commission.

The possibility of a dialogue

Some of the key concepts or focal points of ethics include choices, values and value con-
flicts. The same applies to bioethics as well. If the situations of choice differ between de-
veloped and developing countries, this should be made clear in our dialogue. If values in 
different regions or populations are not the same, and if the values are ranked differently in 
importance, there is a need for a dialogue, in view of the global nature of many of the chal-
lenges facing us today.

But is a dialogue possible at all? Pessimists might be inclined to take the story of the Tower 
of Babel as their starting-point. Languages, views of the world and values are so different 
that communication becomes impossible from the beginning or rapidly breaks down. The 
world values survey project has demonstrated that values are indeed different and that cer-
tain easily predictable clusters of values predominate in different parts of the world. 

But, taking a less pessimistic view, it is possible to try to identify certain fundamental goals 
or values for humans. They are enshrined in international documents proclaiming the basic 
human rights. These values can be achieved in many different ways, depending on the cli-
mate and technical and economic level of society.

ethical challenges raised by science and new technologies

New  developments  in  science  and  technologies  offer  prospects  of  providing  solutions  to 
many problems facing contemporary society, for example the promise of new strong nano-
materials, better biomaterials, improved imaging, genetic tests with higher predictive value, 
better  methods  of  drug  delivery,  treatments  for  as  yet  untreatable  conditions  and  many 
more.

Some  of  these  developments  also  raise  ethical  concerns.  There  are  potential  dangers, 
knowledge gaps and uncertainties, for example related to the possibility of spreading toxic 

24 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

prof göran hERmERÉn

nanoparticles in the environment or of dual uses of applications of research in synthetic biol-
ogy or of widening the gap between developed and developing countries.

Moreover, how, when and by whom is the line drawn between surveillance violating privacy 
and personal integrity and surveillance providing effective protection for citizens? Who is to 
have access to new genetic information made available by tests offering higher sensitivity 
and specificity and for what purposes may this information be used?

a political vision

Both the first President of the European Council and the President of the European Com-
mission  have  expressed  similar  visions  with  a  general  political  aim.  According  to  Mr  van 
Rompuy, the first European Council President, ‘Europe is a community of values.’

In  his  speech  to  the  European  Parliament  after  his  re-election  as  President  of  the  Euro-
pean Commission, President Barroso said: ‘I will redouble my efforts to make an ambitious 
Europe happen. A Europe that puts people at the heart of the policy agenda and projects 
European values and interests in the world.’ In his speech, Margaritis Schinas, Deputy Head 
of BEPA, will tell us more about what this vision will mean in practice.

Values or goals can be achieved in different ways. In most cultures some of these ways are 
accepted, others not. Accepted ways of achieving cultural goals involve general agreement 
on how people ought to behave, that is a number of cultural norms.

by way of conclusion

In view of the fact that many of the challenges we face are global, we need to face them to-
gether. That is why an International Dialogue on Bioethics is essential. In that spirit, I extend 
a warm welcome to all of you.

I would not want to end this introduction without thanking BEPA for financing this event and 
without expressing special thanks to Maurizio Salvi, who took the decisive initiative that gave 
birth to the IDB.

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

25 

prof göran hERmERÉn

26 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

prof göran hERmERÉn

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

27 

prof göran hERmERÉn

28 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

prof göran hERmERÉn

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

29 

prof göran hERmERÉn

30 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

prof göran hERmERÉn

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

31 

prof göran hERmERÉn

32 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

ms Victoria CampS

Ms Victoria CAMPS, 
President of Comité de Bioética de España

Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Colleagues,

It is a pleasure for the Spanish Bioethics Committee to welcome to Madrid the International 
Dialogue on Bioethics, organised by the Bureau of European Policy Advisers (BEPA) from the 
European Commission. Our Committee is very young, so this is the first time we have had 
the opportunity to host a conference of this kind. It also gives us the chance to introduce our 
committee to all of you and to welcome you to our country. I hope we will have an interesting 
discussion on some of the bioethics issues which are of most concern to us at the moment. 
I also wish you an excellent stay in Madrid and hope you have some free time to enjoy the city.

Let  me  start  with  a  few  brief  words  of  introduction  on  the  Spanish  Bioethics  Commit-
tee.  It  was  set  up  in  October  2008  and  has  twelve  members  appointed  by  the  Ministry 
for Science and Innovation, having been created by the Law on Biomedical Research. In 
our first year, we drafted our internal rules of operation and have just published an Opin-
ion  on  the  new  abortion  law,  recently  approved  by  the  Spanish  Parliament.  At  the  mo-
ment,  we  are  working  on  a  Code  of  Good  Practice  in  Scientific  Research  and  on  issues 
such as conscientious objection in health matters, umbilical cord blood banks, the benefits 
for patients from biomedical research and research into surgical practices. These are just 
some of the studies currently in the pipeline. You can find more information on our website  
(www.comitedebioetica.es).

The general theme chosen for this conference is: ‘The role of ethics in international biomedical 
research’. To begin with, we will have the pleasure of listening to two speakers who will provide 
the conceptual framework for our subsequent discussions. first of all, Sir Michael Marmot will 
talk to us about equity and solidarity in healthcare and health research. Then, Mr. Margaritis 
Schinas will discuss the idea of Europe as a community of values. These two opening speech-
es will be followed by a series of round tables, involving representatives from all continents and 
from international institutions, to explore some of the problems related to the regulation and 
ethical review of biomedical research and, more specifically, the review of clinical trials.

I think it is important to use the principle of justice or equity as a benchmark when assessing 
the achievements of biomedical research and healthcare, so that we can draw attention to 
what are still major shortcomings in sharing out our resources fairly. At a time of global eco-
nomic crisis like this, bioethics cannot afford to forget those countries which are least devel-
oped or those sections of the population which are most disadvantaged. That is, those who 
suffer most and have the fewest opportunities to receive healthcare. In the development of 
bioethics up to now, considerable emphasis has been placed on the importance of patient 
autonomy, to the detriment of justice or a fair distribution of resources. We can only talk about 
the right of all individuals to have their autonomy respected from the perspective of equity. 
This approach should guide all international dialogue comparing the specificities and efforts 
of different countries in order to preserve fundamental rights and the principles of bioethics.

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

33 

ms Victoria CampS

Europe is not just an economic and monetary union. Neither is it only a political enterprise. 
Europe must also be a community of values to be preserved at all costs. These values are 
none other than freedom, equality and fraternity.

They are the basis for the fundamental rights and obligations of everybody. There is no con-
tradiction in recognising differences between cultures and, at the same time, defending some 
universal values which cannot be ignored. The golden rule of morality was first expressed by 
Confucius when he said, ‘do not do to others what you would not want done to yourself.’ This 
is a universal rule, not exclusive to East or West. It concerns all of us. It is the foundation of 
any ethical theory or framework, however different the cultural setting.

We will certainly have the opportunity to listen to experiences from countries with different 
cultural, economic and political contexts in the next sessions. However, what unites us is a 
desire  to  do  biomedical  research  and  provide  healthcare  which  do  not  undermine  funda-
mental ethical values. When, as is now the case, multinationals carry out large-scale clinical 
trials, more than ever we need a community of ethical values to shape research. Recognising 
human dignity is an indisputable starting point for any project which aspires to ethical legiti-
macy. We may need to express this value using different words and concepts, befitting the 
traditions and idiosyncrasies of each culture, but ultimately we will be repeating what Kant 
said best when he argued that human beings are ends in themselves and must always be 
seen as such, not as means serving other interests.

As you all know, one of the objectives of this meeting is for us to get to know each other, to 
learn about how the different bioethics committees and institutions work, and to highlight the 
challenges for bioethics at present and in the near future. Without doubt one of these chal-
lenges is the emergence of ethics committees in developing countries and the possibility of 
creating a suitable ethical framework for global governance of biomedical research.

One of the problems to be tackled by any institution dedicated to bioethics is communication. 
We need to inform the general public about the activities of our committees and show them 
that we are not just here to hold grand theoretical discussions on major issues, but rather, 
and above all, to come up with new ways of approaching problems which affect everybody. 
The word ‘bioethics’ still belongs to a small group of experts. However, I can say from experi-
ence that when I tell non-experts that I work in the field of bioethics, they usually reply: ‘Ah, 
that’s very important.’ In fact, to talk about bioethics is to consider the ethical problems of 
life, especially those related to birth, illness and death. In other words, the problems related 
to the vulnerability of human beings.

Everybody can understand that this concerns them.

I hope that over the  next few hours we  will  have an  interesting discussion  about all these 
ideas. A discussion that leaves us with the impression that it was worth coming and taking 
part in this conference.

Welcome, again, and thank you all for being here.

34 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

mr margaritis SChInaS

2.3.2 Key note speeches

Mr Margaritis SCHINAS, 
Principal Adviser, Deputy Head of BEPA  
“EU as a community of values”

Intervention at the 2nd meeting of the European Commission 
International Dialogue on Bioethics 

Madrid, 04.03.2010 

Distinguished colleagues, ladies and gentleman, thank you for coming today to this meet-
ing  from  all  over  the  world.  I  also  thank  the  President  of  the  European  Group  on  Ethics,  
Prof. Hermerén, the Chair of the Spanish National Ethics Council, Professor Victoria Camps, 
also representing the Council rotation Presidency and the forum of EU27 National Ethics 
Councils, and Mr António fernando Correia de Campos, honourable Member of the Euro-
pean Parliament’s Scientific Technology Options Assessment commission. 

It is always a pleasure to see that a dialogue among so many relevant interlocutors can be 
established to discuss bioethics, such a complex and multi-dimensional issue. 

In  my  presentation  today  I  would  like  to  address  the  following  issues:  1)  The  implications 
of the entering into force of the Lisbon Treaty, 2) The political priorities of the Commission 
and the role ethics plays in the overall political programme of the European Union; 3) The 
relevance of the international dialogue platform and its role in global discussion on bioethics. 

Ladies and gentleman, the European Union is an extremely dynamic reality which 
has been progressing steadily during the last 60 years. Only in the last 10 years, it has 
adopted a common currency, opened to 15 new member states and on 1 December 2009, 
the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force, thus ending several years of uncertainty around its 
institutional future. 

The Treaty of Lisbon provides the Union with the legal framework and tools necessary to 
meet future challenges and to respond to citizens’ demands: 

A  more  democratic  and  transparent  Europe,  with  a  strengthened  role  for  both  the 
European Parliament and national parliaments, more opportunities for citizens to have their 
voices heard and a clearer sense of who does what at European and national level. 

A more efficient Europe, with simplified working methods and voting rules, streamlined 
and modern institutions for a EU of 27 members and an improved ability to act in areas of 
major priority for today’s Union. 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

35 

mr margaritis SChInaS

A Europe as an actor on the global stage will be achieved by bringing together Europe’s 
external policy tools, both when developing and deciding new policies. A new High Rep-
resentative for the Union in Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, also Vice-President of the 
Commission, will increase the impact, the coherence and the visibility of the EU’s external 
action. 

A new European External Action Service will provide visibility and support to the EU. A single 
legal personality for the Union will strengthen the Union’s negotiating power, making it more 
effective on the world stage and a more visible partner for third countries and international 
organisations. 

However, most important of all, the Treaty of Lisbon requires a Europe of rights and val-
ues: promoting the Union’s values, introducing the Charter of Fundamental Rights into 
European primary law. for the first time in the European Union’s history, the European 
Union Charter of Fundamental Rights elaborates the whole range of civil, political, eco-
nomic and social rights of European citizens, which are legally binding not only on the Union 
and its institutions, but also on the Member States as regards the implementation of Union 
law. 

The Charter identifies a set of European values, such as human dignity, freedom, democ-
racy, protection of human rights, pluralism, non discrimination, tolerance, justice, solidarity, 
and gender equality. Promoting these values is now a main objective of the EU. 

Ladies  and  gentleman,  in  the  political  guidelines  presented  by  President  Barroso  to 
the European Parliament and the European Council it was clearly stated that the European 
Union is founded on precisely these values. Promoting these, as well as peace and 
the well-being of the Union’s peoples are now the main objectives of the Union. It is in this 
light that the priorities for the newly established Commission will be implemented: making 
a successful exit from the crisis; leading on climate action and energy efficiency; boosting 
new sources of growth and social cohesion to renew our social market economy; advanc-
ing a people’s Europe with freedom and security; and opening a new era for global Europe. 

In line with the EUROPE 2020 Strategy, for the science and society sector this will involve 
growth based on knowledge and innovation: improving our productivity by increasing our 
research  and  development  and  innovation  performance,  better  exploiting  the  potential  of 
information  and  communication  technologies  and  creating  a  digital  single  market,  raising 
education outcomes and promoting skills. 

In the science and new technologies sector the Commission is promoting a responsible use 
of science and technology, both within the EU and worldwide. 

There is no doubt in the Commission’s mind that the International Dialogue will be fully 
compatible with the changes required by the Lisbon treaty and the political strat-
egy of the European Union. 

36 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

mr margaritis SChInaS

Ladies and gentleman let me now address specific issues related to the International Dia-
logue on Bioethics and the topics you are going to discuss today. 

As you know, the European Union is a world player in economic, trade and financial terms 
and has bilateral and multilateral agreements covering most countries and regions of the 
globe. Although these relationships focused mainly on trade issues at the beginning, they 
have expanded over the years to cover investment, economic cooperation, energy, science 
and technology and environmental protection as well as political matters such as interna-
tional crime and human rights protection. 

Research and innovation, and public health are issues that can hardly be confined to spe-
cific geopolitical reality. The topics you are going to debate today are therefore intrinsically 
global and raise difficult questions: 

Ethics review and biomedical research in emerging and developing countries: how to pro-
mote actions in those regions of the world without considering equality and protection of 
human rights? 

How to promote global actions without endorsing solidarity and fight socio-economic in-
equalities? How to face global tragedies such as HIV, tuberculosis and malaria or new epi-
demics such as SARS, bird flu without respecting tolerance, solidarity, respect for human 
rights?  What  ethics  frame  should  be  identified  for  a  global  governance  of  biomedical  re-
search? How to face social determinants of health? 

These are issues you will discuss today, and certainly univocal and simple responses will be 
hardly identifiable. 

Ladies  and  gentleman,  the  list  of  public  health  threats  that  still  deeply  affect  global 
health is long and includes sexually-transmitted agents; respiratory agents; enteric agents; 
 zoonotic agents, emerging agents, new enteroviruses and retroviruses etc. In addition, the 
changing ecology and the increasing risk factors associated with urbanization and mobility, 
social disruption, misuse of medical technology and environmental change, all these factors 
affect the world population mortality rates, and health problems and hunger still affect large 
portions of the world population. 

the EU is, however, active to face global public health threats: 

The EU is a major contributor to development cooperation programmes -providing 
over half of all official development assistance worldwide-, with a financial support of € 51 
billion for the time frame 2007 – 2013, a role which is further reinforced in the Lisbon Treaty. 

with  regard  to  epidemics,  several  pro-active  measures  have  been  taken  by  the  EC: 
for example the European Centre for Disease Control (ECDC) – the EU agency seeking to 
strengthen  Europe’s  defences  against  diseases  such  as  SARS,  HIV/AIDS  and  influenza  – 
will play a major role the EU-wide surveillance of current and emerging infections, and in 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

37 

mr margaritis SChInaS

coordinating and sharing best practice to ensure that Member States’ authorities provide  
detailed  surveillance  statistics  in  cooperation  with  relevant  international  organisations  
(WHO in particular). 

In  the  area  of  research  and  development,  the  EC  will  continue  to  support  research 
into poverty-related diseases through the Seventh framework Programme and the EDCTP 
(European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials Partnership) initiative, as well as vaccine 
research and technologies for evaluating efficacy and safety; extending research collabora-
tion with developing countries beyond the ‘limited’ remit of the EDCTP; increasing support 
for multidisciplinary research centres; facilitating public-private sector partnerships for vac-
cine R&D; and supporting training and skills development for staff working in the field.

In the area of ethics, specific activities will be devoted to facilitate capacity building on eth-
ics in developing countries and emerging countries. The Commission will also reinforce this 
action and coordination tasks to monitor that the EU policies are consistent with the shared 
European values.

In the area of Clinical trials involving human subject, any marketing authorisation ap-
plications in the EU are required to be conducted in accordance with the European Clinical 
Trials Directive. As you know, the above mentioned EU regulatory provisions also cover the 
information to be submitted to the competent authorities and to the ethics committees.

If the clinical trials are conducted outside the EU, but submitted in an application for mar-
keting authorisation in the EU, they have to follow the principles which are equivalent to the 
provisions of Community code relating to medicinal products for human use. 

It is important to note that the above European legislative framework specifies requirements 
on the composition and role the ethics committee has to play in assessing research proto-
cols, but it does not provide ethics guidelines on which the work of the ethics committee has 
to be carried out, both in the EU or internationally. 

This  is  because  EU  Member  States  have  regulations  that  govern  the  ethics  of  scientific 
research and they implement some form of ethical review of research proposals, either at 
national level, or more commonly at local level through the use of local research ethics com-
mittees.  Regulation  of  ethical  issues  as  such  remains  responsibility  of  individual  Member 
States,  reflecting  the  ethical  pluralism  and  the  principle  of  subsidiarity  that  characterises 
the European Union. This ethical diversity, however, is enriched by a value platform which 
is  intimately  linked  to  the  identity  of  the  EU:  the  European  Charter  of  fundamental  rights. 
furthermore,  notwithstanding  the  specific  (legal)  weight  of  the  Charter,  when  discussing 
ethical issues in the EU we also look at other important sources such as, for example, the 
Oviedo  Convention,  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  or  UNESCO’s  Universal 
Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights. In other words, everything that the river carries 
is considered. 

38 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

mr margaritis SChInaS

I referred to EU regulation on clinical trials not only because this was debated yesterday at 
the forum of National Ethics Councils, or because it was the first EU law requiring com-
pulsory approval of the research practice by ethics committees, but because it exemplifies 
the EU policy method in the fields of bioethics: to strike a balance between ethical and 
socio-cultural diversity, both at EU level and globally in other regions of the world, while also 
respecting  internationally  recognised  fundamental  values  and  the  Charter  of  fundamental 
rights. 

The  International  Debate  on  Bioethics,  established  by  the  European  Commission  under 
suggestion of the European Group on Ethics, therefore aims to facilitate international de-
bates, sharing of information (best practices) and to establish synergies across the EU and 
its  Members.  It  does  not  aim  at  normative  outputs,  as  other  relevant  interlocutors  in  this 
room do in their work on Bioethics, I am referring to the Colleagues of the Council of Europe, 
the Unesco, and the World Health Organisation, just to quote some. The event today em-
bodies the spirit, the political frame and the new role the EU will play according to the Lisbon 
Treaty: Europe as a ‘community of values’, based on open debate, mutual respect 
and tolerance and the notion of Europe as a ‘global player in a multi-polar world’. 

Ladies  and  gentleman,  to  conclude,  as  the  financial  crisis  has  dramatically  showed  us, 
global governance, based on international debate, is needed in several policy sectors in the 
world. This international dialogue platform may then open a forum between relevant EU and 
non-European stakeholders to identify commonalities as well as divergences and promote 
the importance of values across the breadth of EU policies. I am therefore thankful for the 
participation of both European and non-European experts in this room today. 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

39 

Sir michael maRmoT

Sir Michael MARMOT, 
Director of International Institute for Society and Health  
“Equity, solidarity and global governance”

40 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Sir michael maRmoT

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

41 

Sir michael maRmoT

42 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Sir michael maRmoT

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

43 

Sir michael maRmoT

44 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Sir michael maRmoT

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

45 

Sir michael maRmoT

46 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Sir michael maRmoT

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

47 

Sir michael maRmoT

48 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Sir michael maRmoT

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

49 

Sir michael maRmoT

50 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Sir michael maRmoT

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

51 

Sir michael maRmoT

52 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Sir michael maRmoT

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

53 

Sir michael maRmoT

54 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Sir michael maRmoT

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

55 

Sir michael maRmoT

56 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Sir michael maRmoT

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

57 

Sir michael maRmoT

58 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Sir michael maRmoT

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

59 

mr antónio fernando CoRREIa DE CampoS

Mr António fernando CORREIA DE CAMPOS, 
MEP, European Parliament’s Science and Technology Options 
Assessment Panel (STOA) “Ethics and EU” 

eU as a community of values: towards an ‘open’ science and ethics dialogue 

(Acknowledgement...) 

I  am  most  honored  with  the  invitation  to  represent  the  European  Parliament’s  Scientific 
Technology  Options  Assessment  Panel  (STOA)  in  this  second  International  Dialogue  on 
Bioethics  on  the  role  of  ethics  in  international  biomedical  research.  One  year  ago,  in  this 
same event, important statements were made. Prof. Philippe Busquin strongly supported 
the need to hold an international debate on the ethics of science and technology and re-
spect for diversity; Prof. Göran Hermerén stressed the need to share information as a first 
step to global mutual understanding of the principles and values to respect and, Prof. Josef 
Kure recalled that a knowledge-based society is part of the revised Lisbon agenda and the 
ERA (European Research Area), underlining the benefits to the EU from sharing a position 
on the importance of human dignity, protection of human rights, informed consent, privacy 
and safeguard of personal data. 

All these statements remain updated. 

An independent and fruitful dialogue between ethics, science and technology endures an 
almost daily input of challenges, which require unprecedented questions to be answered. 
Actually, scientific research never advanced so fast. A month in the beginning of this 21st cen-
tury  outputs  more  tested  knowledge  than  could  have  ever  been  imagined  by  the  man  of 
the early 20th century. In parallel, the explosion of the internet and the birth of open access 
scientific journals allows new scientific findings to reach their interested readers at a much 
higher rate than in previous years and decades. 

Every  time  an  innovative  scientific  or  technological  advance  is  on  the  line  potential  and 
challenge arise together for humankind. Several questions and doubts become ever more 
pressing and we must confront them with a measured sense of urgency. Therefore the need 
for  a  sustained  dialogue  between  scientists  health  professionals  the  civil  society  and  law 
professionals sounds even more important today if we want to build a new paradigm of so-
cial cohesion based on mutual understanding acceptance towards difference and profound 
respect of human rights and liberties.

60 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

mr antónio fernando CoRREIa DE CampoS

But why exactly would this dialogue be even more necessary now than ever before? 

The gaps between imagination of the scientific community and realism of the civil society. 
can widen today to a point where bridges take longer to establish than it takes to achieve 
significant scientific progress. Therefore it is more urgent to dialogue now than ever before. 
When information runs through platforms databases electronic journals blogs and planetary-
wide scientific consortiums the gaps in understanding and regulation between science and 
society are no longer tolerable. More than ever we must all come together and build sound 
bridges that can be traveled easily in both directions in the future. We haven’t come this far 
to let it slip away at the last moment by not talking and making the most of all the precious 
knowledge we are generating. 

furthermore, the temporal gap between main scientific advances and their translation into 
our  daily  lives  is  shortening  at  an  extraordinary  rhythm.  Almost  seven  millennia  separated 
the wheel from the discovery of electricity but only one hundred years went past between 
electricity and the telephone. Communication soon will be mainly web based, but the internet 
was launched worldwide in 1991, only nineteen years ago! The same applies to Biology; the 
structure of DNA was discovered in 1953 and together with it the central dogma in Biology 
(DNA -RNA -Protein); the first human stem cells reboot was reported recently, only fifty years 
after that dogma was first established. Biomaterials, nanomedicine and robots are already in 
the pipeline. It will all come together as it did in the past, only it will definitely come faster. And 
even faster in the years to come. 

I have stated my point about the need to make an effort for dialogue. So let’s summon up 
the challenge: 

Can scientists and other professionals bridge their gaps faster than the advance of scientific 
progress? 

That surely seems like a daunting task at first given the pace at which knowledge is accumu-
lating. But in STOA we believe that we all need to beat this challenge. 

However, that will not be that easy, mainly when we move to the Regulatory domain. There 
is no doubt that we need a new paradigm for scientific and biomedical lawmaking and this 
is exactly where the EU and national bioethics commissions must commit to improve their 
roles. Law and ethics need to become updated and effective instruments to allow science 
and technology to serve humankind, free of impending conflicts of interest and selfish mo-
tivations. However, law and ethics must provide the groundwork for this goal to be assured 
without limiting science and technology’s promises. 

Ideally, bio-Iawyers and bioethicists must act proactively, at the forefront of the whole proc-
ess. They must be able to read the knowledge that is being generated and realistically under-
stand the social repercussions of the next scientific breakthrough. Then, when that break-
through finally happens and is later translated to a significant impact on our daily lives (just 
see the bad example of the so called “door-sale genetics”) there must be a legal framework in 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

61 

mr antónio fernando CoRREIa DE CampoS

place, dynamical enough, flexible enough, not only to assess the ethical acceptance of these 
practices but also to prevent any harmful consequences. The. trophy in the long term must 
be progress, but sustained progress, meaning it has to promote fundamental values such 
as justice, equity and freedom. It must be won by working with profound respect for human 
rights together with an awareness to avoid any anthropocentric excessiveness, and honoring 
the whole eco dimension of our planet. 

This  cannot  be  achieved  without  a  constant  organizational  and  individual  self-evaluative 
process,  striving  to  attain  fairness  in  our  judgment.  We  need  a  new  set  of  rules  that  will 
accompany that constant evaluation. Here bio-Iawyers and bioethicists assume the big re-
sponsibility of thinking, designing and phrasing these ground rules, and as our scientific and 
technological achievements gets more complex and ingenious so does the difficulty of their 
task. Only multidisciplinary open forums of discussion will help to attain the fairest, while si-
multaneously more dynamic, ethical and legal framework possible, which will obtain the ideal 
match of adapting to the present while keeping a constant eye on the future. 

This is an enormous challenge. There is a steep mountain to climb for systems that are usu-
ally rigidly structured and conservative at their core and which can be deeply reactive when it 
comes to innovative science and technology. To change that paradigm towards a pro-active 
model there is a need to reach out and agree to talk together, independently of our profes-
sional background, cultural bend or religious views. People from allltends of the spectrum” 
need not only to talk more but also to talk better. A healthier and fairer world must be the 
background axiom of this effort. 

To  achieve  this  purpose  STOA  believes  that  Bioethics  should  never  become  the  voice  of 
unilateral  professions,  religions  or  politics;  it  should  not  become  a  iclose’  dialogue  where 
the opinions of ethics commissions only reflect some kind of professional, confessional or 
lobbying interests. A global society needs a serious, independent and determined bioethics 
discourse  based  on  fundamental  rights  and  on  the  answering  of  core  questions  such  as 
Itwhich is the 21st Century meaning of ethics, common good, integrity, solidarity or equity”. It 
also needs more significant updated research about rights, casuistry, utilitarianism, pragma-
tism, and other very basic concepts whose dimensions are essential to serious and relevant 
thinking in bioethics. for the European Union to become a community of not merely declared 
but also respected values, we believe like Pericles of Athens phrased around 430 B.C. that 
although only a few may originate a policy, we are all able to judge it, which means that events 
like the one we are at today, promoting the gathering of worldwide bioethical experts and 
concerns, ought to be celebrated as main, key instruments to construct and solidify a true 
‘open’ science and ethics dialogue in the EU. 

Thank you for your attention. 

62 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

mr antónio fernando CoRREIa DE CampoS

Main sources: 

Cordeiro, J.V. -To think like the unborn, 2010 (comentario nao publica do) 

Dan Sulmasy, 07/24/2009, Speech on the 40th anniversary of The Hastings Center.  
See: http://www.thehastingscenter.org/Bioethicsforum/Post.aspx?id=3768 

EGE documents. See: http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/policy_advisers/welcome_en.htm and  
http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/docs/draft_agenda_international_platfrom_19_febr_2009.pdf

Popper, K. -The open society and its enemies, voll, Ed. Routledge Classics, 2009 

R. Irvine -Bioethical Inquiry (2009) 6:415-416 DOl 10.1007/s11673-009-9199-5 

STOA report on Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) impact and other STOA 
documents. See: http://www.europarl.europa.eu/stoa/default_en.htm 

Wesley J. Smith --Not So Dark Year in Bioethics After All.  
See: http://www.cbc -network.org/2009/11/2009-a-not-so-dark-year-in-bioethics-after-all/

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

63 

argentina

2.3.3 presentations 

Argentina 

64 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

argentina

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

65 

argentina

66 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

argentina

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

67 

argentina

68 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

argentina

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

69 

argentina

70 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

argentina

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

71 

argentina

72 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

australia

Australia 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

73 

australia

74 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

australia

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

75 

australia

76 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

australia

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

77 

australia

78 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

australia

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

79 

australia

80 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Brazil

Brazil 
Ethics in research involving human subjects: the Brazilian experience 

William Saad Hossne, Corina Bontempo Duca de freitas  
and Christian de Paul de Barchifontaine 

introduction 

The doctor-patient relationship has traditionally been based on trust. However, it has also 
traditionally been one-way, requiring the patient to waive his right to give his opinion while 
trusting fully in that given by the doctor. As Jay Katz pointed out, the patient-doctor relation-
ship was a silent world. Now there is a growing need for honest communication between 
them, in which informed consent is more than just a legal measure. Doctors and patients 
must see trust as part of a relationship based on mutual communication. 

In experiments involving human subjects, it is not enough just to provide an explanation to a 
potential participant and then hand out a consent form. The decision-making process takes 
time,  because  self-determination  is  a  process  of  self-reflection  and  reflection  with  others 
(Katz 1984, pp. 121–129). The quality of the consent obtained varies depending on the ex-
tent to which the doctor and the patient are of similar social status. Thus informed consent 
is meaningless unless the patient is educated and medically very knowledgeable, but most 
sick people are not in a position to argue with their physicians: they are “coerced by disease, 
by pain, by fear of death, and often by ignorance” (Katz 1984, p. 2). It is important to point 
out that this is the case for most sick people in Brazil. In addition, the distinction between 
treatment  and  experimentation  is  generally  vague,  making  it  difficult  to  decide  precisely 
what is the most appropriate medical procedure. 

There  are  figures  to  support  this  statement.  It  is  well  known  that  the  introduction  of  the 
Brazilian  Universal  Public  Health  System  around  1990  was  accompanied  by  a  significant 
increase in private insurance cover. However, it is difficult to understand why, in 1998, only 
7.2% of the population had health insurance while health expenditure for this group account-
ed for 52.5% of health expenditure in general (Kilsztajn et al. 2002, pp. 258-262). In 2005, 
19.9% of the population had private insurance cover and universal public health expenditure 
represented around 3.7% of Gross Domestic Product (DATASUS 2006). 

These figures explain why some pharmaceutical companies prefer to conduct research in 
Brazil. It is relatively easy for companies to find volunteers who have never had treatment, 
which means that they have never received any medicine to treat their illnesses. Moreover, 
many Brazilians are desperately seeking medical treatment and will thus accept any kind of 
experimental treatment provided free of charge. Brazil is a big country (8 514 876 km2) with 
a population estimated at roughly 191 000 000 in 2010. There is unequal income distribution 
together with varying education levels. 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

81 

Brazil

What used to be called “human experimentation” is now referred to in more technical terms 
as “clinical research” or “clinical trials”. “Clinical research” is a type of scientific approach 
which evaluates disease prevention, diagnostic techniques and treatment, while “clinical tri-
als” means the subset of clinical research used to evaluate experimental drugs in phases I, 
II and III (Spilker 1991). In addition to this, human research also involves the understanding 
and use of cohort studies, retrospective studies, cross-sectional studies, different types of 
questionnaires and research and control groups. 

In Brazil, all participants in experimental studies are aware that the treatment they are receiv-
ing forms part of research. The question is whether or not they were actually given the op-
tion of taking part in the research. The only real protection individuals have is dependent on 
the ethical approach of the researchers and their colleagues. The committees for research 
ethics are the main structures responsible for the ethical protection of human subjects in 
medical research in Brazil. 

Guidelines for research ethics in brazil 

Background 

In the 1980s, the ethical requirements and procedures applied to human research involv-
ing  human  beings  were  debated  throughout  the  world.  Several  important  achievements 
included  the  revision  of  the  Helsinki  Declaration  by  the  World  Medical  Association  at  its 
twenty-ninth world medical meeting in Tokyo, Japan (1975); the publication in 1982 of the in-
ternational ethical guidelines for biomedical research by the Council for International Organi-
sations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS), and the publication of various rules and regulations 
applicable to research involving human subjects by the World Health Organisation (WHO) 
and the United States Department of Health and Human Services. 

In Brazil, the political changes of the time led to a petition to revise the Brazilian constitu-
tion. A revised constitution clearly setting out human rights was therefore adopted in 1988 
(Constitution of the federative Republic of Brazil). following these changes, a new code of 
medical ethics was adopted which covered medical research (1988 Code of Medical Eth-
ics). In addition to this, a book was published on experiments using human subjects (Vieira 
and Hossne, 1987). All of this culminated in a reaction by doctors to the lack of government 
regulations concerning human experimentation, in particular biomedical research. In 1988, 
the Brazilian Health Ministry’s National Health Council adopted the first guidelines on medi-
cal research in the form of Resolution CNS 1/88. Unfortunately many mistakes were made, 
and the resolution was not implemented. 

A proposal to revise it was put forward in 1995, and the National Health Council commis-
sioned a working group, chaired by William Saad Hossne, to produce new guidelines on re-
search involving human subjects in Brazil. The team consisted of an interdisciplinary group 
of fifteen people from different domains including medicine, philosophy, religion, sociology, 
law, government and the pharmaceutical industry, and several representatives of voluntary 

82 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Brazil

health organisations dealing with different illnesses and medical conditions. All the mem-
bers of the group were selected by the National Health Council and were properly qualified, 
experienced and skilled to promote and protect, on the basis of their profiles, the rights and 
well-being of research participants. 

An initial draft was produced which was presented at the first Brazilian Bioethics Congress. 
The Brazilian Bioethics Society had been set up two years previously by Dr William Saad 
Hossne. The suggestions put forward by the Congress were accepted, corrections were 
made and after ten months spent revising Resolution CNS 1/88, the group sent a proposal 
in writing to the National Health Council. The new guidelines were laid down in Resolution 
CNS-196/96 in October 1996, when Brazil officially adopted guidelines on human experi-
mentation which were approved by the National Health Council and the Ministry of Health. 
The revised guidelines are now well known all over the country and researchers are familiar 
with them and comply with them (National Health Council, Brazil 2000). 

Resolution  CNS-l96/96  involved  significant  progress  and  indicated  a  considerable  differ-
ence between the initial regulations laid down and those which Brazil managed to introduce 
subsequently. The Resolution led to the establishment of the National Commission for Re-
search Ethics (CONEP, 2000), which is responsible for assessing ethical issues arising from 
all research involving human subjects that entails a risk of damage. It must be noted that 
many people use the word “risk” to mean unpleasant consequences (Vieira and Hossne, 
1987).  CONEP,  however,  defines  risk  as  the  possibility  of  physical,  psychological,  social, 
economic  or  legal  damage.  Resolution  CNS-196/96  also  led  to  the  establishment  of  the 
institutional committees for research ethics (CEP) in institutions that conduct experiments 
involving human subjects. These committees will be discussed in more depth below. 

It is worthwhile noting that Resolution CNS-l96/96 also contained principles providing guid-
ance  on  the  responsibilities  and  obligations  of  all  parties  engaged  in  research  involving 
human  subjects.  However,  it  is  not  a  code.  Part  One  of  Resolution  CNS-196/96  links  its 
recommendations to Brazilian laws and was written by lawyers and legal experts. It informs 
researchers of the cases in which it is possible to deviate from the guidelines. But the main 
objective of Resolution  CNS-196/96  is to  make readers aware of human  experimentation 
and its consequences from different points of view. 

Committees for Research Ethics and the National Commission for Research Ethics 
(CONEP) 

In Brazil, these committees are found  in academic  institutions and  medical  organisations 
and in most cases are concerned with research in the fields of medicine, dentistry, nurs-
ing, psychology and other health sciences. There are also some committees of this kind in 
the social and human domains. They all come under the aegis of the National Commission 
for Research Ethics (CONEP), which is under the responsibility of the Ministry of Health. All 
research involving human subjects must be approved by one of these committees before 
it can start. We already held a specific discussion on the Commission and Committees of 
Ethics in Research in Brussels in february 2009. 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

83 

Brazil

final comments 

It is challenging to establish a researcher-patient decision-making process which is genu-
inely  mutual.  It  is  also  difficult  to  make  researchers  see  that  the  protection  of  individuals 
depends  to  a  large  extent  on  their  ethical  conduct.  However,  the  Brazilian  guidelines  are 
designed to make researchers realise that there is a need for a reliable, ethical protocol and 
to make them recognise the critical issues which researchers and participants must face 
up to in relation to declared consent. The Brazilian guidelines do not, therefore, constitute 
a code of rules. 

This  is  a  persistent  problem  because,  if  ethical  rules  are  to  be  established,  professionals 
must become familiar with this domain. Ethics should be made a subject in establishments 
providing  professional  training.  If  it  formed  part  of  the  first-year  curriculum,  this  would  in 
general result in students simply learning facts off by heart. If it were introduced in the final 
years of study, on the other hand, there is a risk that students would not be receptive to 
the thinking behind it, as they would only want to learn and practise their professional skills. 
Despite these challenges, there is a need for change. A decision to do nothing would prob-
ably involve just as many problems as a decision to do something. Doing nothing, therefore, 
would simply exacerbate the existing problem. 

The achievements observed to date include the following: the establishment of a body of 
literature on this matter written in Portuguese; the publication of periodicals on bioethics in 
Brazil; various attempts to introduce bioethics at different level of training (undergraduate, 
graduate  and  postgraduate  levels  in  medicine),  and  the  introduction  of  the  first  master’s 
degree in bioethics in Brazil and now a doctorate at the S‹o Camilo University (Centro Uni-
versitário São Camilo). 

There has been growing interest in Brazil in research ethics in the past decade, and this is 
increasing. The CONEP and the Committees for Research Ethics have changed the behav-
iour of researchers, and they must be given credit for having done so and for having made 
a difference. However, a lot remains to be done if the general public is to be given a basic 
understanding  of  health  research  and  the  demands  involved,  not  only  in  terms  of  money 
spent  but  also  of  the  participation  of  the  general  public  as  research  subjects.  Brazilian 
researchers are now more aware of the fact that scientific research requires social checks 
and balances, like other professional activities. A seed has therefore been planted which we 
hope will bear fruit one day. 

references 

Brazil (2000). Ministry of Health. National Health Council. Available at: 

http://conselho.saude.gov.br/web_comissoes/conep/aquivos/resolucoes/resolucoes.htm 

Code of Medical Ethics (1988) Cf http://www.m.org.br. Accessed 2/22/09 

DATASUS (2006) http://tabnet.datasus.gov.br/cgi/idb2006/matriz.htm. Accessed 2/26/09. 

84 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Brazil

freitas CBD (2006). O sistema de avaliação da ética em pesquisa no Brasil: estudo dos 
conhecimentos e práticas de lideranças de Comitês deÉtica em Pesquisa. (Evaluation of ethics in 
research in Brazil: study of the skills and practices of the leaders of the Committees for Research 
Ethics). PhD dissertation, São Paulo. 

Hilberg R (2003) The destruction of the European Jews [1961]. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT. 

Katz J (1972) Experimentation with human beings. Russell Sage foundation, New York. Part One. 

Katz J (1984) The silent world of doctor and patient. free Press, New York, pp 121–129. 

Kilsztajn S, Camara MB, Carmo MSN (2002). Gasto privado com saúde por classes de renda 
(Private health expenditure per income class). Rev Assoc Med Bras 48(3):258–262. 

National Commission for Research Ethics (CONEP) (2000) Rules on Research Involving Human 
Subjects (Res. CNS 196/96 and others). National Health Council, Brasilia. 

Spilker B (1991). Guide to clinical trials. Raven Press, New York. 

Vieira S, Hossne WS (1987). Experimentação com seres humanos (Experimentation with human 
beings). Moderna, S‹o Paulo. 

Constitution of the federative Republic of Brazil (1988). http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/
Constituicao/principal.htm. Accessed 03/05/09. 

William Saad Hossne – Professor Emeritus of the faculty of Medicine of the State University of São 
Paulo (UNESP). Co-founder and first president of the Brazilian Bio-ethics Society. first president 
of the National Commission for Research Ethics (CONEP) from 1996 to 2007. Coordinator of the 
master’s and doctoral bio-ethics programme at the São Camilo University. 

Corina Bontempo Duca de freitas - Executive Secretary of the National Commission for Research 
Ethics (CONEP) from 1996 to 2007. 

Christian de Paul de Barchifontaine – Nurse, researcher and lecturer in bio-ethics. Rector of the São 
Camilo University (São Paulo, Brazil).

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

85 

Canada

Canada
Research Ethics Review during the Outbreak of SARS: A New 
Model for Research Ethics Review during Public Emergencies4 

Catherine Tansey M.Sc. PhD (candidate)

University of Toronto, Joint Centre of Bioethics and the Institutes of Medical Sciences. 
University Health Network, Toronto General Hospital.

4   Disclaimer

“Reprinted from the original CMAJ English version which is Early release, published at www.cmaj.ca on June 7, 
2010 - Subject to revision at time of press titled “A framework for research ethics review during public emergen-
cies” with permission of the publisher. © 2010 Canadian Medical AssociationEpub ahead of print at www.cmaj.ca” 
“The Canadian Medical Association (CMA) assumes no responsibility or liability for damages arising from any error 
or omission in the text or from the use of any information or advice contained in this material.”

86 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Canada

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

87 

Canada

Slide #3. This slide depicts what it was like for health care workers to report to work every 
day. Public Health had mandated these measures to control the SARS outbreak. Everyone 
was required to complete a form before being able to enter the hospital. It had to state that 
the health care worker was feeling well and had not entered another hospital within the last 
10 days. No visitors were allowed and no meetings with more than 3 people were permitted. 
We were cautioned to stay at least 3 metres from our co-workers.

88 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Canada

Slide #4. I was involved during the SARS outbreak with this study. As we were conducting 
the study, I was struck by the fact that we encountered many unusual logistical challenges 
that had ethical implications. SARS protocols were quickly written and this raised the ethi-
cal issues of social and scientific value, scientific validity and resource allocation. Research 
Ethics Board (REBs as they are called in Canada) approval was required and this raised the 
issue of resource allocation. Identifying and contacting potential participants was at times 
difficult and raised the ethical issues of privacy and confidentially in ways that are different 
from those seen in normal circumstances. Because of these ethical issues that were differ-
ent because of the circumstances of the outbreak, I formulated another study to understand 
more about them and how they affected research ethics review of the protocols that were 
submitted for review. I studied 2 REBS, one an academic tertiary care centre and the other 
a large community hospital.

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

89 

Canada

Slide #5. Here I show a schematic of the number of SARS protocols that were submitted to 
the 2 REBs that I studied. On the X-axis is time. On the Y-axis is the cumulative number of 
protocols. The pink rectangles are the protocols that were submitted to the academic cen-
tre; they represented 3% of the previous year’s submissions. The yellow triangles were those 
submitted to the community hospital which represents 20% of the previous year’s submis-
sion. The blue wiggly line is the ‘epi-curve’ or the depiction of the number of new cases each 
day. We can see that 28 protocols were submitted in 77 days which is a lot of protocols for 
these REBs to deal with in such a short time span, particularly as they were restricted in their 
usual functions in the ways described above. It is unusual to see this number of protocols 
all about the same disease over just a few months. We also see that as the number of new 
cases waned, so did the number of new submissions to the REBs.

90 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Canada

Slide #6. There were several responses to the outbreak by the main actors in this scenario, 
i.e.,  Public  Health  departments,  researchers  and  REBs.  Public  health  officials  responded 
with  outbreak  management.  Researchers  responded  by  changing  research  priority;  they 
quickly wrote SARS protocols many of which used a modified consent process because of 
the infectious disease precautions in place. REBs responded by changing the prioritization 
of protocols reviewed – SARS protocols were reviewed before the others. They also sped 
up the turn-around time to review the protocols submitted and changed the REB member-
ship by consulting outside expertise and modifying the number of reviewers who scrutinized 
some of the proposals. Interaction between researchers, REB members and public health 
officials was not always collegial.

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

91 

Canada

Slide  #7.  Thus  there  were  many  challenges  faced  by  REBs  as  they  attempted  to  review 
SARS-related  protocols.  They  were  inundated  with  protocols  at  a  time  when  many  REB 
board members and office workers were not available due to infection control measures. 
REBs were not able to meet face-to-face due to these restrictions and there was ambiguity 
about whether teleconferences were an acceptable means to meet and discuss protocols. 
Our Canadian guidance document, the Tri-Council Policy Statement (TCPS) recommends 
only face-to-face meetings. REBs had no mechanism to deal with these procedural issues, 
and the ad hoc procedures that were developed differed a great deal one from the other at 
the 2 REBs that I studied. 

92 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Canada

Slide #8. In order to come up with a quickly actionable solution to this problem of lack of 
guidance  for  research  ethics  review  during  a  public  emergency  such  as  SARS,  my  co- 
authors and I have discussed a novel strategy for research review for use during a public 
emergency.  This  work  has  recently  been  published  in  the  Canadian  Medical  Association 
Journal.

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

93 

Canada

Slide #9. Our view is that an ideal model of research ethics review during a public emer-
gency would involve increased diligence consistent with ‘special scrutiny’ as is described by 
Levine et al. (“Special Scrutiny”: A Targeted form of Research Protocol Review Ann Int Med 
2004;140(3):220-3.). It would also  have  greater procedural flexibility  consistent with expe-
dited review and it would be proportional to the perceived risks and specific circumstances 
associated  with  a  research  protocol,  as  defined  in  the  Canadian  TCPS.  This  document 
strongly recommends proportionality in all aspects of review. 

94 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Canada

Slide  #10.  This  slide  shows  some  of  the  procedural  requirements  of  review  that  may  be 
altered in the first column. The second column shows the way in which increased diligence 
is accomplished and the third column depicts what the review would be proportionate to. 
Each protocol would be reviewed by a unique panel that would be tailored to the charac-
teristics of the specific protocol. In the interest of time, I show here just 3 procedures that 
may be altered. The first of these is the composition of the review board. The number of 
reviewers,  the  number  of  public  representatives,  and  the  specific  expertise  of  the  panel 
members would depend on the complexity of the protocol and the initial assessment of risk 
involved for research participants. Thus increased diligence would be accomplished by a re-
dundancy of reviewers and their multiple perspectives. The second procedure that may be 
altered is the review time. This would involve both the initiation of the review and the speed 
of the review itself. Emergency-related protocols would be prioritized and in order to reduce 
the work load on REB members, they might be asked to only review the specific areas of 
the protocol that are closely aligned with their areas of expertise. These measures would 
be  taken  based  on  the  urgency  of  the  proposed  research  and  the  evaluation  of  the  risk/
benefit ratio of the protocol. The third procedure that may be altered is the meeting format 
as face-to-face meetings might not be feasible. This might be related to infectious disease 
precautionary measures, to the geographic location of the reviewers or to infrastructure fail-
ure due to the emergency itself for instance in the event of an earthquake or hurricane. This 
is another method to increase the redundancy of reviewers with their multiple perspectives 
and it would be implemented in a manner that was proportionate to the complexity of the 
emergency and the urgency of the research.

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

95 

Canada

Slide #11. I would like to acknowledge my two funding sources: the Canadian Institutes of 
Health Research and the Ontario Thoracic Society.

96 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

China

China
On the conflict between international regulatory regimes (SARS):  
A Chinese perspective

Qiu Renzong
National Ethics Committee, MOH
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, China

change of international situation

Lao Zi described the situation at his time as ‘crowing cocks and barking dogs are heard 
across the way. Yet they leave each other in peace while they grow old and die5.’ 

 (Lao Zi, Chapter 80). At that time, infections were largely local, or they took 
long time to become an epidemic in a region or in a country. Today the situation is radi-
cally different. Worldwide, nearly 3 million passengers fly every day and it only takes 10 to 
12 hours to travel from China to Europe or America. The world is getting smaller: countries 
are more closely interconnected and interdependent than ever before. A local infection eas-
ily becomes a country-wide epidemic or a global pandemic within a few weeks. SARS is a 
case in point. The change of situation implies, in a sense, that each country has a respon-
sibility for the public health of his neighbouring countries and of the whole world. failure to 
take this responsibility seriously causes international conflict.

conflict and factors accounting for the conflict

Several  factors  can  contribute  to  conflict  over  epidemics.  The  first  is  the  obstruction  of 
information  flow  from  the  country  where  the  epidemic  has  prevailed  to  its  neighbouring 
countries. SARS appears to have claimed its first victims in November 2002 in Guangdong 
Province in southern China. Senior officials in the Ministry of Health (MOH) and the Beijing 
Municipal Government tried to cover up the information, denying that there was a problem.

The second factor is losing control of the epidemic in one country, thus facilitating its spread 
to other countries. for example, before SARS became rampant in China, public health had 
not been on the government’s agenda since the reform in the 1980s. Only a small budget was 
allocated to public health sectors, and the infrastructure of the public health system had col-
lapsed as a result of the prevailing philosophy of commercialism or market fundamentalism.

The third factor is the difference in national strategies for handling epidemics. for example, 
during  the  A  (HINI)  influenza  pandemic,  some  countries  adopted  more  restrictive  regula-
tions, and took more severe countermeasures, than others. 

5   http://www.wussu.com/laotzu/laotzu80.html

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

97 

China

In the case of the SARS epidemic, several kinds of factor contributed to the international 
conflict.

first, legal factors. There are some outdated regulations in China, such as the Interim Regu-
lation on Keeping the Confidentiality of State Secrets (1951), which obstructed the informa-
tion flow. In this regulation the scope of state secrets was widely and ambiguously defined: 
state secrets include information about scientific discoveries, culture and education, health 
and medicines (Article 10). However, the Regulation never specified what kind of scientific 
discoveries,  culture  and  education,  health  and  medicines  are  or  should  be  state  secrets. 
Moreover, during the Korean War in the 1950s, epidemiological information (or even infor-
mation about the local occurrence of diseases) became more than a state secret after the 
germ warfare conducted by the US Army in northeast China.

There  were  regulatory  gaps,  too.  for  example,  in  the  Law  on  the  Prevention  and  Control 
of Infectious Diseases (1989) there is no article defining the government’s responsibility for 
disclosing disease-related or epidemiological information to the public and the international 
community.

The second kind of factor is cultural and ideological. In Chinese tradition, bad news is seen 
as harmful or destabilising to society and to China’s image, and this too obstructs the flow of 
information. Traditionally, pubic health was hardly a main priority for governments – though 
they could always regulate on health matters once the need arose. After the market-oriented 
reform of Chinese politics, many economists and decision-makers were obsessed by GDP 
fetishism  or  market  fundamentalism.  They  believed  that  GDP  growth  and  market  forces 
could solve every problem facing China. The reality is, however, that the public health sys-
tem  built  in  the  1950s  was  almost  completely  destroyed  by  market-oriented  health  care 
reform.

The third factor, which we saw operating in the case of the A (HINI) influenza epidemic, is 
that the infrastructure of public health and the technological means in developing countries 
are usually weaker than those in developed countries. Consequently, the government in a 
developing country will tend to take a more restrictive approach in order to better prevent 
and control the epidemic. 

handling the conflict between international regulatory regimes

In  our  ‘small  world’,  all  governments  should  have  a  sense  of  responsibility  for  the  public 
health of other countries and for international health as well as for public health in their own 
country. When a conflict takes place, it is crucial to engage in bilateral, regional or interna-
tional dialogue and consultation. In this dialogue and consultation, each side should make 
efforts to identify common values and to reach a consensus on ethical guidelines for com-
bating the pandemic. 

It is very important for each country to reform its laws and harmonise them with those of 
other advanced countries and the international community. During and after SARS, the Chi-

98 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

China

nese government promulgated the Regulation on SARS Prevention and Control (2003) and the Regulation 
on Response to Emerging Events of Public Health (2003). It revised the Law on Prevention and Control 
of Infectious Diseases (2004), promulgated the Regulation on Disclosing Government Information (2007) 
and is now revising the Law on Keeping the Confidentiality of State Secrets. All these revised laws and 
regulations emphasise that:

(1) Citizens have right to information, and that disclosing information on diseases is the government’s ob-
ligation. It cannot be exempted from this obligation on the pretext of ‘keeping state secrets’.

(2) Building up the infrastructure of the public health system includes setting up national and municipal/
provincial centres for disease control and prevention (CDCs).

In our shrinking world, all countries have to recognise the values of mutuality, reciprocity and solidarity. In 
the event of a pandemic we have to take action to promote mutual help and support among all countries, 
and to provide moral, technical and financial support to low-income countries in particular.

The role of the WHO in handling the conflict between international regulatory regimes is very important. It 
would be very helpful if the WHO would take initiatives to harmonise the regulations implemented in dif-
ferent countries. Many governments are relatively willing to listen to the WHO’s advice.

finally, in seeking common ground and harmonising different regulatory regimes, we should set aside 
cultural differences in our response to the pandemic so that they do not have a negative impact on epi-
demic control and human rights. And the result will be, as Confucius said: ‘Harmonised but not identical’ 
or ‘harmonised and diverse’ (

 - the Analects of Confucius, Chapter Zi Lu). 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

99 

China

100 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

China

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

101 

China

102 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

China

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

103 

China

104 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

China

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

105 

China

106 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

China

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

107 

Egypt

Egypt
What ethics frame for a global governance of biomedical research?

Prof. Dr. I. G. Badran
Egyptian National Committee for Bioethics

introduction, summary

Developments  in  science  and  technology  have  raised  many  ethical  issues  while  offering 
numerous benefits.

Scientific progress that bypasses ethical standards as laid out in international ethical prin-
ciples  needs  to  be  discussed.  This  has  led  researchers  to  identify  common  standards  in 
ethics to replace rules that applied in ancient civilisations - Pharaonic, Greek, Roman, or 
Islamic.

With  breakthroughs  in  biomedicine,  such  as  organ,  tissue  and  cell  research,  as  well  as 
transplantation, new scientific and therapeutic possibilities have opened up, in areas of bio-
medicine that were never imagined before World War II.

Nowadays, the practice of medicine is accepted as a morally-driven profession, dependent 
on science and driven by technology; in Islam, under the auspices of a merciful God.

Unfortunately, there were major deviations from principles established for millennia during 
the 20th century. for instance, unethical experiments were carried out during World War II.

from a historical viewpoint, codes  of ethics have evolved since the  Pharaonic Amhotops 
(as stated in Erb’s Papyrus). They were stated in Hamorabi’s code (Babylonian period), then 
in the Prayer of Maimonides (said to have been written in Egypt, in the Middle Ages). The 
Hippocratic oath also involves ethical issues.

Global  governance  for  biomedical  research  is  therefore  justified,  especially  today,  when 
clinical research affects ethical, legal economic or religious beliefs. Let us consider some 
examples:

• The research benefits of cell, tissue or organ transplantation raise the risk of organ or tis-
sue trafficking or smuggling of children for such purposes. Here aggressive penalties have 
to be recommended for infringement;

• Breakthroughs in pharmacogenetics raise the risk of widening the economic divide, given 

the expense of such treatments;

• Production of counterfeit drugs can lead to disastrous consequences if used in treating 

patients;

• New  technologies  for  pharmacological  products,  for  example  genetic  engineering  and 

nanotechnology, may raise other new ethical issues that need to be addressed.

108 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Egypt

Particular points need to be addressed regarding global governance in biomedical research. 
Let us consider what WHO calls the 10/90 disequilibrium, meaning to say that only 10 % of 
world expenditure on health, including drug services and research, is available to popula-
tions in developing countries, while those in industrialised countries benefit from the remain-
ing 90 %. This accounts for inequalities with regard to health standards, access to health 
facilities, and access to potable water and environmental degradation in developing coun-
tries compared with industrialised countries.

However, there has been significant support for public health in less developed regions of 
the world over the last decade, including the Global fund to fight AIDS, malaria and tuber-
culosis in Africa, promoting health and making available healthcare in regions plagued with 
corruption.

General ethical issues

Two moral commitments govern biomedical and medical research:

1.  The  responsibility  to  secure  equitable  welfare  through  public  health  studies  to  under-
stand  the  nature  of  specific  diseases  and  carry  out  preventive  care  intervention  and 
proper treatments;

2.  Results  in  drug  research  have  to  be  obtained  while  protecting  the  health  of  research 

participants.

In developing countries, clinical research on human subjects should be subject to the fol-
lowing rules:

• Respect for international ethics guidelines as related to national laws and specific beliefs;
• Adherence to ethical regulations governing pharmaceutical research;
• Attention to considering possible risks in dealing with experiments on specific diseases;
• Authorisation from the following bodies: advisory bodies of research in local and sponsor 

agencies;

• Local ethics committees abiding by the research rules of the host country while exchang-

ing good practice with sponsors from developed countries;
• Adherence to budget limits calculated by funding agencies.

ethics governing clinical research and trials

Medical and biomedical rules must be defined to avoid increasing risk, injustice or exploita-
tion of participants in clinical trials. This addresses the issue of safety and the securing of 
volunteers’ rights when trials are carried out in developing countries. Clinical trials should 
consider the following issues:

• Risks of potential negative effects of new drugs;
• Remuneration for poor volunteers;

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

109 

Egypt

• Use of placebos in research means that some participant groups may not benefit from the 
standard treatment for a disease. Sponsors should be obliged to offer volunteers the op-
portunity to undergo alternative treatment. The same applies to randomised clinical trials;
• Research  investigators  or  sponsors  should  therefore  consider  making  available  clinical 

care for trial participants.

basics of ethics governing clinical trials

According to the EGE (EGE Opinion n°17 on Ethical aspects of clinical research in develop-
ing  countries6,  february  2003),  it  was  considered  that  years  of  research  were  necessary 
before a new drug was marketed, following specific steps that include the preclinical step, in 
vitro studies e.g. disclosing biomedical character and pharmacological properties, and toxi-
cological studies, which may also include experiments on animals. The clinical step involves 
experiments on humans:

1.  Performed on healthy volunteers to test pharmacological and toxic effects of a drug;
2.  Performed on a limited number of patients to test the potential effects of drugs on spe-

cific diseases;

3.  Performed on a larger number of cases to ensure efficacy and evaluation of the appropri-

ate dosage;

4.  Performed after commercialisation of a drug, to identify potential adverse effects.

In industrialised countries, research trials follow scientific methods, but in developing coun-
tries, they are carried out with lower standards of care because of the poverty of the pa-
tients.  Ethical  guidelines  and  safety  standards,  however,  should  be  applied  whether  the 
patients are rich or poor.

ethics in global trade: counterfeit drugs

The production and sale of fake medicines is a phenomenon that is expanding rapidly in 
developing countries, especially in Africa, where street ‘doctors’ and local drug stores sell 
counterfeits manufactured to look identical to drugs produced by major pharmacological 
companies. The counterfeits are of course cheaper than the genuine medicines, by an es-
timated 50% in Africa. If they have any of the active ingredient, the concentration is likely to 
be very low, too low for therapeutic purposes. They may, however, contain other chemical 
substances, with high risks of toxicity. It is now estimated that at least 15 % of medicines 
sold worldwide are counterfeit. This industry is both immoral and criminal. The question is: 
who is responsible?

6   http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/docs/avis17_en.pdf

110 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Egypt

for poor patients, counterfeit drugs could be lethal, but people take the risk of buying them 
because they cannot afford the genuine product. This is because:

1.  The public sector has not opposed the excessive price of genuine drugs and has not 

informed the public about the risks of counterfeit drugs;

2.  The  activities  of  the  companies  producing  and  distributing  counterfeit  drugs  have  not 

been opposed effectively enough.

ethics of research in nanotechnology
(COMEST7 report, June 2009)

COMEST adopted a three-stage strategy to define a governance model for nanotechnology. 
A multidisciplinary group of experts should be established, to review the state of the art (and 
the ethical issues) of nanotechnology to identify opportunities for international action in this 
research sector. The group should examine strategic options to propose and indicate a ref-
erence framework on ethics of nanotechnology (2006). The above strategy should support 
concrete applications of nanotechnology and deal with their political aspects.

It should be noted that:

• Nanotech relies on several converging sciences and technologies;
• The  interdisciplinary  and  trans-disciplinary  dimension  of  nanotechnology  should  not  be 

neglected (including control mechanisms);

• Risks of the use of nanotechnology in the military and security domain should be properly 

addressed.

The first Research Document identified four points for action regarding the ethics of nanote-
chnology research (COMEST, 2008):

• Awareness raising;
• Ethical education of researchers.

ethics for research on embryos
(Stem Cell Research)

Embryonic stem cells were isolated in 1998, derived from the inner cell mass of the human 
blast cyst between day 6 and 14. Embryonic stem cells may be regarded as ordinary living 
cells (like skin cells), or deserving of specific protection, if the embryo is seen as a human 
being from the moment of conception.

7    The World Commission on the Ethics of Scientific Knowledge and Technology (COMEST) is an advisory body 

and forum of reflection composed of 18 independent experts. The Commission is mandated to formulate ethical 
principles that could provide decision-makers with criteria that extend beyond purely economic considerations  
(http://www.unesco.org/new/en/social-and-human-sciences/themes/science-and-technology/comest/).

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

111 

Egypt

Two questions have been posed:

1. Is it ethical to create an embryo for research purposes?
2. Can we use surplus embryos from IVf for human embryonic stem cells procurement?

The answer to the first question is: absolutely unethical. As for the second, such instrumen-
tal use of human embryos should be possible only if the donor consents to the use of frozen 
spare embryos. Using embryonic stem cells for toxicological studies on new drugs should 
be done only if adequate alternative methods are not available.

Another example, from the complicated domain of embryonic research, is also under dis-
cussion nowadays, regarding a later stage of development of fresh morula, when the primi-
tive streek cells that act as the precursors of brain tissue appear on or after day 17. These 
cells can be utilised in clinical research (Ian Knowles) to correct neurological deformity or 
disease.

conclusion and recommendations

The following ethical considerations are proposed for debate:

• Scientists working in pharmaceutical drug production should be independent and obsta-

cles restricting their autonomy be eliminated;

• Developing some generic versions of drugs at cheaper market prices would be positive 

insofar the new line may prove efficacy and safety;

• Production or use of chemical or biological weapons of mass destruction should be for-

bidden;

• The medical use of genetically modified tissues should no longer be patentable and the 
international IPR system should reflect this. This goal may only be achieved through nego-
tiations between WHO and WTO;

• In the same context, patents should not be awarded for protection of ownership so as to 

avoid monopolistic practices in respect of organs, tissues or cell lines.

112 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

India

India
Review of biomedical research and ethics in India

Vijay Kumar
Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi, India

Biomedical research in India is very strong due to the country’s large population of more 
than 1.2 billion people, with different ethnic groups, an endogamous tribal population (con-
served gene pool) in various parts of the country and the prevalence of both communicable 
and  non-communicable  diseases  in  the  population.  India  has  at  least  271  medical  col-
leges, more than 400 research institutions, some 70 universities, 11,500 hospitals, 14,000 
diagnostic laboratories, and 250 R&D laboratories in the public sector and the government 
sector combined. 

The major agency promoting biomedical research in India is the Indian Council of Medical 
Research, the agency in India for the formulation, coordination and promotion of biomedical 
research under the Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health and family Welfare. 
The Council of Medical Research was originally established in 1911 as the Indian Research 
fund Association (IRfA), and then renamed in 1949 as the Indian Council of Medical Re-
search (ICMR) with considerably expanded functions. Intramural research is carried out in 
the  Council’s  21  thematically-oriented  permanent  research  institutes/centres  and  six  re-
gional centres. Its mandate is to undertake and support basic epidemiological, applied and 
operational  research  in  areas  of  importance  for  national  public  health,  using  tools  which 
include  those  of  modern  biology.  It  promotes  research  in  communicable  diseases,  non-
communicable diseases, reproductive health and nutrition, basic medical sciences, medici-
nal plants and traditional medicine, ethics, intellectual property rights and socio-behavioural 
sciences. Extramural research is also funded and ICMR institutes also cover occupational 
health,  virology,  nutritional  research  and  human  reproductive  research,  as  well  as  cancer 
registries, vector research centres and a nutritional research monitoring bureau. 

Major  challenges  in  biomedical  research  include  allocating  priority  according  to  need, 
strengthening  the  ethical  review  mechanism,  capacity  building,  building  expertise  in  spe-
cialized  areas,  regulating  clinical  research  organizations  (CROs),  clinical  trial  registry  and 
database management, adherence to norms of Good Clinical Practice (GCP), availability of 
GCP compliant infrastructure, such as IECs, investigation sites, laboratories, investigators, 
trainers and training. 

With regard to ethics administration India has a code of medical ethics since the days of 
Caraka and Susruta (circa 600 BC). This Ayurvedic code offers advice on behaviour in re-
spect of patients and their relatives. However, research ethics is a new specialty. There are 
inherent  problems  in  administering  informed  consent  due  to  illiteracy,  multilingualism  and 
scarce resource allocation for public counselling. The Indian Council of Medical Research 
plays  a  lead  role  in  spreading  bioethics  awareness  by  preparing  guidelines,  workshops, 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

113 

India

training ethics committee members, educational programmes, and public debates on con-
temporary issues. 

In  the  area  of  laboratory  animal  welfare,  India  has  adopted  acts  and  rules  and  prepared 
guidelines including the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (PCA) Act 1960 (amended in 1982), 
and Breeding and Experiments on Animals (Control and Supervision) Rules 1998, amended 
in 2001 and 2006, Indian National Science Academy (INSA) Guidelines for Care and Use 
of Animals in Scientific Research- 1992 (revised in 2000), ICMR’s Guidelines for the use of 
Laboratory Animals in Medical Research − 2001, the Committee for the Control and Super-
vision of Experimentation (CPCSEA) Guidelines – 2001, and ICMR’s Guidance document on 
Humane Care and Use of Laboratory Animals - 2006. Animal Care Guidelines emphasize 
that animals may only be used if other techniques do not work, that the animals used must 
be disease free, and the number of animals to be used must be limited. Other features in-
clude correct management or handling techniques, standards of care, minimizing pain and 
distress, and clearance of research protocols by the Institutional Animals Ethics Committee 
(IAEC).

In  the  area  of  human  experimentation,  ICMR  prepared  Ethics  Guidelines  in  the  form  of  a 
Policy Statement in 1980, followed by ethical guidelines for biomedical research on human 
subjects (in 2000). These guidelines include general principles, namely, informed consent 
and  community  agreement,  non-exploitation,  privacy  and  confidentiality,  precautions  and 
risk minimization, and professional competence. Its specific principles include clinical Trials 
of  Drugs,  Devices,  Vaccines,  Diagnostic  Agents,  Herbal  Drugs,  Epidemiological  Studies, 
Human  Genetics  Research,  Transplantation  Research  including  foetal  tissue  transplanta-
tion, and Assisted Reproductive Technologies. These guidelines were further amended in 
2006. The expectation is that all institutions in the country which carry out any form of bio-
medical research involving human beings should follow both the letter and the spirit of these 
guidelines in order to protect the safety and well-being of all individuals. These guidelines 
are being incorporated into the biomedical research on human participants’ bill.

ICMR, in collaboration with the Department of Biotechnology, has prepared Guidelines for 
Stem Cell Research and Therapy which provide guidance on different areas of research in 
stem cell research and therapy, including permissible areas, restricted areas and prohibited 
areas. These guidelines provide oversight of research in these areas at national and institute 
level through the National Apex Committee on Stem Cell Research Therapy and the Insti-
tutional Committee for Stem Cell Research and Therapy respectively. On 20 July 2007, the 
ICMR also launched the Clinical Trials Registry-India (CTRI). It is mandatory for all clinical 
trials carried out in India to be registered with CTRI. 

In  conclusion,  it  is  essential  that  biomedical  researchers  should  adhere  strictly  to  ethical 
guidelines,  and  undergo  scientific  and  ethical  review.  All  persons  involved  in  the  study 
should undergo basic training, including counselling and preventive strategies. No person 
should be recruited in any study without proper informed consent for participation; no per-
son  should  apply  discriminatory  practices;  and  adequate  care  and  protection  should  be 
provided to vulnerable groups. There must be community involvement at every stage of the 

114 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

India

studies, sharing of results with all persons involved in research, ensuring global justice, prior 
agreements to ensure that proven interventions will be made widely available to developing 
countries and to prevent exploitation of research participants. 

Research ethics should be an integral part of all biomedical research and part of the psyche 
of  every  stakeholder,  so  that  participants  in  research,  who  are  central  to  every  research 
project, are protected from harm. There is a need to develop a system of prioritizing clinical 
trials based on national interest, approving drug trials which provide benefits to a substantial 
segment of the Indian population and for diseases that are relevant to the Indian population, 
leveraging of private and public resources, capacity building activities, a ‘smart’ regulatory 
system, strengthening the ethical review mechanism-accreditation of IECs and registration 
of CROs, as well as access, affordability and equity issues.

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

115 

India

116 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

India

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

117 

India

118 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

India

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

119 

India

120 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

India

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

121 

India

122 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

India

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

123 

India

124 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

India

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

125 

India

126 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

India

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

127 

India

128 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

India

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

129 

India

130 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

India

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

131 

India

132 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

India

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

133 

India

134 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

India

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

135 

India

136 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Indonesia

Indonesia
Traditional Medicines in the Modern Era 
The struggle for their existence and recognition8)

Umar A. Jenie
Chairman of the National Bioethics Commission (KBN),
Chairman of the Indonesian Institute of Sciences (LIPI)

introduction: a country of biological, ethnic, cultural and ethical diversities 

Indonesia is an archipelago country. Indeed, it is the only maritime continent in the world, 
consisting of 18 000 islands and having coastal length of 108 000 km. In addition, Indonesia 
has many rivers, both large and small. This country is therefore rich in water resources. In-
donesia is also known as a land of biodiversity. No other country except Brazil has a richer 
terrestrial ecosystem, and Indonesia’s marine life diversity is the richest in the world. This is 
a precious resource and it is under threat.

In terms of ethnicity, Indonesia is known as a country of great ethno-cultural diversity. There 
are  more  than  500  tribes  living  in  the  Indonesian  archipelago,  having  different  cultures, 
languages and ethics. Consequently, Indonesia is also ethically very diverse. In short, we 
can say that Indonesia is a multi-cultural, multi-ethnical, multi-ethical and biologically rich 
country.

indonesian traditional medicine: a mixture of hindu, buddhist, chinese and 
islamic cultures

The  unique  nature  of  Indonesia,  particularly  in  terms  of  its  ethical  and  cultural  diversities, 
gives us a unique position in discussions on how to use and conserve natural resources, 
since  different  ethical  systems  treat  Nature  differently.  People  use  natural  resources  for 
many purposes, such as for food, medicines, dyes etc. and there are thus many traditional 
medicines and forms of medication across the archipelago. Given Indonesia’s cultural, ethi-
cal and religious diversities, traditional medicine is strongly influenced by the region’s major 
religions as well as by indigenous local traditions. The strongest influences are from Hindu, 
Buddhist, Chinese and Islamic traditional medicine. from the 7th to the 15th Century, Indone-
sia was dominated by Indian culture, so Hinduism and Buddhism were the majority religions 
in this archipelago. However, from the 13th Century, Islam gradually became the major reli-
gion in Indonesia, and the influence of Islamic culture is dominant. 

Hindu traditional medicines and medication are based on Ayurveda, a system of traditional 
medicine native to the Indian subcontinent and practised in other parts of the world as a 
form of alternative medicine (see Wikipedia). Islamic traditional medicine can be defined as 

8    Presented at The 2nd International Dialogue on Bioethics, held by The European Commission and the Euro-

pean Group on Ethics of Sciences and New Technologies (EGE), Madrid, Spain, 4-5 March 2010.

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

137 

Indonesia

medicine whose basic paradigms, concepts, values, and procedures conform to or do not 
contradict the Qur’an and the tradition of the Prophet Muhammad (known as the Sunnah) 
(Kasule, 2008). So there are varieties of Indonesian traditional medicine and medication de-
rived from Hindu, Buddhist, Chinese and Islamic traditions, or a mixture of those traditions. 
(Note: the influence of Chinese culture in Java began in the 13th Century, but in Sumatra it 
started long before, around the 8th Century).

Indonesian traditional medicine in Java is known as Jamu. Actually Jamu is a herbal medi-
cine used for medical or cosmetic purposes. It has been used since ancient times by people 
from all social strata, in the villages as well as in the big cities. Even today, Jamu is still used 
by princes and princesses who live in the Sultanate Palaces in the cities of Surakarta or Yo-
gyakarta. A Javanese woman is very much concerned for her physical appearance, wishing 
to be always slim and beautiful with an alluring, bright, smiling face. The ladies of the Royal 
families are believed to inherit the beauty of goddesses from paradise. They kept the se-
crets of Jamu recipes for cosmetic purposes, such as Jamu for Ngadi Sarira – which means 
to maintain the body in perfect condition. Nowadays, some secrets of this palace culture of 
Ngadi Sarira are known and used by many women outside the palace walls. 

People like to consume Jamu as it is widely available, comparatively cheap and has no side 
effects.  On  the  other  hand,  people  regard  modern  medicines  as  more  expensive,  having 
side effects and too complicated to be accessed. Jamu is trusted because it has been used 
safely for the past 500 years ago. Usually Jamu contains a mix of medicinal herbs and herbal 
preparations derived from Arabic (Islamic), Chinese, Hindu or Javanese traditional medicine.

What bioethics say about Traditional Medicine

The Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights (UDBHR), approved by UNESCO’s 
33rd General Conference on 3-21 October 2005, respects cultural diversity. In its preamble, 
the Declaration states that: ‘cultural diversity, as a source of exchange, innovation and crea-
tivity, is necessary for humankind and, in this sense, is the common heritage of humanity.’. 
Article12 of the UDBHR, under the heading cultural diversity and pluralism, states that 
‘The importance of cultural diversity should be given due regard. However, such considera-
tions shall not be invoked to infringe upon human dignity, human rights and fundamental 
freedoms nor upon the principles set out in this Declaration, nor to limit their scope’. Moreo-
ver, in Article 17, entitled ‘Protection of Environment, the Biosphere and Biodiversity’, 
the Declaration states that ‘Due regard is to be given to the interconnection between human 
beings and other forms of life, to the importance of appropriate access and utilisation of bio-
logical and genetic resources, to respect for traditional knowledge and to the role of human 
beings in the protection of the environment, the biosphere and the biodiversity’. from those 
two articles, we can say that respect for cultural diversity and traditional knowledge is an 
integral part of bioethical principles, as stated by the UDBHR. In other words, the existence, 
usage and sustainability of traditional medicine are ensured by bioethics principles.

138 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Indonesia

Tolerance or integrative Principles

There are four principles used by governments when dealing with traditional medicine. An 
integrative principle is used by the Chinese government. This means that Chinese traditional 
medicines  and  medication  are  legally  recognised  by  the  Government,  hand  in  hand  with 
the modern ones. The second is the selective principle, meaning that traditional medicines 
can be used in legal medication, provided scientific examination shows these products are 
safe for medicinal purposes. The Japanese government, for example, adopts the selective 
principle. The third principle is tolerance; the government formally recognises modern medi-
cines only, but allows the people to take these traditional medicines or medication, on the 
basis of personal needs and responsibilities. The fourth principle is rejection, which means 
that only modern medicine is formally recognised. The government rejects and forbids using 
traditional medicines and medication.

The Indonesian Government formally recognises only modern medicines for prevention and 
curing diseases. The use of traditional medicines is neither forbidden nor allowed. Its means 
that the Indonesian Government does not use the integrative principle, but instead adopts 
the principle of tolerance toward traditional medicines. Government policy, however, sup-
ports  the  development  of  traditional  medicines.  This  policy  is  indeed  in  accordance  with 
UDBHR  Articles  12  and  17.  The  Book  of  Materia  Medica,  which  contains  descriptions  of 
indigenous Indonesian medicinal herbs, has been published by the Indonesian Agency for 
food & Drug Control (BPOM, equivalent to fDA in US). Moreover, research centres for tradi-
tional medicines have been established in many state-owned universities and are supported 
by government funds. The main aim of those centres is to incorporate traditional medicines 
into modern ones, by identifying, isolating and purifying the active compounds within the 
herbs, and doing pharmacological as well as clinical trials of those pure compounds. 

conclusion

• The rights to the existence, usage and sustainability of traditional medicine are ensured 

by bioethics principles.

• Indonesian  Traditional  Medicine  (ITM)  is  regarded  by  the  Indonesian  Government  as  a 

national cultural heritage, and therefore it needs to be preserved and developed. 
• The centuries-old use of ITM is not forbidden, but it is not explicitly allowed either. 
• The Government is supporting research on ITM which aims to convert those traditional 

medicines into modern dosage-form drugs.

references:

Kasule, Omar Hasan, 2008, Islamic Medicine: Its Meaning and Principles,  
http://www.islamicmedicines.com/forum/islamic-medicine-its-meaning-principles/ 
118-islamic-medicine-its-meaning-principles.html

Ayurveda — Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ayurveda. 

Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights, UNESCO 33rd General Confer-
ence, October 3, 2005. 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

139 

Indonesia

140 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Indonesia

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

141 

Indonesia

142 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Indonesia

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

143 

Indonesia

144 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Indonesia

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

145 

Indonesia

146 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Japan

Japan
What Ethics framework for Global Governance of Biomedical 
Research? – from a Japanese and Asian Perspective 

Ryuichi IDA, Professor
Kyoto University Graduate School of Law
Expert Panel on Bioethics, CSTP, Japan

introduction – setting the scene

There are three questions that are a prerequisite for a possible ethics framework for global 
governance of biomedical research. 

first of all, what does ‘global’ mean in this context? Our world has a wide diversity of cul-
tures, of social systems, of spirituality and of power. We are living in a diversity of values. 

Second,  what  kind  of  values  do  we  mean?  Is  it  possible  to  conceive  of  a  ‘community  of 
values’? It is true that we all respect values such as human life, human dignity, fundamental 
rights and freedoms. However, do these words have the same meaning, the same content, 
and, therefore, the same value throughout the world?

Third, how do we build up global governance?

The answers to these questions combined will lead us to find universality in diversity. 

1. respect for cultural diversity

UNESCO’s Universal Declaration on Bioethics of 2005, Article 12, is a commitment to re-
spect for cultural diversity and pluralism. This article reflects the need for constant dialectics 
of universality of fundamental values and cultural diversity.

However, for the Asian region, diversity is quite wide in various ways. for instance, as for 
social values, importance is often given to family, community, or even to ethnic group, while 
individualism is considered most important in the Western world. 

Religions and spiritualities are also different. five major religions are found in this vast region, 
namely, Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism, Islamism, and Confucianism, and local traditional 
spiritualities are also alive. 

We also recognise that three out of four great civilizations were born in Asia. Various tradi-
tions live on in our daily life, so that values of human life and death may be different from one 
country to another. 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

147 

Japan

These differences imply differences in relevant conceptions of bioethics. There are some 
common features relating to bioethics in Asia. As far as the regulatory framework for bioeth-
ics is concerned, non-binding guidelines are often preferred to legislation. Most of the frame-
work, including legislation and guidelines, has been drawn up since 2000, so over the past 
10  years,  the  number  of  national  bioethics  regulations  has  grown  substantially.  However, 
the responsible authority on bioethics in each country varies. This may be the competence 
of,  for  instance,  the  ministry  of  health,  ministry  of  science,  ministry  of  biotechnology,  the 
national institute of health, or the national medical council, etc. 

Public awareness of bioethics is generally low, and for historical reasons of national devel-
opment,  science  and  technology  are  deemed  as  ‘GOOD’  per  se.  Here  also,  the  value  of 
‘society’  or  ‘community’  is  prioritised.  The  community’s  interest  often  prevails.  Neverthe-
less, Western bioethics has been growing into a dominant influence. In Asia, many leading 
bioethics experts are trained in Western countries, in particular, in the United States, so that 
arguments as well as value judgements are often based on the basic conceptions of West-
ern bioethics. The four basic principles of Beauchamp and Childress are quite frequently 
cited. Moreover, various Western concepts and terminologies or international instruments 
are primarily referred to in the discussion rather than local ethical thinking or moral values.

Japanese examples are seemingly based on the country’s cultural particularities. 

first, individual autonomy is overridden by the family’s will in organ donation cases, as the 
law  on  organ  transplantation  requires  the  double  consent  of  the  donor  and  the  family  in 
cadaver organ removal. 

Second, in the discussion on legislation to prohibit reproductive human cloning, some ex-
perts argued that the concept of ‘human dignity’ should not be deemed as rooted in Japa-
nese thought. This concept was thus paraphrased into three elements, i.e., the instrumen-
talisation of the human being, denial of identity, and social disorder on human birth. 

Third, the status of the embryo is treated as ‘germ of human life’, an expression which is 
somewhat sentimental in order to show that an embryo is not a ‘thing’, nor a human being. 

fourth, the relationship between the Human Being and Nature is stressed in discussion on 
enhancement. for Japanese people, the human being is a part of Nature, so that some-
times, the ethical standpoint starts from a fundamental question: ‘How far may we depart 
from the Nature?’ The ideology of ‘as it stands’ is also argued on many occasions. 

2. What ethics framework for global governance of biomedicine?

‘How should an ethics framework be realised?’ This question should be answered in the 
form of the quest for universality in diversity. We propose here three key concepts to reach 
the  goal,  namely,  ‘International  Dialogue’,  ‘Harmonisation’  and  ‘Uniform  Standardisation’. 
These signpost the road to achieving a future ethics framework for global ethics governance 
of biomedicine.

148 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Japan

(1) International Dialogue

The  first  stage  would  be  mutual  understanding  of  differences.  We  should  realise,  for  in-
stance, that Japanese values on human life and the human body may be different to those 
in  Korea,  China,  or  elsewhere  in  Asia,  and  also  different  to  Western  or  African  values.  In 
framing ethics governance, importance should be given to avoiding the dominance of one 
particular system of values and ethics. The world today is that of coexistence of different 
values, cultures and, therefore, ethics. 

However, these differences are the basis of building up a new ‘global’ community of values. 
We know we use the same words, such as human dignity, human being, human body, life, 
family, etc... It is obvious that we use them with different meanings and implications. The 
clue for a community of values lies there.

 In a world forum such as this International Dialogue, we can consider that using the same 
terminology, even with different interpretations, leads to establishing a core value system, 
which may be called a ‘community of values in diversity’. Although there may be different 
elements, conceptions and applications in each cultural context, the first stage is thus an 
international dialogue to understand and recognise similarities and differences. In this con-
text we thank the European Union for enabling this first stage of development for a global 
framework of ethics in biomedicine.

(2) Harmonisation

The  second  stage  would  be  that  of  harmonisation.  Each  country  has  its  own  system  of 
ethical evaluation and regulation, so that difficulties arise in international multi-centre joint 
research. To promote a transborder research framework, an international dialogue, that is, 
mutual  understanding  of  differences  is  not  sufficient.  We  should  seek  common  core  ele-
ments of ethical standards in each country. We need to know what is fundamental and what 
is secondary. 

We may cite the Japanese example regarding the import of embryonic stem (ES) cells. The 
Japanese regulation for the derivation of embryonic stem cells requires two conditions:

1.  Embryos to be used for derivation of ES cell should be supernumerary;
2.  Informed consent for donation at the end of assisted reproduction treatment should be 

reaffirmed after 30 days. 

This double-check system leads necessarily to freezing of the embryos donated.

However,  there  are  easier  conditions  for  the  import  of  ES  cells  into  Japan.  The  core  ele-
ments are that the cells are supernumerary, and that fair informed consent for donation is 
obtained. We call such an arrangement ‘harmonisation’.

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

149 

Japan

(3) Uniform Standardisation

The third and the last stage is uniform standardisation through international efforts. At this 
stage, mention should be made of the importance of soft law.

While an international convention is certainly not possible in this diversity of ethical values in 
the immediate future, uniform standardisation of ethical regulation may be divided into four 
steps. 

The first step would be to draft a declaration of core general principles that are applicable 
in each country regardless of differences in values. Principles such as respect for human 
dignity, protection of human rights, protection of a mother’s body, autonomy and so forth 
should be included in this declaration. The declaration would be a non-binding instrument, 
aiming to clarify common ethical values and principles. 

The second step would be achieved by a declaration of principles in particular fields, such 
as embryo research, assisted reproduction, organ transplantation, end of life, and so on. 
These principles would be deduced from national codes and guidelines of various coun-
tries. They are deemed as universal principles of bioethics. Parallel to this, a process of har-
monisation of national practical rules and procedures should be undertaken. 

The third stage would be the establishment of a framework convention of basic principles. 
This  type  of  framework  convention  is  legally  binding.  However,  the  provisions  should  be 
general and merely indicating principles, which indicate the basis for ethical consideration 
in a national context. 

The fourth and the last step would be harmonisation of national rules and standards. Who 
are  the  actors  in  this  process  of  standardisation?  Countries  may  undertake  cooperation 
to achieve mutual understanding and uniform solutions. The current trilateral cooperation 
among france, Germany and the United Kingdom may be an example to follow. Internation-
al organisations such as UNESCO, WHO, OECD, the European Union or Council of Europe 
are also actors, through their activities of establishing principles, declarations or even codi-
fying general or specific norms within their competence. The scientific community at global 
level should also play its role of self-regulation. Several frameworks already exist. The Inter-
national Stem Cell forum and P3G (Public Population Project in Genomics) are two such 
examples. Other actors may join this process. for instance, ethics communities such as the 
International  Association  of  Bioethics  (IAB),  and  non-governmental  organisations  such  as 
patients’ organisations are potentially able to support this process. 

3. conclusion

The process of realising global ethical governance is thus a complex task. There is no obvi-
ous path, no easy way. It will be a long and convoluted process and requires firm will and ef-
forts. However, developments in biomedicine do not await the establishment of a system of 
global governance. While it is certain that biomedicine has the potential to offer tremendous 

150 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Japan

benefits and welfare to present and future generations, ignorance of and unpreparedness 
for new conflicts and infringement of values can do great harm to human beings. Multiple 
and multidimensional efforts are indispensable to accelerate the task of establishing global 
ethical governance.

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

151 

Japan

152 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Japan

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

153 

Japan

154 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Japan

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

155 

Japan

156 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Japan

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

157 

Japan

158 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

mexico

Mexico
The Mexican experience in the context of the A/H1N1 influenza 
pandemic comments on international recommendations and 
regulations

Manuel H. Ruiz de Chávez, Jesús M. Siqueiros, Arturo Chimal
MEXICAN NATIONAL BIOETHICS COMMISSION9, 10

introduction

Mexico was the first country to announce the emergence of the new A/H1N1 influenza virus 
which posed a threat to the health and lives of people not only in our country but, as we 
have seen, all over the world.

On 17 April 2009, the Mexican Ministry of Health (Secretaría de Salud) declared a health 
alert  and  took  steps  to  deal  effectively  with  the  situation.  When  the  results  of  tests  were 
received  from  Canada  on  23  April,  it  informed  the  WHO  that  a  new  influenza  virus  had 
emerged.  The  measures  introduced  were  based  on  two  guiding  principles:  1.  To  protect 
health and preserve human life. 2. To ensure, where possible, the continuing socioeconomic 
dynamism of the country.

The Mexican National Bioethics Commission considers that the thrust of this report should 
be to present ethical considerations relating to international regulations and recommenda-
tions, in the light of the Mexican experience of the A/H1N1 influenza pandemic.

To this end, in addition to the lessons learnt in responding to this crisis, the Health Ministry 
has drawn on the International Health Regulation and the Ethical considerations in devel-
oping  a  public  health  response  to  pandemic  influenza  made  available  by  the  WHO  to  its 
member countries to enable them to develop strategies to contain and prevent the spread of 
the disease in the context of international cooperation to deal with this type of public health 
problem.

four topics will be discussed: 

1.  The moral and professional obligations of health care workers in special situations such 

as pandemics and, in general, in other crises and disasters. 

2.  Public co-responsibility, since this highlights our concern for the values at stake in such 
situations and the moral commitments which must guide the actions of the various play-

9   We would like to thank Dr Alejandro del Valle for his contributions, suggestions and technical corrections.

10   Decentralised body under the aegis of the Health Secretariat, technically and operationally independent, 

 established by Presidential Decree on 7 September 2005.

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

159 

mexico

ers involved: civil society, industry and the private sector, educational and health institu-
tions, the media and the government as a whole. 

3.  The  legitimacy  of  the  action  taken  by  the  authorities  and  the  leadership  shown  in  re-

sponse to health crises. 

4.  The  most  important  lessons  that  Mexico  has  learnt  from  this  momentous  experience 
which should form part of a new health culture focusing on prevention of damage and 
risks, health promotion, informed social action and, of course, scientific evidence.

The moral obligations of health care workers in the performance of their duties

According  to  Ethical  considerations  in  developing  a  public  health  response  to  pandemic 
influenza, moral obligations are based on a society’s understanding of “right” and “wrong” 
behaviour  and/or  are  rooted  in  universal  sets  of  values.  Policies  that  address  individuals’ 
moral obligations can play an important role in creating social norms in favour of particular 
behaviour.  They  tell  people  what  they  “should”  do,  but  they  are  not  in  themselves  legally 
binding.11 

The professional and moral commitment of health care workers to preventing and contain-
ing the epidemic was highlighted in the Mexican experience. However, in some cases there 
was a certain amount of resistance to the vaccine by health care workers working with im-
munosuppressed or intensive care patients, and some people doubted whether the vaccine 
should  be  given  to  priority  groups.  The  bioethical  dilemmas  which  had  to  be  considered 
were as follows: should the vaccine be compulsory for all health care workers? Where is the 
borderline between patients’ rights and health care workers’ rights? 

Given the debate in progress, the National Bioethics Commission embarked on promoting 
ideas to develop tools to help with decision-making in such crises. 

Public co-responsibility 

In the context of governance or the exercise of government, public co-responsibility involves 
getting all the players concerned to take part at one time or another in the planning, imple-
mentation and evaluation of public policies, and hence to share the risks, costs and benefits 
of the measures taken. Mexico tackled co-responsibility and cooperation on two levels:

a) International

• It cooperated with the Canadian laboratory in Winnipeg and with the CDC in Atlanta in 

order to sub-type the new virus. 

• It triggered the alarm at world level to warn about the new virus and delivered the new 

strain to the WHO in time for it to develop the vaccine. 

11  Ethical considerations in developing a public health response to pandemic influenza, WHO, 2007, p. 13.

160 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

mexico

b) National

• It  cooperated  with  economic  operators,  civil  society,  and  government  bodies  and 

 institutions. 

The international documents refer in general to the importance of generating public spaces 
for decision-making and cooperating on the public health response to pandemic flu. It is 
worthwhile remembering that generating such spaces is beyond the responsibility of local 
and national levels and can only be achieved internationally. Therefore the National Bioethics 
Commission considers it necessary to have a public co-responsibility framework setting out 
a series of specific ethical recommendations for the various actors involved in a health crisis. 
This framework must be defined in line with certain parameters. The following are essential: 
respect for human rights; solidarity; compliance with international agreements; health pro-
tection and preservation of human life. 

The health authorities: leadership and legitimacy 

The leadership and legitimacy of the health authorities are sorely tested in times of crisis. Le-
gitimacy is essential to obtain an effective response by society to the policies implemented 
by the authorities. It is rooted in the work carried out previously, consisting of consensus-
based decision-making. 

Legitimacy is achieved by getting society to take part in the process of preparing for a pan-
demic. This preparation consists  of  assuming leadership; awareness-raising and training; 
establishing strategies to ensure continuity; carrying out simulations, opening communica-
tion channels and issuing educational messages; reinforcing the processes which ensure 
institutions can continue operating, coordinating with customers, suppliers and other stake-
holders, and ensuring a transparent evaluation method12.

It is important to ensure that the action plan is seen as legitimate by society so that meas-
ures taken during the pandemic are more effective. Since the preparation process and the 
action plan have been based on consensus, effective, uniform social mobilisation is pos-
sible, with the authorities gaining credibility as a result13.

The lessons learnt 

Many topics were discussed by the National Bioethics Commission, however we will under-
line only the following points by way of conclusions and lessons learnt:

12  Manual to prepare institutions before an influenza pandemic. CENAVECE, 2007. 

13  Citizen voices on pandemic flu choices. A report of the public engagement pilot project on pandemic influenza, 2005.

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

161 

mexico

• The co-responsibility of the government together with its institutions and human resourc-
es must be promoted. Health care workers must be protected and the functioning of the 
health care system guaranteed as a matter of priority.

• The manual to prepare institutions for an influenza pandemic must be updated. It must be 
ensured that each country produces a manual like that of Mexico which is in line with its 
own needs, health system features and culture. 

• Health care workers must be trained and awareness raised to promote their moral and 

professional commitment.

• Ethical principles must be disseminated which are targeted in particular at the media and 
intended to promote transparency as regards the information provided by the government 
to society. 

• Participatory strategies must be developed to ensure the legitimacy and leadership of the 

health authorities with respect to society. 

• Health infrastructure must be enhanced to ensure fulfilment of the right to health protec-

tion and to promote research and the training of specialised professionals.

• Government policy on health protection and the preservation of human life must continue 

to be developed, even in a context as complex as the world economic crisis. 

Mindful of the imperative ethical necessity and efforts to ensure respect for human rights, 
the National Bioethics Commission intends to promote systems which ensure effective ethi-
cal public co responsibility by the various local, national and international players, with spe-
cial emphasis on co responsibility between the following:

1.  Countries, acting in accordance with human rights obligations, with special emphasis on 
and consideration of the rights of migrants and (legal and illegal) sick persons who are in 
transit, with a view to preventing discrimination and ill-treatment.

2.  The pharmaceutical industry and developing countries or emerging economies.
3.  Governments and civil society.
4.  Governments and their health institutions and health care workers. 
5.  The media and society. 

Lastly, it must be pointed out that one of the most significant aspects of this learning proc-
ess in Mexico is the fact that the preventive hygiene recommendations on individual health 
care were largely taken on board by people in terms of their general conduct and behaviour, 
which led to the emergence of new habits and significant progress in the generation of a 
public health culture. 

162 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

mexico

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

163 

mexico

164 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

mexico

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

165 

mexico

166 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

mexico

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

167 

mexico

168 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

mexico

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

169 

mexico

170 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

paBIn

PABIN 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

171 

paBIn

172 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

paBIn

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

173 

paBIn

174 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

paBIn

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

175 

paBIn

176 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

paBIn

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

177 

philippines

Philippines
Illustrative case studies: ethics in research

Leonardo D. de Castro 
Philippine Health Research Ethics Board

The three case studies described in this presentation illustrate situations and relationships 
that occur quite often in the Philippines. All of these case studies involve collaboration be-
tween local investigators and a foreign group. 

a ‘routine’ drug trial

This protocol refers to something that could be considered as a routine drug trial. It was 
submitted to the National Ethics Committee on the pretext that it was to be a multi-centre 
trial  and  that  NEC  action  would  have  avoided  multiple  submissions  to  institutional  ethics 
committees  that  could  also  have  resulted  in  inconsistent  decisions  in  several  institutions. 
The NEC declined to review the protocol and asked that it be submitted to the pertinent 
institutional ethics committees (IECs).

When the protocol was due for review at one institutional ethics committee (IEC1), the Princi-
pal Investigator did not attend. Instead, a clinical research manager from the Drug Company 
that was sponsoring the research came. The IEC deferred discussion to a date when the PI 
could appear and answer questions. 

When the PI did come, he gave a well-prepared presentation to the IEC. However, he could 
not satisfactorily answer some of the questions posed by IEC members. The IEC decided to 
defer action on the protocol. 

Other institutional ethics committees had no problems with their Principal Investigators and 
made some recommendations for amending the protocol and the informed consent form. 
The PI from IEC2 promised to take the recommendations back to the research sponsors. 
However, he later explained that from the European sponsors he could get authorisation to 
make changes to the informed consent form but not to the protocol itself.

The Chair of the IEC accepted the explanation and convinced the committee to approve the 
protocol with some changes to the informed consent form. The IEC Chair is also Chair of the 
institution’s Research Committee. The Research Committee makes money for the institution 
by collecting a sizable commission for studies conducted at its facilities. 

One can surmise that it was not difficult for the Chair to convince the members to approve 
the  protocol:  she  also  has  a  responsibility  to  ensure  her  institution  increases  its  research 
output and makes money by collecting fees from research sponsors (a percentage of the 
entire budget for the  study). Doesn’t  this  tend to  happen when  the  IEC  Chair is  from  the 
same institution where research is proposed to be conducted?

178 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

philippines

There were other factors that raised additional ethical concerns. The members of the IEC 
receive allowances from the Research Committee when they attend meetings. Does this not 
give rise to conflicts of interest? 

The PI was going to receive a per capita fee — to be given only for every subject who com-
pleted the trial. Isn’t this a practice that gives the investigator an incentive to prevent subjects 
from dropping out even when they realise that continuing in the trial jeopardises their health? 

The trial was conducted at an extension branch of the hospital that caters mostly to a poor 
urban population. At that institution, investigators usually have a good response to calls for 
volunteers. Yet subjects are so economically deprived that they wouldn’t have an opportu-
nity to buy the products coming out of this trial in future — so how can benefits to them be 
ensured?

a case of authorship and more

This  case  involved  collaborative  genetic  research  on  torsion  dystonia  among  a  group  of 
patients on Panay Island in the Philippines. The local group of researchers published the re-
sults of their work and presented their findings at international conferences. After one of the 
international presentations, a European researcher approached the filipino PI to offer the 
use of his institution’s laboratory for collaborative studies. The European investigator wanted 
to study the same group of patients coming from the same location in the Philippines. The 
filipino group accepted the offer and the collaboration resulted in some publications. 

The turning point came when the filipino received a letter from the European collaborator 
asking if she thought she needed to be an author in another publication resulting from a 
study using the same stored materials. The ambiguous reply resulted in a mere acknowl-
edgement of the filipino’s contributions. She was not named as an author of the article or 
of the others that followed, even when the subsequent studies flowed from the same source 
materials. 

The situation incensed the filipino researchers but they did not have an opportunity to ven-
tilate their grievances to the international research community. 

collaboration in organ transplantation research and training

This case study deals with a proposed partnership involving the Department of Transplant 
Surgery at the National University of rich country A (NUA) and the Department of Surgery at 
a University Hospital from a developing country in Asia (UHA). 

According to the terms of the proposed agreement, NUA was to set up a new operating 
room for the project within the premises of UHA and to provide equipment as well as some 
of the initial supplies for organ transplantation. 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

179 

philippines

In addition, NUA was to host six visiting fellows from UHA for training and research for six 
months each and provide them with accommodation and living expenses. for its part, UHA 
was to provide offices for six visiting fellows from NUA for their use during the incumbency 
of the project. Both NUA and UHA were to organise two annual conferences each during 
the four years life of the project. 

Putting the agreement into operation also meant that mixed transplant teams were to be 
formed at both institutions. Both teams were to perform transplants on patients at both in-
stitutions, using donors from either country. 

concerns

In the end, the proposed agreement raised enough concerns to prevent it from getting off 
the ground. There were worries that the sources of donor organs were more likely to come 
from one country and that recipients were more likely to come from the other, resulting in an 
imbalance. Questions were also raised about the means of recruiting donors and the pos-
sible use of incentives to sustain the activities envisioned in the agreement. 

This last case study could be seen as a reminder of the need to carefully balance the re-
lationship  between  developed  and  developing  country  partners  involved  in  collaborative 
research. 

180 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

philippines

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

181 

philippines

182 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

philippines

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

183 

philippines

184 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

philippines

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

185 

philippines

186 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

philippines

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

187 

philippines

188 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

philippines

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

189 

philippines

190 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

philippines

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

191 

philippines

192 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

philippines

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

193 

philippines

194 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

philippines

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

195 

philippines

196 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

philippines

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

197 

philippines

198 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

philippines

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

199 

philippines

200 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

philippines

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

201 

Russia

Russia
Bioethics and the law in Russia: Case study,  
vaccine trial in Volgograd (Vika G.)

Professor Boris Yudin
Russian National Committee on Bioethics

The current practice on vaccination in Russia is rather controversial. There are many active 
opponents of the practice. The federal Law ‘On Immunoprophylaxis of Infectious Diseases’, 
adopted in 1998, created some grounds for their activities. The law includes gives citizens:

• The right to obtain from medical practitioners complete and objective information on the 
need  for  immunisations,  the  consequences  of  refusing  immunisation,  and  on  possible 
post-vaccination complications; 

• The right to free treatment in case of post-vaccination complications;
• The right to refuse immunisation.

The law gives an exhaustive list of restrictions that can apply to persons who have refused 
vaccination. It protects those who for some reason were not vaccinated against unjustified 
discrimination. It also states that vaccinations must be carried out with the consent of citi-
zens, parents or other legal representatives, and that vaccinations should be administered 
only to those who have no medical contraindications.

However, it is still rather difficult to ensure compliance with the law in everyday life. One of 
the problems stems from the fact that in many cases, parents, health professionals and per-
sonnel in preschool institutions do not know about its existence and, consequently, about its 
content. Often, parents are rather suspicious with regard to immunisation of their children.

The case discussed here was widely covered in the Russian media.14 The event in question 
took place in the city of Volgograd, one of the biggest cities in the basin of Volga river.

Clinical trials for a chicken pox, measles and rubella Priorix vaccine made by GlaxoSmithK-
line Biologicals, Belgium, were carried out in Russia. According to the company’s Moscow-
based  spokesman  Alexei  Brevnov,  the  national  battery  of  tests  involved  1  000  babies  in 
10 cities, and 14 clinics took part in the tests, in cities such as Moscow, Novosibirsk, No-
vokuznetsk, Tomsk, Saratov, Saint-Petersburg, Yekaterinburg and Volgograd. 

In Volgograd, trials were carried out at the Independent Clinical Hospital, which is owned by 
Russian Railways. While Russian Railways is state-controlled, the clinic is not a state facility. 
However, the current law permits biomedical research only in state or municipal patient care 
institutions.

14   In particular, I shall extensively rely on article from ‘The Moscow Times’ newspaper, which is published in English 

(2 March, 2007. Issue #3607).

202 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Russia

Vika G. from Volgograd was one year old when she was given shots at the clinic in Novem-
ber 2005. She subsequently displayed disturbing symptoms that her parents are convinced 
were caused by the trial vaccine. ‘Since getting her shots, Vika and I have been to the hos-
pital on several occasions. She’s frequently been sick,’ said Lyubov G., Vika’s grandmother. 
She added that her granddaughter had suffered speech and psychological problems since 
the trial. 

In 2007, Vika’s parents appealed to the Volgograd prosecutor’s office. They and other par-
ents claimed that the clinic’s doctors encouraged them to allow their children to undergo 
the  course  of  vaccines  without  providing  sufficient  warning  of  possible  side  effects.  ‘The 
pediatrician explained that this was a standard, essential procedure,’ said Olga R., whose 
son Pavel was vaccinated despite warnings that he had a neurological disorder. ‘That didn’t 
stop them,’ she said.15

GSK’s Belgian arm, GSK  Biologicals, paid  the Volgograd clinic  $  50  000 for  its services. 
Viktor  Kostenko,  a  St.  Petersburg-based  doctor  who  has  run  clinical  trials  for  large  drug 
companies, said the payment was reasonable. ‘It all depends on how complicated the trial 
procedures were,’ Kostenko said. Prosecutors maintain that the money was a bribe paid 
to the clinic’s deputy head doctor, Yelena Natsko, to find children for the trials. However, 
Brevnov says the money was merely payment for services rendered.

The Ethics Committee under the federal authority for quality control of pharmaceuticals in 
Moscow approved the carrying out of the trial. According to some data, the research proto-
col was also approved by the hospital’s own ethics committee. However, it was not possible 
to obtain further information regarding this committee. It is possible that it was convened 
specifically to review the protocol and disbanded thereafter. 

After  the  first  vice-prosecutor  of  the  Volgograd  region  sued  the  hospital,  the  Volgograd 
district court on 1 february, 2007 decided there were some infringements in the course of 
trials, in particular:

• parents were not informed about the experimental nature of the vaccination;
• physicians were also not informed about the experimental nature of the vaccination of their 

patients;

• the principal researcher was replaced by another, far less qualified; 
• children with contraindications were knowingly included in the trial. 

The court decided to stop the trial.16 So, it is possible to discern some problems manifested 
by the case:

• lacunae and contradictions in existing law;

15  Komsomolskaya Pravda, 2 March, 2007.

16  International Journal of Medical Practice /in Russian/, #2, 2007, p. 79.

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

203 

Russia

• lack of regulations for the protection of participants in research;
• lack of regulations regarding the status and authority of research ethics committees and 

interrelationships between committees at different levels;

• low  level  of  knowledge  on  the  part  of  participants,  their  relatives,  physicians  and  even 

researchers about existing law and regulations in the field;

• difficulties in anticipating possible adverse effects and in identifying them.

204 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Russia

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

205 

Russia

206 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Russia

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

207 

Russia

208 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Russia

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

209 

Russia

210 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Russia

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

211 

Russia

212 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

South africa

South Africa 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

213 

South africa

214 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

South africa

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

215 

South africa

216 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

South africa

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

217 

Council of Europe

Council of Europe 

218 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Council of Europe

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

219 

Council of Europe

220 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

Council of Europe

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

221 

unESCo

UNESCO
Ethics of science and technology division – bioethics section 
Assisting Bioethics Committees 
ABC

Dr Dafna feinholz Klip, Chief of Bioethics Section
Ethics of Science and Technology Division, UNESCO

introduction

The Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights adopted in 2005 is a universal 
framework that includes both principles and procedures. Principles such as: Human Dignity 
and  Human  Rights,  Benefit  and  Harm,  Autonomy  and  Individual  Responsibility,  Informed 
Consent, Social Responsibility, etc. Procedures relate to addressing bioethical issues and 
decision-making, the establishment of Ethics Committees, risk assessment and manage-
ment, and transnational practices, among others. 

Article 19 of the Declaration is devoted to ethics committees and states:

‘Independent, multidisciplinary and pluralist ethics committees should be established, pro-
moted and supported at the appropriate level …’

UNESCO has decided to devote its efforts to support member states in establishing bioeth-
ics  committees  at  national  level,  and  has  developed  a  specific  programme  to  that  end, 
called  the  ‘ABC  Project:  Assisting  Bioethics  Committees’.  There  is  no  official  definition  of 
such committees as far as UNESCO is concerned, thus allowing for great diversity In fact, 
their names currently vary and there are subtle differences in their role and deliverables.

Nonetheless, there are some core features that UNESCO regards as necessary in order to 
consider a body as a ‘National Bioethics Committee’ and to be included in the ABC Project. 
Such a committee must:

• Be a national platform for bioethical development in the country
• Be newly established or established but willing to have a broader mandate
• Systematically  and  continually  address  the  ethical  dimensions  of  (a)  medicine  and  the 

health sciences, (b) the life sciences, and (c) associated technologies

• Be a group (with a chairperson and members) that meets on a regular basis
• focus on issues that are not simply factual but normative
• Not be merely a research ethics committee, but play a broader role in policy advice, public 

debate and education

• Operate at national level with government recognition

222 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

unESCo

assisting bioethics committees Project (abc)

Main objective: To reinforce the bioethics infrastructure in member states by facilitating the 
establishment of national bioethics committees (NBCs), and, once established, enhancing 
their technical capacities. The project is intended to bring about change in member states. 
It involves three steps:

Step I. Exploration and assessment of the existing bioethics infrastructure in each country

Step II. Technical support for the establishment of a national bioethics committee

Step III. Technical support for long-term sustainability

a. Technical capacity-building training
b. Partnerships, internships and networking
c. Provision of practical information

step ii. Technical support for the establishment of the national bioethics committee

After assessment of the bioethics infrastructure in the country, the project aims to provide 
practical recommendations to establish national bioethics committees, taking into account 
the country’s needs and domestic specificities. An exploratory meeting is held to facilitate 
discussion  among  key  national  stakeholders  about  the  needs  of  the  country,  optimal  ar-
rangements for the committee and practical steps to be taken towards its establishment. 
The mission includes UNESCO staff and international experts, who also assist in drafting a 
plan of action. Once the committee is established, its official inauguration is accompanied 
by:

• a bioethics awareness-raising public event involving multiple stakeholders
• the  signing  of  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  with  UNESCO  for  technical  capacity-

building support over a period of three years

step iii. Technical support for sustainability

a. Technical capacity-building training (3 courses in 3 years)

Year 1 

• first training course: Working Methods of National Bioethics Committees
• Building up relevant documentation and providing UNESCO guides developed specifically 

with this aim.

• Training of the Committee’s secretariat
• Three teams of experts: English-, french- & Spanish-speaking.

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

223 

unESCo

Year 2 

• Second training course: Bioethics — Principles and Practices (based on UNESCO’s Core 

Curriculum in Bioethics)

• Public event to disseminate the work of the committee

Year 3

• Specialised ethics training (ethics education, legal provisions, etc.)
• Actions to ensure the long-term sustainability and viability of the committee

step iii. Technical support

This includes: facilitating the establishment of long-term partnerships between experienced 
and newly established national bioethics committees; arranging internships for the secre-
tariat members of newly established committees, hosted by experienced committees; and 
supporting networking opportunities at regional and international level.

networking is understood as practical and ongoing regional collaboration between 
experienced  and  newly  established  national  bioethics  committees.  The  joint  JACOB 
meeting held in Mexico City on 26-28 Nov 2009 between the European Commission and 
UNESCO reflects their efforts to foster partnerships and the exchange of experiences be-
tween national bioethics committees. 

Present state of the abc Project 
countries that have already established an nbc

Colombia (2009)
Ivory Coast (2002)
El Salvador (2009)
Gabon (2008)
Ghana (2009)
Guinea (2007)
Jamaica (2009)
Kenya (2009)
Madagascar (2007)
Mali (2009)
Oman (2009)
Togo (2007)

224 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

unESCo

countries considering the establishment of an nbc

Bangladesh
Botswana
Cap-Verde
Chad
China
Comoros
Malaysia
Malawi 
Mauritius
Niger
Nigeria 
Trinidad and Tobago

nbcs that have signed an MoU with Unesco (first training course held in 2009) 

Ivory Coast (first course Dec. 2009)
Gabon (first course June 2009)
Ghana (first course Jan. 2009)
Guinea (first course April 2009)
Jamaica (first course March 2009)
Kenya (first course Nov. 2009)
Togo (first course Jan. 2009)

second training course in ethics based on Unesco’s bioethics core curriculum 
(scheduled for 2010)

Ivory Coast (20-25 Sep. 2010)
Gabon (14-19 June 2010)
Ghana (autumn 2010)
Guinea (autumn 2010)
Jamaica (Nov. 2010)
Kenya (May 2010)
Madagascar (autumn 2010)
Togo (6-12 Sep. 2010)

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

225 

unESCo

226 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

unESCo

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

227 

unESCo

228 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

unESCo

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

229 

unESCo

230 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

unESCo

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

231 

unESCo

232 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

unESCo

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

233 

unESCo

234 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

unESCo

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

235 

World health organisation

World Health Organisation 

236 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

World health organisation

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

237 

World health organisation

238 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

World health organisation

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

239 

World health organisation

240 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

World health organisation

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

241 

2.4 list of participants

Key note speakers

oRGAnISAtIon

nAmE

UCL Epidemiology & Public Health 

Sir Michael Marmot

Member of the European Parliament

Mr António Fernando Correia de Campos

European Commission, Deputy Head of BEPA Mr Margaritis Schinas

CoUntRy

oRGAnISAtIon

nAmE

AFRICA

ARGENTINA

AUSTRALIA

AUSTRIA

BRAZIL

BELGIUM

BULGARIA

CANADA

CHINA

Pan-African Bioethics Initiative 
(PABIN)

Comité Nacional de Etica en la  
Ciencia y la Tecnología

National Health and Medical  
Research Council

Mr Chifumbe Chintu

Ms Otilia Vainstock

Mr Timothy Dyke

Austrian Bioethics Commission

Ms Christiane Druml

UEA - Universidade do Estado do 
Amazones

Mr Christian de Paul de  
Barchifontaine 

Belgian Advisory Committee on 
Bioethics

Ms Jeanine-Anne Stiennon 
Mr Paul Schotsmans

Bulgaria’s Parliamentary Ethics 
Committee

University of Toronto

Ethics Committee – Ministry of 
Health

Mr Assenov Djerov

Ms Cathy Tansey

Mr Qiu Renzong

CZECH REPUBLIC Bioethics Committee of the  

Research and Development Council 
Czech national Bioethics Council

Mr Josek Kure 
Mr Bohuslav Svoboda 

CYPRUS

The Cyprus National Bioethics  
Committee

DENMARK

The Danish Council of Ethics

Ms Rena Vrachimi-Petridou

Mr Peder Agger 
Ms Lise Wied Kirkegaard

Mr Ibrahim Badran

EGYPT

ESTONIA

FINLAND

FRANCE

Egyptian National Committee for 
Bioethics (EGY/NCB)

Estonian Council on Bioethics

Ms Hele Everaus

National Advisory Board on health 
Care Ethics (ETENE)

Ms Outi Konttinen 
Ms Aira Pihlainen

French National Ethics Advisory 
Committee for Life Sciences

Mr Patrick Gaudray

GERMANY

German Ethics Council

Ms Kristiane Weber-Hassemer 
Mr Joachim Vetter 

242 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

CoUntRy

oRGAnISAtIon

nAmE

GREECE

The Hellenic National Bioethics 
Commission

Mr Miguel Oliveira Da Silva  
Mr George Maniatis 
Ms Marianna Dracopoulou

HUNGARY

INDIA

INDONESIA

Health Science Council, Scientific 
and Research Ethics

Mr Lászlό Szonyi

The Central Ethics Committee on 
Human Research (CECHR)

Mr Vijay Kumar

National Bioethics Commission 
(Komisi bioetika Nasional)(KBN)

Ms Dwi Ajeng Pratitie 
Mr Anggara Umar Jenie 
Mr Agus Purwadianto

IRELAND

Irish Council for Bioethics

Ms Siobhán O’Sullivan

ITALY

Comitato Nazionale per la Bioetica

JAPAN

LATVIA

Expert Panel on Bioethics, Council 
for Science and Technology Policy, 
Cabinet Office

Central Medical Ethics Committee of 
Latvia

Ms Laima Rudze

Ms Laura Palazzani 
Mr Demetrio Neri

Mr Ryuichi Ida

LITHUANIA

Lithuanian Bioethics Committee

LUXEMBOURG

Commission consultative nationale 
d’étique pour les sciences de la vie 
et de la santé

Ms Asta Cekanauskaité 
Mr Eugenius Gefenas

Mr Jean-Claude Milmeister

MALTA

MEXICO

Bioethics Consultative Committee

Mr Michael Asciak

Comisión Nacional de Bioética

Mr Manuel Ruiz de Chavez 

NETHERLANDS

Standing Committee on Medical  
Ethics and Health Law

Ms Alies Struijs 
Mr Derk Willems

PHILIPPINES

Philippine Health Research Ethics 
Board (PHREB) 

Mr Leonardo de Castro

POLAND

Bioethics Commission

Mr Andrzej Górski

PORTUGAL

Conselho Nacional de Ética para as 
Ciências da Vida CNECV 

Ms Ana Sofia Carvalho 
Mr Miguel Oliveira da Silva

ROMANIA

National Ethics Council

Ms Beatrice Gabriela Ioan

RUSSIA

SLOVAKIA

Russian National Committee on 
Bioethics (RCB)

Mr Boris Yudin

Etická komisia Ministerstva  
zdravotníctva Slovenskej republiky 

Mr Peter Krizan

SLOVENIA

National Medical Ethics Committee

Mr Tone Zakelj

SOUTH AFRICA

National Health Research Ethics 
Council

Mr Daniel Du Toit 

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

243 

CoUntRy

oRGAnISAtIon

nAmE

SPAIN

Comité de Bioética de España -  
Instituto de Salud Carlos III

Ms Victoria Camps 
Mr Carlos Alonso Bedate 
Mr Javier Arias Diaz 
Ms Maria Concepción Martín-
Arribas 
Ms Carmen Ayuso Garcia 
Mr Jordi Cami Morell 
Ms Maria Casado Gonzalez 
Ms Yolanda Gomez Sanchez 
Mr Cesar Loris Pablo 
Mr José Antonio Martin Pallin 
Mr Cesar Nombela Cano  
Mr Marcelo Palacios Alonso 
Mr Carlos Romeo Casabona 
Mr Pablo Simon Lorda

SWEDEN

The Swedish National Council on 
Medical Ethics

Mr Daniel Tarschys

UNITED KINGDOM Nuffield Council on Bioethics

Mr Hugh Whittall

USA

Georgetown University

Mr Frank Daniel Davis 

oRGAnISAtIon

COUNCIL OF EUROPE

WHO

UNESCO

INSERM

EGE members

EGE President

nAmE

Ms Laurence Lwoff

Ms Marie-Charlotte Bouësseau  
Ms Michelle Allain 
Ms Cansu Canca

Ms Dafna Feinholz

Mr François Hirsch

nAmE

Mr Göran Hermerén

EGE Vice-President

Ms Paula Martinho Da Silva

EGE Member

EGE Member

EGE Member

EGE Member

EGE Member

EGE Member

EGE Member

EGE Member

EGE Member

EGE Member

EGE Member

EGE Member

EGE Member

Mr Emmanuel Agius

Ms Diana Banáti

Mr Francesco Busnelli

Ms Anne Cambon-Thomsen

Mr Rafael Capurro

Ms Inez de Beaufort

Mr Josef Glasa

Ms Hille Haker

Mr Julian Kinderlerer

Mr Krzysztof Marczweski

Ms Linda Nielsen 

Mr Pere Puigdomenech

Mr Günter Virt 

244 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

oRGAnISAtIon

European Commission

DG BEPA

DG BEPA

DG BEPA

DG RTD

DG RTD

DG RTD

DG RTD 

nAmE

Mr Maurizio Salvi

Mrs Maja Prelog

Mrs Kim-Hoàng Lê

Mr Jean-Michel Baer

Mr Peteris Zilgalvis

Mr Lino Paula

Ms Roya Kamran

The role of eThics in inTernaTional bioMedical research

245 

Secretariat

address

European Commission
Bureau of European Policy Advisers
BERL 5/118
B-1049 Brussels
fax: (32-2) 29 94565
Email: BEPA-ETHICS-GROUP@ec.europa.eu
Web-site: http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/international_bioethics_dialogue/
index_en.htm

maurizio SALvI
European Commission
Head of the EGE Secretariat
Berl 5/115 - B-1049-Bruxelles
Tel: (32-2) 29 91179
E-mail: Maurizio.SALVI@ec.europa.eu

maja PRELoG
European Commission
Policy Officer
Berl 5/120 - B-1049 Bruxelles
Tel: (32-2) 29 66639
E-mail: Maja.PRELOG@ec.europa.eu

Kim-hoang LE
European Commission
Berl 5/118 - B-1049 Brussels
Tel: (32-2) 29 99228
Email: Kim-Hoang.LE@ec.europa.eu

maria Alberta RIBEIRo
European Commission 
Berl 5/118 - B-1049 Brussels 
Tel: (32-2) 295 09 01 
Email: Maria-Alberta.RIBEIRO@ec.europa.eu

246 

REpoRT of ThE 2 nD mEETIng of ThE EuRopEan CommISSIon’S  InTERnaTIonal DIaloguE on BIoEThICS

the role of ethics in international biomedical research

Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union

2010 — 246 pp. — 21 x 29.7 cm

ISBN 978-92-79-16590-0
doi:10.2796/12463

How to obtain EU publications

Free publications:

•	 via	EU	Bookshop	(http://bookshop.europa.eu);

•	 	at	the	European	Commission’s	representations	or	delegations.		

You	can	obtain	their	contact	details	on	the	Internet	(http://ec.europa.eu)	or		
by	sending	a	fax	to	+352	2929-42758.

Priced publications:

•	 via	EU	Bookshop	(http://bookshop.europa.eu);

 Priced subscriptions (e.g. annual series of the Official Journal of the European 
Union and reports of cases before the Court of Justice of the European Union):

•	 	via	one	of	the	sales	agents	of	the	Publications	Office	of	the	European	Union	(http://

publications.europa.eu/others/agents/index_en.htm).

N
J
-
3
0
-
1
0
-
4
6
1
-
E
N

-

C

R
e
p
o

r
t
o

f

t
h
e
2
n
d

m
e
e
t
i
n
g
o

f

r

t
h
e
E
u
o
p
e
a
n
C
o
m
m

i
s
s
i
o
n
’
s

I

n
t
e

r

n
a

t
i
o
n
a

l

The role of 
ethics in 
international 
biomedical 
research

Report of the 2nd meeting 
of the European  
Commission’s  
International Dialogue  
on Bioethics

Madrid, 04-05 March 2010

l

i

D
a
o
g
u
e
o
n
B
o
e
t
h
c
s

i

i

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
