K
A
-
A
I
-
1
0
-
0
1
5
-
E
N

-
C

ISSN 1725-5562

Ethically speaking

A newsletter providing information
on the activities of the National Ethics Committees
compiled by the Secretariat of the European Group
on Ethics in Science and New Technologies
to the European Commission

July 2011

How to obtain EU publications

Free publications:

• 

• 

via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu);

at the European Union’s representations or delegations. You can obtain their contact 
details on the Internet (http://ec.europa.eu) or by sending a fax 

Priced publications:

• 

via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu).

Priced subscriptions (e.g. annual series of the Official Journal of the European Union and 
reports of cases before the Court of Justice of the European Union):

• 

via one of the sales agents of the Publications Office of the European Union (http://publi-
cations.europa.eu/others/agents/index_en.htm).

Ethically speaking

Issue 15

July 2011

Maurizio SALVI,  

Chief Editor

Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers 
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers 
or these calls may be billed.

More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu).

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication.

Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2011

ISSN 1725-5562

© European Union, 2011
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Printed in Luxembourg

Printed on white chlorine-free PaPer

Contents

Editorial 
Julian Kinderlerer, President of the EGE 

Speech 
President Barroso’s speech at the EGE meeting on 8th February 2011 

5

7

GENERAL INFORMATION ON ACTIVITIES of the EU national and regional ethics committees  11

Austria: Austrian Bioethics Commission 

Belgium: Belgian Federal Advisory Committee on Bioethics 

Denmark: The Danish Council of Ethics 

France: The National Consultative Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences 

Germany: The German Ethics Council 

Greece: The Hellenic National Bioethics Commission 

Italy: National Committee for Bioethics 

Malta: The National Committee Malta 

Poland: The National Committee Poland 

Portugal: The National Committee of Portugal 

Spain: Spanish Bioethics Committee 

United Kingdom: The Nuffield Council on Bioethics 

GENERAL INFORMATION ON ACTIVITIES of the European Commission 

GENERAL INFORMATION ON ACTIVITIES of the non‑EU national 
and regional ethics committees 

Brazil: National Research Ethics Committee 

China: A Report from NEC in China April 2010–May 2011 

Japan: The Expert Panel on Bioethics 

Mexico: National Bioethics Commission 

USA: Presidential Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues 

GENERAL INFORMATION ON ACTIVITIES of the international organisations 

Council of Europe: Bioethics Division 

UNESCO: Ethics of Science and Technology Division – Bioethics Section 

WHO: Ethics and Health World Health Organization 

13

15

21

23

27

31

33

35

37

39

41

43

45

51

53

57

61

65

67

71

73

75

81

Editorial

Julian Kinderlerer

A new EGE – a new mandate – a new beginning?

In January 2011 President Barroso appointed a new European Group on Ethics with a new mandate. 
There were many applications for membership, which was itself exciting, for it provided an indication of 
the impact the Group has had on the community. We have said goodbye to many individuals who have 
served the Group and Commission well and welcomed many new members to out work. 

Close friendships had been made during the 5 years (or more) that we had worked together, and the 
respect that we developed for all the individuals and their views is something that I will treasure. When 
we came together 5 years ago many of us were concerned that the disparities in outlook, philosophy and 
language would never allow us to gel into a coherent group. That view was soon dispelled as the neces­
sities of working together towards common goals allowed us to learn to know and enjoy each other’s 
company. The most influential of the members of the previous EGE was the President, Goran Hermeren. 
I met him for the first time at the first meeting of the EGE in 2005, and almost immediately a bond was 
formed which has led to a friendship and understanding that goes beyond the working relationship that is 
part of membership of this group. I am sure that I speak for the whole EGE in thanking Goran for every­
thing that he did for us and for the cause of ethical reflection within the European Union. The range of 
experience and expertise we have lost is formidable. One of the issues that I certainly learned during that 
mandate was the incredible impact the years of communist rule had had on our Eastern colleagues and 
the importance placed on individual freedoms of those who had suffered under the stifling atmosphere of 
repression of individual rights and expression. 

During the 5 year mandate (2005­2010) the Group had provided the Commission with five opinions, 
all based within the life sciences, although not within the narrow confines of that which is often con­
sidered bioethics, encompassing ethics in relation to new technologies used in agriculture and the 
use of cloned animals and their offspring for food. The mandate of the group is to advise the Com­
mission on ethical questions relating to sciences and new technologies, either at the request of the 
Commission or on its own initiative. The Lisbon treaty will have a significant impact on fundamental 
rights within the European Union –the Charter of Fundamental Rights is central to the treaty obliga­
tions. “The Charter demonstrates that Europe in its diversity is based on a set of shared values that 
are intimately linked to the identity of the European Union”1. The multiversity of values, traditions 
and religion in the European Union requires us to question with great care the many concepts we 
hold dear, and provide a coherent message that permits the Commission, Parliament and Council to 
respect the ethical values that underlie the introduction of many new technologies into our lives. The 
Group has always consisted of scientists, lawyers, philosophers, ethicists and philosophers – a dif­
ficult balancing task with only 15 members. The range of expertise needed is vast, for we have to look 
at issues that relate to scientific disciplines that may not be reflected in the memberships expertise, 
and therefore we have to spend time learning about them from those that have studied the discipline 
and from those that have studied the underlying ethical, legal and social issues before we are able to 
provide coherent advice. The new group appreciates the need to ensure independence and integrity 
as it begins its task. 

1 President Barroso’s introduction to the General Report

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

5

In our general report at the end of the last mandate, the EGE noted many future challenges2. There are 
global issues, like those of climate change and the manner in which the economic crisis impacts on indi­
vidual rights or even the changes in the demography (ageing population, a change in the distribution of 
diseases and of the mechanisms of diagnosis and treatment). These include a responsibility to consider 
those living in Europe and those living in developing countries. The impact of science and technology 
on our lives is constantly evolving, and the need to ensure that the ethical analyses (and implementation 
of actions protecting rights) are fully considered. The physical sciences cannot conceptually be sepa­
rated from the biological sciences any longer, imposing a duty on scientists, technologists and the wider 
community that is new could raise new ethical issues and may lead to new or enhanced risks while 
providing substantial benefits.

It is an exciting time to be involved, and the new EGE will do its best to provide useful, effective and 
considered Opinions to and for the people of the European Union. I am humbled by having been asked to 
act as chair of the group and can only promise to do my very best.

Julian Kinderlerer

President, EGE 2011­present

2 abstracted from Section 3, Future Challenges, General Report

6 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

PRESIDENT’S SPEECH

José Manuel Durão Barroso 
President of the European Commission

Meeting with the European Group on Ethics3

Brussels, 8 February 2011

Ladies and Gentlemen,

I would like to welcome you all as members of the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Tech‑
nologies. I see some familiar faces, and would like to thank you for your renewed commitment to advise 
the Commission on these issues. This advisory Group has provided the Commission with high quality 
and independent advice on ethical aspects of science and new technologies for the past 20 years. This 
has been invaluable in the preparation and implementation of Community legislation or policies.

This is an important task, since on the basis of the Group’s opinions the Commission is better equipped 
to respond to the expectations of the people of Europe; better equipped to ensure that the ethical aspects 
of science and technology are properly taken into account in all activities of the European Union. This 
Group is valuable precisely because it includes the most qualified experts, internationally recognised 
and with high level experience on ethics advisory boards. You represent different disciplines, like law, 
science and ethics, or theology and you come from a range of Member States: 8 of you represent conti‑
nuity, 7 of you are newly appointed. You certainly reflect Europe in all its diversity. It is important that 
you work on the basis of consensus, building on the work of previous Groups. Your opinions have to be 
authoritative; meaning all of you should be able to defend them. These working methods have served the 
Group well in the past. They have helped it gain a very credible reputation for the quality of its opinions. 
I am confident that you will build on this record and meet the Commission’s expectations in full. 

In recent years, the Commission has reinforced the embedding of ethics into the EU’s policy architecture. 
The Commission has worked to coordinate actions in the fields of ethics and EU policies, increased links 
with the Council and the European Parliament and established links between National Ethics Councils 
at European and international level; I am thinking here of the EU international dialogue on bioethics, 
where the Ethic Group, the Chairs of 15 non‑EU National Ethics Councils from 5 continents and the 
Chairs of the EU 27 National Ethics Councils share information, create synergies and discuss the main 
bioethics topics. 

In the political guidelines I presented to the Parliament and the European Council at the beginning of 
the mandate of this Commission, I said that the European Union is founded on values: respect for human 
dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights. In implementing its 
priorities, the Commission has to promote these values: we have to make a successful exit from the crisis, 
boost new sources of sustainable and inclusive growth to renew our social market economy, take a lead 
on climate action and energy efficiency, advance a Europe of freedom and security, and open a new era 
for global Europe. There are many concrete policy sectors that contribute to the achievement of these 
priorities: the EU digital agenda, the future 8th EU framework programme for research, the innovation 
union, international rules on global trade, new applications of science and technology, EU policies on 
climate change and sustainable use of natural resources, the EU energy policy, to mention just a few. 

3 http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european­group­ethics/docs/activities/barroso_speech_8_february_2011.pdf

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

7

All these policy areas have to be implemented with full respect for fundamental values and ethics, and 
the European Group on Ethics can play an important role in this process. 

Ladies and Gentlemen, dear members of the Ethics Group, in the field of science and technology, the 
European Union needs proper governance, in full respect of subsidiarity, while promoting shared values 
and human rights. For this purpose, we need open debate, mutual respect and tolerance; three axes on 
which the EU is focusing efforts, actions and initiatives and which will constitute the daily routine of 
your work. I am therefore confident that you will succeed in finding the right balance between the dif‑
ferent professional and philosophical backgrounds that characterise the European debate on ethics in 
science and new technologies. 

I know that you have now to take the first important steps for the functioning of the new Group, namely 
to elect your Chair and Vice‑Chair, as well as adopting the rules of procedure. As soon as this process 
is finalised, I will await your suggestions on your future work. From the Commission side, I will provide 
you with specific requests for the next Opinions. With this, I am confident that you will adopt a work 
programme for the coming years that helps the Commission in its work of defining, proposing and imple‑
menting different EU policies. Let me finish by congratulating you once again for your appointment, and 
wishing you all a fruitful time as members of the European Group on Ethics.

Thank you.

8 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

Activities on Bioethics by the European Group 
on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 
(EGE)

On January 10, 2011 the President of the European Commission José Manuel Barroso appointed the 
15 members of the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies4 (EGE) for 2011 ­ 2016. 
The selected EGE members serve in a personal capacity and are asked to offer independent advice to the 
Commission5.

The EGE held its 1st meeting on 8­9 February in Brussels and had a meeting with President Barroso. 
The EGE held its 2nd meeting on 15­16 March in Brussels. The EGE has elected Prof. Julian Kinderlerer 
as the President of the Group. Prof. Linda Nielsen has been elected as Vice­President of the Group. The 
EGE has also adopted its rules of procedure on March 15. 

On March 22, the President of the European Commission has requested the EGE to issue an Opinion on 
the ethical implications of Information Communication Technology (ICT). The President of the Euro­
pean Commission has also asked the EGE to issue Opinion on the ethical implications of security and 
surveillance technologies. Following the last Competiveness Council on the Euratom Programme, the 
Commission is considering to ask the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies to 
contribute to the debate on a sustainable energy mix in Europe by issuing an Opinion on the ethical 
impact of research on different energy sources on human wellbeing. 

The EGE held its 3rd meeting on 12th and 13th April in Brussels, its 4th meeting on 17th and 18th May in 
Brussels and its 5th meeting on June 21­226. 

The EGE will discuss the forthcoming Opinion on ethics and ICT with the Chairs of EU27 National 
Ethics Councils in September 21. On November 15 the EGE will hold an open conference with relev-
ant stakeholders on ethics of ICT and will finalise the Opinion in November for its final approval in Dec-
ember, 2011.

In 2011 BEPA ethics sector will publish the following7: EGE Opinion on ethics and ICT, EGE Open 
round  table  on  ethics  and  ICT  proceedings;  ‘Ethically speaking’  n. 15 ,  3rd IBD  conference 
report.

4  The EGE consists of 15 members. They are appointed on the basis of their expertise and a geographical distribution that 
reflects the diversity in Europe. EGE Members are nominated ‘ad personam’, they do not represent Member States, political 
parties, lobby groups or religions. 

5 http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european­group­ethics/welcome/mandate­2011­2016/index_en.htm
6 http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european­group­ethics/welcome/activities/index_en.htm
7 http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european­group­ethics/publications/index_en.htm

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

9

GENERAL INFORMATION 
ON ACTIVITIES of the  
EU national and regional 
ethics committees*

*  For further information on EU national and regional ethics committees please see: 

http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/international_bioethics_dialogue/docs/IDB_brochure.pdf 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

11

Austrian Bioethics Commission

Austria

Codification of the laws governing medical research

The Austrian Bioethics Commission has been actively implementing its work programme. The Commis­
sion has tackled the ethical issues surrounding the codification of the laws governing medical research 
and amended its 2007 report on biobanks for medical research.

In January 2011, the Austrian Bioethics Commission unanimously adopted a report on the codification of 
the laws governing medical research. As the Commission notes in the first part of its report, the current 
legislation governing medical research is fragmented, opaque, unclear and in some cases contradictory. 
This creates legal uncertainty among researchers and impedes acceptance of and possible guidance by 
the law. These shortcomings in the legal system cannot be offset by endorsing legally non­binding ethical 
principles or recommendations by international bodies.

The Commission therefore recommends a reform of the laws governing medical research, which is advis­
able not only for legal policy reasons but also for reasons of constitutional and international law.

After a detailed analysis of the different legal options in the second part of its report, the Commission 
recommends a single legal framework for medical research, for reasons of clarity and consistency. The 
risk of imposing inappropriate and excessive constraints on research can be effectively counteracted by 
strict compliance with the constitutional guarantees of fundamental rights and the rule of law.

In the third part of its report, the Commission analyses national and international legal provisions which 
have to be observed when preparing law on medical research.

Finally, in an annex, the Austrian Bioethics Commission sets out the possible scope of future laws gov­
erning medical research covering the persons concerned, possible types of research, criteria for approval 
of research and relevant sanctions.

Biobanks for medical research — amendments to the May 2007 report

In May 2007, the Austrian Bioethics Commission published a comprehensive report entitled ‘Biobanks 
for Medical Research’. In response to the recent legal and factual developments in this field, the Com­
mission wished to express its opinion on this subject once again. Its latest recommendation amends the 
report published in May 2007. It examines ways in which human body substances can be incorporated 
into biobanks and reviews the requisite criteria concerning information and consent.

The Commission draws attention to the important role of biobanks in medical research. Such collections 
of body fluids and tissue are linked to medical data and are preserved for an indefinite period with the 
intention of identifying causes of diseases and finding new methods for diagnosis and therapy. Biobanks 
constitute one of the most valuable bases for gaining knowledge on pathomechanisms of diseases. Estab­
lishment and operation of biobanks are therefore of considerable public interest.

The Commission recommends to base future legal provisions on establishment and operation of biobanks 
for research purposes on the following considerations:

• 

Incorporation of body substances in a biobank requires the voluntary written consent of a person 
with the capacity to consent. Obtaining specific consent for individual research projects is not nec­
essary, since this research is, on the one hand, not foreseeable and, on the other, will not be carried 
out on the patient and therefore does not pose any risk to him or her.

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

13

•  Donors have the right to withdraw consent that has been given. If this happens, their samples have 
to be destroyed. However, data obtained up to the date of withdrawal of consent may still be used.

•  Research projects using samples and data from the biobank should be submitted to the ethics com­

mission responsible for approval.

•  The donor’s identity must not be known to the researchers using specimens from the biobank. 
Consequently, samples may be given to researchers working within and outside the biobank on an 
anonymous basis only.

•  Any cooperation with other biobanks should involve them fulfilling the same security standards.

Events past and future

The Austrian Bioethics Commission held a conference on reproductive medicine on 20­21 June 2011 in 
order to discuss the changing image of human life as a result of reproductive techniques.

The members of the Commission will be (re)appointed in autumn 2011.

Further information
Dr Doris Wolfslehner
Head of the Secretariat 
Austrian Bioethics Commission

Austrian Federal Chancellery
Ballhausplatz 2
1014 Vienna
Austria

Tel: +43­1­53115/2987
Fax: +43­1­53109/2987

E­mail: doris.wolfslehner@bka.gv.at
Website: www.bka.gv.at/bioethics

14 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

The Belgian Federal Advisory Committee 
on Bioethics

Belgium

16th Forum of the National Ethics Councils in Brussels (‘NEC Forum’)

Introduction

The European Commission offers countries holding the Presidency of the European Union the possibility 
of organising the ‘NEC Forum’. The Belgian Federal Advisory Committee on Bioethics took this oppor­
tunity to hold a meeting at the palace of the Royal Academy of Sciences from 27 to 29 October 2010. 
On the evening of 27 October members of the Belgian Committee also attended the traditional meeting 
with the European Group on Ethics (EGE). This was organised around a comparative analysis of the 
Belgian and European approaches to biobanking (from an ethical perspective, of course). It also provided 
an opportunity for informal exchanges between the members of the Belgian Committee and of the EGE. 

The two following days were reserved for the 16th Forum of the National Ethics Councils, which started 
in the presence of the Vice­President of the European Parliament, Isabelle Durant, and of the Belgian 
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Social Affairs and Public Health, Laurette Onkelinx. The first 
session took the form of a meeting between the members of the NEC Forum and, once again, the EGE 
(which focused mainly on the role of ethics in institutional settings in Belgium, Europe and the UK). 

The main sessions, however, started in the afternoon, with highly interactive workshops on three sub­
jects:  pre­implantation  genetic  diagnosis,  commercialisation  of  the  human  body  and  euthanasia.  The 
participants were invited to debate several questions. In my sincere opinion, these are still generating 
creative thinking. I will therefore report fully on them here. However, I will also indicate points on which 
a consensus was reached.

•  Workshop on Pre‑implantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD)

The workshop on PGD debated the following questions: Do you consider PGD a valid alternative to PND 
(prenatal diagnosis) for couples at risk of transmitting a serious genetic condition to their offspring? Who 
— patient or professional — should decide which technique to use? Is PGD acceptable for late­onset con­
ditions such as Huntington’s disease or breast cancer? What is your opinion on use of PGD to conceive 
an HLA­matched child with a view to possibly curing an existing sick sibling with the aid of cell trans­
plantation? What about using embryos to produce HLA­matched stem cells? Do you accept PGD for sex 
selection to avoid carrier females (of X­linked recessive conditions)? Do you accept PGD to select the sex 
of a child for convenience or family balancing? Should we go for harmonisation of regulations governing 
PGD at European level or at international level via conventions? 

It came as no surprise how diverse the reactions of the members were on these thought‑provoking ques‑
tions. Importantly for European legislators, some unanimity appeared on the last question: the partici‑
pants in the workshop saw no need for harmonisation and regulations at European level for the moment. 
There was also consensus on rejecting PGD for selecting the sex of a child for convenience or family 
balancing. 

•  Workshop on the Commercialisation of the Human Body

The first question is a big one: allowing commercialisation of human body material seems to presume 
that human body material can be the subject of property rights. If such a position is untenable, on what 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

15

grounds  must  it  be  rejected?  Wherein,  then,  lies  the  difference  between  commercial  and  non­com­
mercial transfer of human body material (given that the latter is encouraged)? What kind of right or 
interest entitles persons to transfer body materials non­commercially (e.g. right to control instead of 
property right)?

If such a position is defensible, what would be the nature of such property rights? Classic, i.e. tangible 
property rights, or intellectual, i.e. non­tangible property rights, or both, or another type? Who could 
hold such rights? Those using the body material (e.g. for research or diagnostic/therapeutic purposes)? 
The ‘source persons’ of the body material? Both? Others? If there could be more than one type of rights 
holder, how could conflicts be resolved? 

If commercialisation of human body material should not be generally rejected, what is the relevance of 
the type of body material (hair, milk, cells, tissues, organs, reproductive material, etc.)? 

To what extent do different ethical issues (including those mentioned above) arise with regard to com­
mercialisation of material from living versus dead human bodies? 

If commercialisation were allowed, what would be the role of the European regulatory authorities? 

Again, a very intensive debate ensued on all these questions. There was, however, one interesting 
overarching  idea:  there  is  a  risk  that  establishing  a  system  of  commercial  incentives  might  erode 
people’s altruistic motivations to donate and to show solidarity towards others, by putting a price on 
body material. 

•  Workshop on Euthanasia

The moderators started by clarifying concepts in order to respect the deep ethical disagreements on 
this matter. The questions illustrate this broad ethical diversity: how do you assess, ethically speaking, 
termination or restriction of (withholding and withdrawing) treatment, without any curative goal or pur­
pose, in medically hopeless situations? How do you assess stopping a patient’s artificial nutrition and/or 
hydration or controlled sedation, accelerating the patient’s death without directly provoking it (‘right to 
let die’)? How do these practices compare with euthanasia (‘right to die’)? 

The other questions were more informative: In your country, how is the right to suicide considered? 
What is the status of physician­assisted suicide and how is it related to the euthanasia debate? In general 
terms, which role is assigned to the decision­making autonomy of patients in the medical, legal, and ethi­
cal debate about end­of­life decisions? How do you perceive the evolution of mentalities in your country, 
regarding euthanasia and patients’ autonomy, both in the general population and in the medical profes­
sion? Are any surveys, polls or inquiries being conducted on this matter? Taking into account the current 
legal framework in your country regarding the practices described, and euthanasia itself, how, roughly 
speaking, would a judge react in subsequent legal proceedings? What kind of variables or parameters do 
you think the judge would take into consideration? Can you give an example of such a situation in prac­
tice? How do you assess the connection between organisation and improvement of palliative care and the 
euthanasia debate? 

The general conclusion of this workshop was almost self‑evident: opinions diverge greatly. This is also 
the  main  reason  why  it  is  so  difficult  to  start  a  real  debate,  although  this  issue  is  worth  discussing. 
Nevertheless, when end‑of‑life questions are addressed openly, with mutual respect, it proves fruitful.

Conclusion

The organisation of this NEC Forum in three workshops, with a presentation afterwards before the ple­
nary session, highly stimulated the ethical debate. The diversity of opinions is wide, but — as mentioned 
in the conclusions of the workshop on euthanasia — proves fruitful. Ethics is indeed a  discipline of 
dialogue: between opinions, between cultures, between mentalities, but always between human persons. 

16 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

The atmosphere of respectfully listening to and understanding each other’s viewpoints epitomised the 
culture of peace and tolerance in the European Union.

Paul Schotsmans 
President of the Belgian Federal Advisory Committee on Bioethics (2010­2011)

Further information
Title and name:   
Position:  
Name of National Committee: Belgian Federal Advisory Committee on Bioethics

Professor Paul Schotsmans
President (2010­2011)

Website: www.health.fgov.be/bioeth

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

17

 
 
 
Event at Brussels (auditorium 44 – Passage 44), 
12 October 2011:

‘15 years of the Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics: Round‑up and Prospects’

Established in 1996, the Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics is set to celebrate its 15th anni‑
versary on 12 October 2011.

The Committee will consecrate its biennial ‘grand public’ event to take stock of its activities and the way 
in which these have impacted on the main players and the public at large alike.

The assessment put forward by six of the Committee’s members will be complemented by an outside 
view brought by two international experts, namely Mr Albert Weale of the Nuffield Council on Bioethics 
and Mrs Nouzha Guessous Idrissi, President of the UNESCO’s International Committee on Bioethics 
(2005­2007).

Members of the public will be able to put across their views through filmed interviews as well as live on 
the event. 

Please join us on 12 October to share your views and impressions and join us in the celebrations we have 
planned for you!

For further information, please log on to the Committee’s website at www.health.fgov.be/bioeth

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

19

The Danish Council of Ethics

Denmark

The challenge of communicating bioethical issues

Because bioethical questions are so complex it is sometimes difficult to communicate and create aware­
ness in the society about the important, but also sensitive, issues the Council scrutinises. The Council 
has therefore decided to rise to the challenge by collaborating with relevant partners, offering a range of 
events and maintaining an intense focus on both new and existing communication channels. 

‘Who wants an apple?’ Council member Rikke Bagger Joergensen shouts out, trying to drown out the 
noise of 150 high school students, gathered in the hall of a High School in Denmark. The students have 
been pilots in testing a new case about GMO on the educational website www.etikoglivetgym.dk, which 
is hosted by the Council. To launch the new case the Council has invited politicians, debaters and stu­
dents to the event. To show how relevant the GMO issue is, the students are asked to choose between 
normal apples and apples produced with GMO. The Chairman of the Council, Jacob Birkler, explains 
why it is important to reach out to students in these matters, e.g. the debate about GMO: 

‘We would like to make a special outreach effort towards with young people, because this enables us to 
experiment on the communication front. Our different theme sites and our youth conference that is held 
every second year is already a great success, from which we can draw useful experience in planning new 
activities. The students are the citizens of the future and it is crucial that they understand the complexity 
of ethical questions,’ says Jacob Birkler. 

Debate — the old fashioned way 

Over the past few years debating on the Internet has gone from being subsidiary to printed debate in the 
newspapers to now being the primary article, or at least equal. Being a public institution with the aim of 
communicating ethical issues, the Council needs to master both analogue and digital communication. 
This has resulted in working groups blogging in the digital debate universe of one of the largest news­
papers in Denmark, a number of TV broadcasts about the Council, and radio programmes about ethical 
dilemmas. But still the Council applauds the analogue debate forum, where the spoken word replaces 
blogs and digital statements. 

‘There is a special intimacy in a live discussion, where you are able to look fellow debaters right in the 
eyes. Also, it is important to stimulate debate on many platforms, addressing different target groups. It is 
of great concern to us that we maintain a dialogue with as many people as possible,’ Jacob Birkler explains. 

Television 

In 2010 the Council was contacted by the Danish TV production company, STV Mayday, as they were 
making a number of portraits and documentaries about Danish councils, boards and public offices for the 
Danish National Broadcasting Company. The production team was very interested in bioethical dilem­
mas, and the Council felt that such a partnership could be a way of making the Council more visible to 
the Danish population. 

‘Cooperation with the Danish National Broadcasting Company offers us a great chance to reach out to 
the Danish population, in a way that shows the complexity of the ethical questions the Council deals 
with. It gives the viewer/consumer a chance to understand the arguments concerning a given dilemma, 
but also the shades of grey that lie in all ethical questions’, says Jacob Birkler. 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

21

Three TV programmes were produced; the first was organ donation, the next about euthanasia and finally 
prenatal diagnosis. They were all broadcast during the winter 2010/2011.

Keeping up with the new media/Adjusting to the future

The majority of users on the Council’s website are young people or students, especially on the educa­
tional sites and the theme sites. A lot of different groups visit the Council’s site every day: politicians, 
non­governmental organisations and healthcare professionals. But meeting all your target groups on the 
same site is quite a challenge.

‘The Council has to cover the full range of communication aspects, from rapid web news to the compre­
hensive report, from the short video testimonial to a longer documentary or television broadcast. In brief 
terms, the Council’s future communication approach will be much more flexible. The anchor is our web­
site, which can embrace all those different genres and respond to the needs and demands of our many 
target groups. We need to keep a constant focus on media development because it enables us to meet our 
target groups on their usual platforms,’ says Jacob Birkler.

The next step is to make better use of the many opportunities offered by the Council’s website that was 
launched in autumn 2010, e.g. producing more video material, expanding different sections with more 
material and developing new concepts for the Council’s newsletters. 

Louise Dehn
Communication coordinator
The Danish Council of Ethics

Further information
Title and name:  
Position: 
Name of National Committee:    

Address: Ravnsborggade 2, 4.sal

  2200 Copenhagen N

Tel.: +45 72 21 68 68
Fax: 

E­mail: lcd@etiskraad.dk 
Web­site: www.etiskraad.dk 

22 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

 
 
 
 
 
 
The National Consultative Ethics Committee 
for Health and Life Sciences

France

Legal basis and mandate

The National Consultative Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences (CCNE) was established by 
presidential decree on 23 February 1983. Set up under the law of 29 July, 1994, the CCNE now operates 
within the framework of the law of 6 August 2004, which gives it the status of an independent authority 
linked to the Ministries of Research and Health.

The bioethics law is presently being reviewed.

Taking an ethical view on health and life sciences

The CCNE’s mission is to ‘provide opinions on the ethical problems and societal questions raised by 
progress in the fields of biology, medicine and health, and to publish recommendations on these issues’.8 

The CCNE at work

The law of 6 August 2004 and Decree No 2005­390 of 28 April 2005 established the composition, organ­
isation and modus operandi of the committee, and specified how it can be tasked.

A purely consultative body, the CCNE receives requests submitted by presidents of parliamentary assem­
blies, government representatives, higher learning establishments, public institutions and officially rec­
ognised foundations working in research, technological development or the promotion and protection of 
health. The committee can also decide itself to take on various issues raised by entities other than those 
listed above.

The CCNE’s highest decision­making authority is the plenary committee, composed of all its members.

Cases are investigated by the technical section, which has twelve members chosen by the committee on 
the basis of nominations by the CCNE president. Each issue is handled by a working group made up of 
committee members, who may request help from outside experts in order to shed new light on a subject. 
The technical section then examines the case and presents it to the plenary committee. Meetings of the 
plenary committee and the technical session are closed to the public. After the case is examined, a final 
report is published, including recommendations or opinions. 

Law No 2004‑800 of 6 August 2004 determines the composition of the committee

•  The CCNE president and two honorary presidents are designated by the President of the French 

Republic.

•  Five key figures from the main philosophies and religious faiths are appointed by the President of 

the French Republic.

•  Nineteen members are chosen for their expertise and interest in ethical issues; fifteen are desig­
nated by various ministers concerned with biology and health issues; the four remaining members 
are named respectively by the presidents of France’s two parliamentary houses, the vice­president 

8 Article 1412 of law No 2004­800 of 6 August 2004.

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

23

of the Conseil d’État (France’s highest administrative court) and the president of the Cour de Cas‑
sation (supreme court of appeal).

•  Fifteen representatives from the research sector are designated by their peers.

Composition of the Committee

President: Alain Grimfeld

Vice­President: Pierre Le Coz

Honorary Presidents: Didier Sicard, Jean­Pierre Changeux

Members:

Yves Agid, Annick Alpérovitch, Jean­Claude Ameisen, Michaël Azoulay, François Beaufils, Joëlle 
Belaisch­Allart, Ali Benmaklhouf, Marie­Germaine Bousser, Claude Burlet, Sylvie Cazalot, André 
Comte­Sponville, Alain Cordier, Pascale Cossart, Bernard Debré, Anne­Marie Dickelé, Frédérique 
Dreifuss­Netter,  Roger­Pol  Droit,  Gérard  Férey,  Luc  Ferry,  Patrick  Gaudray,  Françoise  Héritier, 
Marie­Thérèse Hermange, Emmanuel Jolivet, Xavier Lacroix, Chantal Lebatard, Claire Legras, Claude 
Matuchansky, Lucien Neuwirth, Philippe Rouvillois, Michel Roux, Louis Schweitzer, Danièle Siroux, 
Alain­Gérard Slama, Dominique Stoppa­Lyonnet, Claude Sureau, Jean­Louis Vildé, Philippe Waquet, 
Bertrand Weil

Secretary General: Marie­Hélène Mouneyrat

The National Consultative Ethics Committee on the international scene

A delegate from the CCNE attended the 8th Global Summit of National Bioethics Advisory Bodies, which 
was held in Singapore from 26 to 27 July 2010.

A trilateral meeting was held between the German, UK and French Ethic Committees, i.e. Deutscher 
Ethikrat, Nuffield Council on Bioethics and CCNE, in Paris on 3 December 2010.

Current work

•  Ethical questions raised by neuroimaging

•  Developments in medically­assisted reproductive technology

•  Medicines and health­related products

•  Ethical aspects of cord blood private banks

•  Genetic profiling and predictive medicine

•  Bioethics and biodiversity

Most Recent Publications

Opinion No 114: Consumption of alcohol and drugs and drug addiction in the workplace. Ethical issues 
connected to substance­related risks and detection (2011­05­05)

Opinion No 113: Request for medically­assisted reproductive technology after the death of the male part­
ner (2011­2­10)

Opinion  No  112:  Ethical  reflection  concerning  research  on  human  embryonic  cells  and  on  human 
embryos in vitro (2010­10­21)

Opinion No 111: Ethical issues raised by the use of corpses for preservation or for exhibition in museums 
(2010­01­07) 

24 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

Opinion No 110: Ethical issues raised by gestational surrogacy (2010­04­01)

Opinion No 109: Society and the communication of scientific and medical information: ethical issues 
(2010­02­04)

Opinion No 108: Ethical issues in connection with the development and funding of palliative care (2009­
11­12)

Opinion  No  107:  Ethical  issues  in  connection  with  antenatal  diagnosis:  Prenatal  diagnosis  and 
Pre­implantation Genetic Diagnosis (2009­10­15)

Further information
Mrs Marie­Hélène MOUNEYRAT
Secretary General
The National Consultative Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences
35, rue Saint­Dominique
75007 — PARIS, France

Tel.: + 33(0) 1 42 75 66 42
Fax: + 33 (0) 1 42 75 66 49

E­mail: contact@comite­ethique.fr
Web­site: www.ccne­ethique.fr

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

25

The German Ethics Council

Germany

Opinion on pre‑implantation diagnosis

The German Ethics Council’s latest Opinion on pre­implantation diagnosis was published in March 2011. 
In this Opinion, the Ethics Council comprehensively sets out the relevant factual position and the deci­
sive arguments of supporters and opponents of permitting pre­implantation diagnosis (PGD).

Against the background of current technological and legal developments, the Ethics Council describes 
the current practice and the new possibilities of genetic diagnosis of embryos. It goes into detail on the 
various positions and arguments on the status and protection of embryos and discusses the most import­
ant socio­ethical aspects.

Proceeding on the basis of these considerations, the Council members present two alternative proposals 
for legislation on PGD.

A group of thirteen members of the German Ethics Council regard PGD, subject to particular restric­
tions, as ethically justified, because PGD provides a possibility of avoiding a lawful termination of preg­
nancy following prenatal diagnosis and on the basis of medical indication, and also offers an opportunity 
of assistance to couples who for genetic reasons have experienced repeated miscarriages or stillbirths. In 
both cases, good reasons relating to the protection of the woman’s health support the permitting of PGD.

The precondition for PGD to be carried out is a high degree of medical risk. This is present

a)  if evidence is submitted that the parents have a hereditary disposition which if it were passed on to 
the child would result in a serious illness or disability and if it were revealed by prenatal diagnosis 
would constitute a medical indication for termination of pregnancy by reason of an endangerment of 
the physical or psychological health of the woman in question,

b)  if evidence is submitted that the parents have a high degree of risk of passing on a chromosome dis­

order or other mutation which excludes extra­uterine viability of the embryo or

c)  if after repeated miscarriages or unsuccessful attempts at treatment by assisted reproduction after 
thorough medical clarification, the parents have a high degree of risk of maturation disorders of the 
germ cells, with the result that a large proportion of the embryos created are not viable outside the 
womb.

On the other hand, in the opinion of these Council members, PGD is impermissible and must be prohib­
ited by statute in the following cases:

a)  to determine the sex of an embryo, unless this is done in order to prevent the birth of a child with 

a very serious, sex­linked congenital genetic anomaly,

b)  if it is to be carried out with the objective of selecting an embryo to donate cells, tissues or organs for 

another person,

c)  if, without any of the indications set out above, it is, for example, to be carried out to prevent a risk of 
chromosome disorders in the embryo which is assumed solely on the basis of the woman’s age and

d)  in the case of late­manifesting illnesses.

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

27

The supporters of restricted permission for PGD recommend that legislation should lay down these crite­
ria but should not create a catalogue of individual illnesses or disabilities in the case of which PGD may 
be considered.

In addition, they suggest that there should be rules of procedure for conducting PGD, which should be 
uniform nationwide. The diagnosis is to be made jointly, following the determination of the genetic risk 
and counselling from a human geneticist, after medical advice from a specialist in reproductive medicine 
and after psychosocial advice by an advice centre recognised under the Conflicted Pregnancy Act, by the 
experts involved in the counselling and a representative of the IVF commission of the Land chamber of 
physicians.

In suggesting restricted permission for PGD, the supporters of this concept hope to avoid a conflict of 
values with the existing statutory protective approach during pregnancy.

A group of eleven members of the Ethics Council is of the opinion that pre­implantation diagnosis is not 
ethically justified and should be prohibited

­  because the embryo created in vitro, since it was artificially created, is subject to a particular duty of 
responsibility which forbids creating it in order to discard it in the case of undesired characteristics,

­  because selective consideration of the embryos created by deliberate human acts and readiness to pos­
sibly discard them fundamentally distinguishes PGD from the situation of termination of pregnancy 
by reason of medical indication after prenatal diagnosis,

­  because PGD would reintroduce an embryopathic indication, that is, the permission to discard human 
life by reason of undesired characteristics; this indication has expressly been removed from the law 
on conflicted pregnancy,

­  because serious consequences can be foreseen for the protection of embryos, in particular in that 
a large number of ‘surplus’ embryos would be created and nobody knows how these should be treated,

­  because a restriction to a few groups of cases or serious illnesses cannot be adhered to; on the con­
trary, it can be anticipated that the indications and occasions for the use of PGD will be increased, as 
has already happened in other countries which have permitted PGD,

­  because the technological development of chip­assisted diagnosis techniques makes it more probable 
that in the foreseeable future PGD will be used more broadly for simultaneous diagnosis of a large 
number of genetic deviations or dispositions to illness,

­  because the pressure on parents carrying genetic risks who do not wish to undergo PGD, and on per­
sons with disabilities, in particular with genetically caused disabilities, might increase and this would 
counteract efforts for integration and inclusion.

According  to  the  signatories  to  this  proposal,  the  anxieties  and  wishes  of  couples  carrying  genetic 
risks must be taken seriously. However, they do not justify the introduction of PGD. Instead, it must 
be ensured that there is better counselling and support for affected couples or families; it must also be 
examined whether their genetic problems can be alleviated by means of other procedures.

In a dissenting position statement, one Council member advocates permitting PGD to identify embryos 
that are capable of development and to prepare a binding list of indications for this purpose.

The Opinion may be accessed at http://www.ethikrat.org/publikationen. The English and French versions 
will be published in September 2011.

28 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

Opinion on the analysis of utility and costs in healthcare

In January 2011, the German Ethics Council released its third Opinion, Utility and Costs in Healthcare: 
The Normative Function of Their Analysis.

In  the  context  of  the  current  legislative  debate  on  the  Medicinal  Products  Market  Restructuring  Act 
(known by its German initials AMNOG) and of the planned Healthcare Provision Act, the German Eth­
ics Council’s Opinion is intended to help focus political and public attention on thorny issues of distribu­
tive justice, taking as an example the ethically disputed methods of analysis used in health economics.

The establishment of criteria for an equitable distribution of healthcare resources is a political task with 
medical,  economic,  ethical  and  legal  aspects.  In  view  of  the  complex  issues  involved,  however,  it  is 
extremely difficult to arrive at a consensus among all interested parties. The German Ethics Council 
nevertheless believes that principles can be formulated as a necessary basis for the assessment of existing 
structures and processes.

The Ethics Council considers it urgently necessary for prioritisation, rationalisation and rationing in the 
field of healthcare to be debated openly. All forms of ‘covert rationing’ of medical treatments and ben­
efits must be rejected. Unavoidable decisions on rationing must not be delegated to an individual medical 
practitioner or nurse. However, in recognising that there is a problem of how scarce healthcare resources 
ought to be distributed, one is not recommending the ‘economisation’ of decisions. An objective debate 
calls for a transparent process involving medical, economic, ethical and legal expertise. Decisions on the 
extent of solidarity­financed benefits are ultimately ethical decisions, which must be taken on the basis of 
societal discourse and through the political process.

Decisions  must  always  be  based  on  the  principle  of  human  dignity  and  on  the  fundamental  rights 
involved in every citizen’s guaranteed right of access to appropriate healthcare. These rights must not 
be subordinated to any supposed maximisation of the common good. Again, the calculated or presumed 
socioeconomic ‘value’ of individuals or groups must on no account underlie decisions on distribution.

On the basis of the foregoing, the German Ethics Council has formulated twelve recommendations to be 
taken into account by healthcare decision­makers in the drafting of statutory instruments, with the two­
fold aim of optimising the allocation of funds for healthcare while at the same time achieving equitable 
distribution.

If scarce resources are to be used responsibly, they must be deployed in such a way as to ensure that util­
ity really does accrue from them under field conditions. In addition to early analysis of utility for pricing 
purposes, it must remain possible for the Federal Joint Committee (G­BA) and the IQWiG (Institute for 
Quality and Efficiency in Health Care) to conduct a comprehensive analysis of utility at any time irrespec­
tive of cost considerations, in particular in relation to patient­related outcomes (mortality, morbidity and 
quality of life). In the case of important groups of indications, a systematic second stage of utility analysis 
should follow as a matter of course after an appropriate interval, not only for pharmaceutical products, but 
also for non­pharmacological interventions. It must always be possible to exclude a given treatment from 
the range of benefits owing to lack of utility, where which is necessary for patient protection.

The Ethics Council recommends an expansion of transfer and care­related research, as well as assistance, 
independent of the manufacturer, for clinical studies in the practical treatment situation after a drug or 
medical device has been licensed. This should be linked to the systematic identification of research top­
ics of particular relevance to healthcare provision, for instance by the G­BA. An appropriate statutory 
framework must be established for this purpose.

One eventual aim should be the compulsory publication of all studies, regardless of their findings, and 
not only of confirmatory studies conducted for licensing purposes, as well as of post­licensing clinical 
trials. This is the only way to guarantee access to all data relevant to the analysis of utility.

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

29

In  the  context  of  the  cost­utility  analysis  of  medical  treatments,  there  are  important  ethical  and  jus­
tice­related reasons not to apply the principle of maximisation of utility on a level higher than that of 
the patient group. Parliament should therefore clarify Section 35b of Social Law Code Book V (SGB V) 
(Analysis of the cost­utility ratio of medicinal products) accordingly. However, calculations of cost­effec­
tiveness based on an efficiency­frontier approach can also not be deemed ethically ‘neutral’ when used 
as a criterion for the appropriateness of decisions on reimbursement for innovations. This is because the 
cost­effectiveness of the particular established therapy that offers the greatest level of utility in a given 
field of indications — i.e. the status quo — is based on a variety of factors which are not always coordi­
nated with each other. The mention of international standards in health economics in sentence 5 of Sec­
tion 35b (1) SGB V as currently worded is too vague.

The effects of the existing provisions on cost­utility analysis in Germany are at present essentially zero 
because an insured party’s legal entitlement to receive everything that is medically necessary is unim­
paired. These provisions do not currently serve as an instrument for the distribution of scarce resources, 
but for pricing purposes. However, the likely future need for rationing decisions will compel the legisla­
ture to clarify the extent to which entitlements to benefits pursuant to Sections 27 and 12 SGB V may be 
influenced by a cost­utility analysis, and to spell out the relative roles of this analysis and of the criterion 
of medical need.

The Opinion can be accessed on http://www.ethikrat.org/publikationen. The English and French versions 
are also avaliable on the website.

Further Information

Dr Joachim Vetter 
Head of Office   

Address
German Ethics Council   
Jaegerstrasse 22/23, D­10117 Berlin 
Tel.: +49/30/20370­242   
Fax: +49/30/20370­252   

Email: vetter@ethikrat.org 
Website: www.ethikrat.org  

Ulrike Florian
Press and public relations officer

German Ethics Council
Jaegerstrasse 22/23, D­10117 Berlin
Tel.: +49/30/20370­246
Fax: +49/30/20370­252

Email: florian@ethikrat.org 
Website: www.ethikrat.org

30 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Hellenic National Bioethics Commission

Greece

A. Most recently issued opinion (March 2011)

The Commission has recently issued an opinion on “Infectious diseases: Public health and autonomy”. 

Abstract 

The Hellenic National Bioethics Commission (HNBC) has recently issued an opinion on: “Infectious 
diseases: Public health and autonomy”. This is an issue of major concern in contemporary bioethics, as 
it influences crucial decision­making when there is an outbreak of an epidemic or an endemic. There are 
frequent examples in the news, such as avian influenza (bird flu), SARS and, most recently, the Η1Ν1 
virus. Furthermore, the spread of HIV/AIDS and the recurrence of tuberculosis also continue to be topi­
cal issues. 

Based  on  the  previously  issued  opinion  entitled  “Consent  in  the  physician­patient  relationship”,  the 
HNBC is focusing its reflections on the priority of personal autonomy in health related matters. Natu­
rally, there are limits to this autonomy if it endangers public health; however, due to the variation in the 
contagious nature and the seriousness of infectious diseases, these limitations need to be given carefully 
consideration and be thoroughly analysed. 

The HNBC evaluates not only specific issues, such as vaccination, compulsory treatment under special 
circumstances and the need for integrity in conducting clinical trials, but also the potential for limiting 
the access of patients to new treatments in the event of an epidemic. It emphasizes the danger of social 
stigma ­ on the dubious grounds of protecting public health ­ and it examines the sensitive issue of illegal 
immigrants and the infection of HIV/AIDS – both situations where it is necessary to balance fundamen­
tal rights. 

The opinion includes a recommendation of the appropriate action that should be taken by the State, but 
also by the medical profession. 

The above opinion will be translated into English and will be available soon on the English pages of the 
Commission’s website (www.bioethics.gr). 

Please note that the full English text (in pdf format) of all opinions and reports issued by the Commis­
sion can be found at the following URL: http://www.bioethics.gr/category.php?category_id=55 or can be 
requested from the Secretariat, Secretariat@bioethics.gr

B. Current work

The Commission is currently discussing the issue of “Conflicts of interest in biomedical research”. 

C. Public consultation and cooperation with other public authorities

The Greek Ministry of Justice has invited the Commission, among other authorities, to comment on 
a draft international convention on the illegal trafficking of organs and tissues, thereby giving the Com­
mission the opportunity to express its opinion on the new draft law on “Organ Transplants” as part of the 
public consultation on this issue. The Greek Ombudsman’s Office is also taking part in the consultation 
working group to review the “Psychargo” programme, which concerns the rights of the mentally ill.

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

31

D. Seminars on Bio‑law 

In February 2010 the Commission launched the first of a series of seminars on Bio­law. This initiative, 
which is directed mainly at young lawyers, aims to inspire participants in their work and to support the 
development of the new field of bio­law in Greece. 

The seminars are held once a month in the Commission premises and participants take it in turns to 
present their work on a particular bioethical issue; the presentation is followed by a discussion led by 
a moderator. So far, presentations have been made on the following subjects: ethical status of the foetus, 
euthanasia, clinical trials, biobanks, patents, surrogacy, and genetic data.

E. Communication tools 

Since  October  2008  the  Commission’s  newsletter  «BIO­HQIKA»  (BIO­ETHICA)  has  proved  to 
be a most valuable tool for the Commission to communicate with the general public. The newsletter 
includes Commission­related announcements, news and events, international news related to bioethics, 
book reviews and information on local and international bioethics meetings or conferences. This news­
letter is sent to an extensive list of recipients in Greece, at the end of each month. 

F. Presentations in 2010‑2011 (for the period from July 2010 to May 2011)

The Commission regularly takes part in meetings held in Greece or abroad when bioethical issues are 
discussed. 

The Commission has participated ­ by invitation ­ in the following international meetings: 

Date

Conference/Meeting

26­27 July 2010 

8th Global Summit of 
National Bioethics Advisory 
Bodies

Title
8th Global Summit of National 
Bioethics Advisory Bodies

27­28 October 2010

Singapore
16th NEC FORUM 

and EGE­NEC Forum

Joint Meeting 

Workshops on:

­ Commercialisation 
of the human body

Belgian Advisory Committee 
on Bioethics/E.U.

­ Euthanasia

­ PGD

Brussels

Participant/s

Professor George 
Maniatis, Deputy 
Chairman of the 
Commission

Professor George 
Maniatis, Deputy 
Chairman of the 
Commission

Marianna Dracopoulou 
Head of Secretariat

Further Information
Mrs Marianna Dracopoulou Head of Secretariat
Mail Address: 47, Evelpidon str., 11362­ Athens­ Greece

Tel.: +30­210­88.47.700 
Fax: +30­210­88.47.701

E‑mail address: Secretariat@bioethics.gr, 
Website: www.bioethics.gr 

32 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

National Committee for Bioethics

Italy

1. Update on the activities of the NBC

The  NBC’s  four­year  mandate  (2006­2010),  due  to  expire  at  the  end  of  2010,  has  been  extended  by 
a Decree of the Italian President of the Council of Ministers until 2012, with the same composition. New 
working groups have been created with the aim of examining the main ethical, societal and legal issues 
related to the following topics: military bioethics, ethics committees, synthetic biology, conscientious 
objection, neuroscience and enhancement, orphan areas of medicine, bioethics and plastic surgery, the 
right to know one’s origins in MAP, human health, nutrition and animal welfare.

At its last plenary meeting on 27May 2011 the NBC discussed and approved unanimously an opinion on 
the ethical aspects of clinical trials in developing countries.

2. A synthesis of the most recent opinions of NBC

Note on the pharmacists’ conscientious objection to the sale of emergency contraceptive products, 
25 February 2011

The document responds to a question raised by the Hon. Luisa Capitanio Santolini, a member of the 
Italian Parliament. Differing bioethical standpoints emerged within the National Bioethics Committee. 
Some members saw the pharmacist’s role as being akin to that of other ‘healthcare workers’, so that the 
right to conscientious objection had be granted of necessity. Others believed that pharmacist and physi­
cian could not be equated with one another. 

Under the hypothesis that the legislature acknowledges the right to conscientious objection on the part of 
pharmacists and pharmacy personnel, the members of the NBC agreed that, an essential and indispen­
sable premise according to constitutional principles would be that women must always be able to access 
the drug they wanted either elsewhere or by different means.

Neuroscience and human experimentation: bioethical problems, 17 December 2010

The advancement of neuroscience and neurotechnologies requires experiments to be done on humans, of 
low invasivity, aimed at a better understanding of the functioning of the brain and its relationship with 
thought and behaviour. The NBC recognises the importance of such research and studies and highlights 
the problematic elements in terms of the reliability of results, the ability to extrapolate generalisations 
and the interpretation of results. 

NBC underlines the need for these tests to be scrutinised by ethics committees and stresses the ethical 
requirements of any trial, one of the considerations being balancing the protection of privacy against soci­
etal needs. Furthermore, the Committee calls for more interdisciplinary comparison and proper public 
debate to make people more aware and for critical scientific information that is objective and well founded. 

The identification of the human body: bioethical aspects of biometrics, 26 November 2010

This opinion deals with new techniques for identifying individuals by using electronic sensors to detect 
specific physical and behavioural characteristics: these can then be reproduced in the form of mathemat­
ical sequences and stored in appropriate electronic databases. 

As well as emphasising the undeniable advantages of these new technologies for the protecting public 
order and for the security of commercial transactions, NBC highlights the possible risks that may arise 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

33

from uncontrolled misuse. The biometric data may be linked with personal data relating to health condi­
tions, tastes, habits, etc, leading to new and more invasive forms of control or social exclusion. For this 
reason, the NBC recommends a ban on all forms of sectoral and discriminatory application, resulting in 
an improper use of these technologies, apart from strictly necessary functions, or which prevent people 
lacking certain physical features (biometric disability) from enjoying services. This general measure 
should be accompanied by the application, both at European and international level, of new and more 
meaningful aspects of the individual’s right to privacy. Attention is drawn in particular to the need to 
give each individual a right of access to any biometric databases that may include his/her data. Equally 
important would be the legislative recognition of the ‘right to oblivion’, providing a reliable and transpar­
ent process of erasing any improperly acquired data. 

The improper use of placebo, 29 October 2010

The opinion makes it clear, by examining experimental findings, that the use of a placebo is not neces­
sary if the investigator is simply applying a superior design to a drug which has already been approved, 
and provided precautions are taken regarding the high number of patients, the duration of the trial and 
above all the adoption of parameters for assessing the drug’s therapeutic effects. It is obvious that any 
comparison with a placebo instead of an active drug will favour a new drug for which approval is being 
sought. In ‘add­on studies’ a treatment of proven clinical efficacy is sometimes used as a common basis 
for all patients who receive, in addition, a new experimental drug or placebo. In many cases, however, 
the availability of other drugs is deliberately not considered. In the ‘three­arm studies’ the new drug, 
even if inferior to the reference drug, albeit within accepted limits, must still prove its superiority to 
a placebo. Improper use of a placebo in these cases arises from the fact that while the placebo does not 
present any experimental advantages, it forces a group of patients to be deprived of any treatment. 

The NBC consequently emphasises the unethicality of improperly using a placebo as it would deprive 
the patient of a useful drug. In addition, the NBC highlights the role of ethics committees in ensuring 
that commercial interests do not prevail over the right of patients not to be treated with a placebo when 
an effective treatment is already available for a given therapeutic indication. 

Further information
Title and name: Prof. Laura Palazzani
Position: Vice President of the Italian Committee for Bioethics, Full Professor of Philosophy of Law 
at University Lumsa, Member of EGE (Italy)

Title and name: Dr Daniela Marrani
Position: Member of the Scientific Secretariat of the Italian Committee for Bioethics, Researcher in 
International Law at the University of Salerno (Italy)

Address: 
Comitato Nazionale per la Bioetica
via della Mercede 96, 00197 Roma — Italy (Europe)

Tel.: 0039­0667794601 
E­mail: cnbbioetica@palazzochigi.it; palazzani@lumsa.it; dmarrani@palazzochigi.it 

All the opinions (abstract and complete text) are on the web, most of them with an English translation. 

Website: www.governo.it/BIOETICA/ 

34 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

The National Committee Malta

Malta

The Equal Rights of the Unfrozen Human Being

When considering the issue of whether to take morals into account when enacting legislation, the debate 
between Lord Devlin, a Law Lord, and Professor Hart, comes to mind. Although these debates date back 
to the sixties, they still throw considerable light on the complex field of morals and legislation to this 
very day. Devlin’s position can be summarised thus: First, there is a public morality that it is the law’s 
business to enforce. This morality may be reached through the reason of an ordinary human being and 
might therefore be called the natural law approach. Second, society’s existence is threatened by deviance 
from this shared morality. Third, in practice, there has to be scope for individual freedom and respect for 
privacy and therefore the law should only attempt to enforce those items without which society would 
disintegrate. Fourth, the limits of tolerance are bound to shift from time to time and, fifth, the law is 
concerned with the minimum not the maximum standards of behaviour. 

Professor Hart, from Oxford University, challenged Devlin in that he maintained that, unless conduct 
involves identifiable public harm, it should not be made illegal. The law should confine itself to prohibit­
ing conduct which would injure others, whether in person or their property, or violate public sensitivity 
or order. He did not agree with Devlin’s view of a public morality nor would that society disintegrate if 
there were a change in basic moral views. Lastly, he believed that the curtailment of freedom was itself 
a moral question and required its own justification.

There is common ground between these two views, although Devlin emphasises the integrity of society, 
whereas Hart’s main concern is for human freedom. The common ground calls for attention to a social 
dimension in human conduct and to the public interest in preventing social harm.

There are others, such as Ronald Dworkin, who suggest that fundamental liberties should never be taken 
away, while more general liberties may be restricted only if they cause harm. Lon Fuller refers to the 
morality of duty which is related to law. This morality condemns man for failing to respect the basic 
requirements of social living such as not killing one another. Fuller goes on to say that any law that con­
tains elements of contradiction within it is a prescription for the failure of the legal system itself.

I put forward these snippets which I have recently come across because I want to highlight the contradic­
tions of those who accept the freezing of human embryos during IVF in order to prevent morbidity and 
mortality in the mother and in any multiple neonates in the perinatal period. It is impossible to distin­
guish between the rights of any human life during IVF without causing a contradiction to the legal sys­
tem, as pointed out by Fuller. Besides, both Devlin’s and Hart’s reasoning lead to the conclusion that all 
human life has to be protected by law simply because, in Devlin’s case, it is a basic tenet of natural law 
and important for upholding the integrity of society and, in Hart’s case, because of the danger of injur­
ing others in person. The right to live a life unobstructed by arbitrary curtailment would, of course, be 
considered a basic freedom and should be protected under law in Dworkin’s opinion. This is, of course, 
not to forget all the international documents on fundamental rights which list the right to life as one of 
the more important considerations, not to mention our own Maltese Constitution.

Those  who  argue  for  strictly  best  practice  scenarios  seem  to  have  forgotten  that  best  practice  codes 
might have been drawn up in a country such as the UK, whose history, culture and political decisions 
might have no reservations about not endowing an embryo with the rights consonant to being a human 
being or person and which would therefore have no qualms about freezing or destruction of human life 
before the proverbial fourteen days after fertilisation. In Malta, our history, law and culture have been 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

35

averse to treating a human embryo as anything less than a human being with the full fundamental pro­
tection of the law, at least inside the uterus. Therefore Maltese law should not accept treating a human 
embryo differently to any other human being at whatever stage of development, even if it happens to 
be in a test­tube! The main issue raised by those of us against freezing human embryos as a necessary 
condition during IVF, and I emphasise the word necessary in a philosophical sense, is not the actual 
freezing per se but what has inevitably followed the freezing of embryos in other countries which allow 
their wholesale destruction when they are not used and when they inevitably accumulate as a result of the 
process of technical commodification. Incidentally, they are either allowed to die or are sold as a source 
of stem cells or used for testing cosmetics or to grow viruses on and produce vaccines, all options in 
which their ultimate destruction is unavoidable and predetermined.

With the techniques of freezing ova or oocytes, the whole scenario of embryo freezing can be avoided 
with equitable results obtained in comparison with freezing embryos during the IVF process. But even if 
this were not the case, I would not bring myself to accept the dictum that embryo destruction and freez­
ing would have been the lesser evil! This would be tantamount to giving human beings a different level 
of dignity! Natural law or reason teaches us that you should do unto others as you would have them do 
unto you. All human life should be protected and, if we fail to do so, we would be going down the slip­
pery slope that would eventually lead to a mentality conducive to mass extermination not very different 
at all from that carried out in the labour camps of Treblinka and Dachau. In view of the dangers which 
new biotechnologies pose to human life, the Bioethics Consultative Committee has suggested to the 
government that the following definition of the human embryo should be included in the law on IVF in 
order to protect human life:

‘There is a human embryo from the fertilisation of a human egg cell by a human sperm cell which is 
capable of developing and shall further include each totipotent cell, removed from an embryo or other­
wise produced, that is assumed to be able to divide and to develop as a human individual under the 
appropriate conditions.’

Such a definition would protect human life from the very beginning, at inception, and should find its way 
into our statute books together with humane regulation of IVF in Malta after twenty years of unregulated 
practice.

Dr. Michael Asciak MD, M.Phil.

Further information
Title and name: Dr Michael Asciak
Position: Chairman
Name of National Committee: Bioethics Consultative Committee Malta

Address:  60, Sodales Akkwedott Street
   Birkirkara BKR 1973
   Malta

Tel.: 0035621446784
Fax: 

E­mail: michael.asciak@gov.mt
Website: Bioethics Committee Dept of Health Malta

36 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

 
 
The National Committee Poland

Poland

Safeguarding research integrity in Poland

Poland will embark upon its Presidency of the EU at a time of significant developments in the field of 
ethics in science in recent months, developments that have markedly altered the landscape for oversight 
of research integrity in our country and our ability to respond to emerging challenges in bioethics.

Last autumn, our Parliament enacted new legislation regarding the Polish Academy of Sciences (PAS) to 
create a Commission for Research Integrity. On 26 May, the General Assembly of the PAS elected nine 
members from 42 candidates suggested by universities, institutes, and scientific and academic organi­
sations. The Commission’s primary mission is a nationwide activity: it will assess reports of alleged 
scientific misconduct submitted by individuals and institutions representing all branches of Polish sci­
ence (e.g. belonging to the PAS network). In addition, the Commission may address specific cases at its 
own discretion. Furthermore, it will develop a national code of conduct for research integrity and will be 
responsible for fostering its rules.

Furthermore, on 15 February the Minister of Science and Higher Education established an Advisory 
Group  for  Good  Academic  Practices.  The  Group  will  cooperate  with  the  Commission  in  promoting 
good manners in science, especially by encouraging transparency in referees’ opinions for academic 
promotions. Furthermore, it will deal with most of the afflictions affecting the academic and scientific 
community, such as nepotism, abuse of power, unfair competition with employers, discrimination and 
conflicts of interest. 

Another important development has been the establishment of the Committee for Bioethics (under the 
Presidium of the PAS and chaired by Prof. Z. Szawarski, eminent philosopher and ethicist, appointed in 
April by the President of the PAS). The issues to be debated will include the ethical aspects of death and 
dying, genetic testing, and procreation.

Later this year, the Polish Parliament will debate new legislation on clinical trials.

I believe that the main accomplishment of our Commission has been the inclusion of a provision requiring 
the mandatory registration of clinical trials by every healthcare institution engaged in clinical research. 
This information is to be presented on each institution’s website and should provide all basic data related 
to a trial. If finally approved by Parliament and the Senate, this would be a significant step towards more 
transparency in health research, one which I have already suggested in the MASIS report (1). 

This ‘if’ is unfortunately well founded: recently, the Senate removed an item from the medicine reim­
bursement  legislation  authorising  the  withholding  of  3  %  of  income  from  reimbursement  to  fund 
non­commercial clinical trials (2). Had this legislation been approved, it would have solved a number of 
problems with the desperately low funding for science in Poland, especially for health research …

Thus, on the eve of the Polish Presidency, the changed landscape for research ethics in our country offers 
hope for developing and maintaining higher standards of research integrity and addressing the bioethical 
challenges emerging with the advancement of science.

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

37

1. Challenging futures of science in society — emerging trends and cutting­edge issues. Report of the 
MASIS expert group set up by the European Commission, Brussels, 2009.

2. Presidential Palace approves healthcare legislation. Health Market 2011 (06)

(In Polish).

Further information
Title and name: Prof. A. Górski
Position: Chair
Name of National Committee: Bioethics Commission, Ministry of Health

Address:  Miodowa 18…

   00­952 Warsaw, PL

Tel.: (4822) 6349400
Fax: (4822) 6349465

E­mail: agorski@ikp.pl
Web­site: www.kb.mz.gov.pl

38 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

 
The National Committee of Portugal

Portugal

Main activities between December 2010 and May 2011

During these six months the Portuguese Bioethics Council

1. Approved in December 2010 an Opinion on the bill concerning Advance Health Care Directives 

(not yet approved by the Portuguese Parliament).

2. Promoted a full day open discussion to evaluate the existing ART (assisted reproductive technol­

ogy) and abortion laws, as well as some of the main polemic issues related with them. 
These laws exist, respectively, since 2006 and 2007.

3. Pursued the discussion of 4 new Opinions about: 

3.1 Bioethics and Public Health;

3.2 Ethical respect towards the animals;

3.3 Bioethics and water use;

3.4 Bioethics and health data bases.

4. Started in April 2011 the discussion of a project law submitted by the Science Minister about stem 

cells research in Portugal. 

For further information please contact mos@cnecv.pt

Further information
Title and name: Miguel Oliveira da Silva
Position: President
Name of National Committee Bioethics: Portuguese Council of Bioethics (Conselho Nacional 
de Ética para as Ciências da Vida)

Address: 
Av. D. Carlos I, 146, 2º Esq,
1200­651 Lisbon, Portugal

Tel.: + 351 213 910 884
Fax: + 351 213 917 509

E­mail: mos@cnecv.pt 
Web­site: 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

39

Spanish Bioethics Committee

Spain

Recommendations  of  the  Spanish  Bioethics  Committee  for  the  Impulse  and  Implementation  of 
Good Scientific Practice in Spain

Scientific research has grown and diversified extraordinarily in several countries and its impact on soci­
ety and personal life is growing so important every day that it could be referred to as a society of inves­
tigation,  innovation  and  development.  In  this  framework  where  scientific  truths  must  be  saved  at  all 
costs, problems of integrity and good scientific practices are becoming more relevant every day. There is 
a general understanding in many countries on the necessity of working together to protect research from 
such deplorable practices as falsification, fictitious elaboration, plagiary, abuse of power, use of privi­
leged information, or conflict of interests of the persons involved in evaluation processes and assigning 
resources, when such interest endangers objective decision­taking.

The Spanish Law 14/2007 of 3rd of July on Biomedical Research confers the Bioethics Committee of 
Spain a supervisory role in this aspect. In particular, Article 78.1, paragraph c) under Functions corre­
sponding to the Spanish Bioethics Committee states that one of those functions is “To establish general 
principles for the development of codes of practice in scientific research, which will be developed by 
Research Ethics Committees”. 

In order to comply with this legal obligation, the Plenary of the Spanish Bioethics Committee adopted 
the decision to draft some “Recommendations” for the implementation of Codes of Good Scientific Prac­
tice with a view to encourage the Spanish Government to take measures promoting the most responsi­
ble behaviour possible in the pursuit of scientific research and which could serve as guidelines for the 
Investigation Ethics Committees and other Biomedical Committees in the preparation of their own Good 
Practice Codes. After some months of working on and considering this issue, the Plenary of the Spanish 
Bioethics Committee decided by a unanimous vote at a meeting held on April 12th, 2010 on a document 
titled “Recommendations of the Spanish Bioethics Committee for the Impulse and Implementation of 
Good Scientific Practices in Spain”.

The  Bioethics  Committee  of  Spain  announced  in  its  report  that  Codes  of  Good  Scientific  Practices 
(CGSP) are sets of rules, recommendations and commitments to be observed by scientific staff, research 
institutes and agencies, which allocate research grants and even scientific societies in order to encour­
age the quality of research integrity and prevent problems of integrity. The Committee emphasised the 
necessity that the CGSP include all professionals involved in scientific research (scientific and technical 
staff, administrative and services personnel, consultants and managers…), so that the aim of achieving 
the “best possible practices” is shared by all concerned.

The document drawn up by the Spanish Committee obtained favourable opinions from various areas and 
institutions and was highly praised in the Spanish Parliament in a non legislative proposal presented by 
the Socialist Parliamentary Group in the Spanish Congress of Deputies on June 8, 2010, where the Depu­
ties requested the Spanish Government to follow the recommendations of the Committee and implement 
Codes of Good Practice in the sphere of scientific research. 

The main objective of the Recommendations adopted by the Spanish Bioethics Committee is that the 
Public Administration in Spain should take measures to encourage the most responsible behaviour pos­
sible in the course of any scientific research. The CGSP should be complementary to the legislation in 
each case, but are not designed to substitute it. Good Practice Codes may not restrict any of the rights 
or freedoms of the researchers, nor impose any obligations not foreseen in the law, but should aim to 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

41

complement the legal norms with ad hoc previsions reflecting greater demands on the behaviour of the 
researchers and institutions to protect scientific integrity. The Spanish Committee considers that Good 
Practice Codes should be frequently revised and adapted to the ever­changing legislation and scientific 
practices and that research centres should have arbitration procedures for resolving conflicts, and stand­
ards for the protection of both persons who may file a complaint, as well as the subject of the complaint.

The Recommendations of the Spanish Bioethics Committee determine that all Scientific Good Practice 
Codes should include principles of behaviour and regulations on the following ten aspects: 

1)  Supervision of research trainees. Assignment of responsibilities and obligations of the mentor, 
limits to the number of people under their charge and the rights and obligations of trainees should 
be dealt with; 

2)  Preparation of research protocols; 

3)  Recording, documentation, storage, custody and sharing of data and biological or chemical mate­

rial resulting from the research;

4)  In research projects funded by the healthcare industry or other commercial entities, the agree­
ments on intellectual property rights of the parties should be known and a protocol of economic 
considerations should be dealt with; 

5)  Rules for solving conflicts of interest; 

6)  Publication and communication practices, rules on peer review, protection of results with possible 

commercial application, unpublished results and negative results should also be included; 

7)  Authorship of scientific publications and patents; 

8)  Procedures for internal and external evaluation of the projects and protection of the documenta­

tion used in the evaluation; 

9)  Main legal requirements affecting scientific activities. The CGSP must inform the scientific com­
munity  on  the  existing  regulations  governing  experimentation  on  humans,  animals  and  other 
living organisms, materials for genetic research purposes, embryonic material, as well as those 
governing the prevention of industrial accidents, including standards on custodianship and pri­
vacy of third party data; and 

10) Responsibility in regard to the use and management of resources and infrastructure related to 

research.

On the other hand, the Bioethics Committee of Spain recommends that Codes of Good Scientific Prac­
tice be implanted in the Spanish public system of science, technology and innovation, i.e. in all institu­
tions, organisms and research centres and also in universities with scientific activity and organisations 
with responsibility for planning, assessment and allocation of public funds for R &D.

The Section on training and promotion of the values of Good Scientific Practice is especially relevant. In 
this aspect, the Spanish Committee recommends that doctoral and research personnel training programs 
should include specific modules for teaching Good Scientific Practice and that the public administrations 
should provide incentives through awards or specific financial support for training and promotion of 
Good Scientific Practice values for research staff at a formative stage.

Finally, the document drawn up by the Bioethics Committee of Spain includes a concept that is very new 
in the Spanish juridical system such as the constitution of a body dedicated to the resolution of scientific 
integrity issues; an independent body with competence to deal with the challenges of scientific integrity at 
a national level. The resolution of queries from the researchers and research institutes, arbitration of disputes 
and the promotion and defence of the most appropriate scientific practices are included among the functions.

The Nuffield Council on Bioethics

United Kingdom

Introduction

The Nuffield Council on Bioethics was established by the Nuffield Foundation in 1991 to identify, exam­
ine and report on the ethical questions raised by recent advances in biological and medical research. 
Since 1994, it has been funded jointly by The Nuffield Foundation, the Medical Research Council and 
The Wellcome Trust. The Council’s role is to respond to public concern about aspects of biomedicine 
and biotechnology; to provide independent advice to policy makers; and to stimulate debate in bioethics.

20th Anniversary

2011 is the 20th anniversary of the Nuffield Council on Bioethics. As part of its anniversary celebrations, 
the Council hosted its annual public lecture on the evening of 19 May at the Royal Society of Arts in 
London. The lecture, entitled “Broadening bioethics: clinical ethics, public health and global health” 
was given by Baroness Onora O’Neill, a founder member and former Chair of the Council. 

The Council is organising an international symposium on global health on 22 June at the Wellcome 
Collection  Conference  Centre  in  London.  The  symposium  will  bring  out  a  range  of  international 
perspectives on the ethical and policy issues raised by the challenge of global health. Three specific areas 
will be discussed in detail: the social determinants of health; chronic and non­communicable disease; 
and the role of new biotechnologies. 

Report: The ethics of biofuels 

The Council’s most recent report was Biofuels: ethical issues, published on 13 April 2011. The report sets 
out six ethical principles that policy makers should use to evaluate biofuels technologies and guide policy 
development: 

•  Biofuels development should not be at the expense of people’s essential human rights.

•  Biofuels should be environmentally sustainable. 

•  Biofuels should contribute to a net reduction of total greenhouse gas emissions and not exacerbate 

global climate change.

•  Biofuels should develop in accordance with trade principles that are fair and recognise the rights 

of people to just reward. 

•  Costs and benefits of biofuels should be distributed in an equitable way.

• 

If the first five principles are respected and if biofuels can play a crucial role in mitigating danger­
ous climate change then, depending on certain key considerations, there is a duty to develop such 
biofuels. 

Since the report was published, it has been debated in the media, among policy makers, and by those 
working in the energy industry.

Report: The ethics of ‘personalised healthcare’ in a consumer age

In October 2010, the Council published a report Medical profiling and online medicine: the ethics of 
‘personalised healthcare’ in a consumer age. The report considers a range of new developments in medi­
cal profiling and online medicine that are promised by their providers as leading to a new era of ‘person­
alised healthcare’. The case studies considered in the report are: 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

43

•  Personal genetic profiling

•  Direct­to­consumer body imaging

•  Online health information

•  Buying medicines online

•  Online personal health records

•  Telemedicine

The benefits and harms of each are weighed up, along with the ethical values that come into play, such 
as individuals being able to pursue their own interests and efforts by the state to reduce harm. Recom­
mendations for policy and practice are made in each case.

Consultation: Emerging biotechnologies 

In January 2011, the Council set up a Working Party to explore the ethical issues raised by emerging 
biotechnologies. The Working Party, chaired by Professor Michael Moran, is interested in the way soci­
ety and policy makers respond to new biotechnologies and how benefits from these technologies can be 
secured in an ethically appropriate manner. A public consultation is being held from April to June 2011. 
Questions include:

•  What currently emerging biotechnologies do you consider have the most important implications 

ethically, socially and legally? 

•  What ethical principles should be taken into account when considering emerging biotechnologies? 

•  What role should public opinion play in the development of policy around emerging biotechnologies? 

A report setting out the Council’s findings and recommendations to policy makers is due to be published 
in autumn 2012. 

Further Information
Hugh Whittall
Director, Nuffield Council on Bioethics

Address
The Nuffield Council on Bioethics
28 Bedford Square
London WC1B 3JS

Tel.: +44 207 681 9619
Fax: +44 207 637 1712

Email: bioethics@nuffieldbioethics.org 
Website: www.nuffieldbioethics.org 

44 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

GENERAL INFORMATION 
ON ACTIVITIES of the  
European Commission

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

45

Activities on Bioethics by the 
European Commission

The European Commission International Dialogue on Bioethics (EC IDB)

On September 20, the 3rd meeting of the European Commission International Dialogue on Bioethics 
(EC IDB), will take place under the auspices of the Polish and Hungarian rotation Council Presiden­
cies. Invited participants at this event will include the members of the European Group on Ethics of 
science and new technologies (EGE), the Chairs of 15 non­EU national Ethics Councils, the Chairs of 
the National Ethics Councils (NEC) of the 27 Member States of the European Union and representatives 
of International Organisations1 (UN Agencies, Council of Europe etc.). The topic of the above meeting 
will be the protection of fundamental ethical principles in international research and innovation pro‑
grammes2.

The inter‑service group on ethics and EU policies

The 14th meeting of the inter­service group on ethics and EU policies3 took place on 29th June, 2011. 
19 Commission services attended the meeting (AGRI, COMM, COMP, DEV, DEVCO, INFSO, EAC, 
ECFIN, EEAS, ENER, ENTR, HOME, JRC, MARE, REA, RTD, SANCO, TRADE, BEPA). The ISG 
Group discussed: The societal dimension in Security Research, and work of the expert group on societal 
impacts;  the  Inter‑Institutional  negotiation  on  the  revision  of  the  novel  food  regulation;  Responsible 
research and innovation, The External IPR policy of the EUEGE Opinion on Ethics of ICT and future 
Opinion (2012). The 15th ISG meeting will take place in November 2011.

Responsible Research and Innovation Workshop, 16‑17 May, Brussels, Belgium

Ten years of research and coordination activities at Community level in the field of Science in Society 
have brought some noticeable progress on the understanding of where the main concerns are and how to 
cope with. One of the most important points is that sustainability and responsibility go hand in hand. In 
the present context of economic and financial crisis, which invites to focus on short­term profits, there 
is an even bigger need than 10 years ago to show that such activities bring a real added value to Europe. 
The workshop “Responsible Research and Innovation in Europe” held on 16th and 17th of May 2011 gath­
ered about 70 stakeholders from various horizons (researchers, civil society organisations, industries, 
policy­makers,...) into a collective reflection and mutual learning on Responsible Research and Innova­
tion and its importance for the Common Strategic Framework that will succeed the 7th Framework Pro­
gramme and for the European research Area. 

A Newsletter was published that gathers the raw material will give you an insight on the strong points of 
the workshop:

http://ec.europa.eu/research/science­society/document_library/pdf_06/responsible­research­and­innova­
tion­workshop­newsletter_en.pdf

A more elaborated report will become available mid­2011.

1 http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european­group­ethics/bepa­ethics/ec­international­dialogue­bioethics/members_en.htm
2 http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european­group­ethics/bepa­ethics/ec­international­dialogue­bioethics/meetings_en.htm
3 http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european­group­ethics/bepa­ethics/inter­service­group­ethics­eu­policies/index_en.htm

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

47

New publications 

European Textbook and Syllabus on Ethics in Research textbook 

This textbook is designed for use in the training of science students, researchers and research ethics 
committee members throughout Europe and beyond. The scope is the ethics of scientific research involv­
ing human beings. The publication contains case studies relating to a variety of scientific disciplines, 
including biomedical and human life sciences, new technologies and the social sciences. These have been 
chosen to illustrate and facilitate discussion of key ethical issues, and to give a flavour of the range of 
research settings in which these issues occur.

The textbook is accompanied by a Syllabus. It provides an overview of the content of the textbook and 
ideally will be used in conjunction with it, but it may also be used independently. Both publications are 
available free of charge and can be downloaded at:

http://ec.europa.eu/research/science­society/document_library/pdf_06/textbook­on­ethics­report_en.pdf

http://ec.europa.eu/research/science­society/document_library/pdf_06/syllabus­on­ethics_en.pdf

Eurobarometer survey: Europeans and Biotechnology in 2010

This survey on life sciences and biotechnology indicates that the crisis of confidence in technology and 
regulation that characterised the 1990s is no longer the dominant perspective. While entrenched views 
about GM food are still evident, in 2010 there is a greater focus on the technologies themselves. The 
survey also reveals important knowledge gaps, pointing to a need for more communication: a majority 
of respondents had never heard of some of the areas covered by the survey, such as nanotechnology (55% 
unaware), biobanks (67% unaware) and synthetic biology (83% unaware). The Eurobarometer, carried 
out in February 2010, is the seventh in a series since 1991. The report and the full data overview can be 
downloaded at:

http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/ebs/ebs_341_winds_en.pdf

http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/ebs/ebs_341_en.pdf

Calls for proposals 

In 2010 the Commission opened a call for proposals under the Framework Programme 7 Science in Soci­
ety Programme, regarding the role of Ethics under EU policy and law. Call topics that were most relevant 
to ethics were:

SiS­2010­1.1.1­1 The role of Ethics under EU policy and law: the EU as a global actor.

SiS­2010­1.1.1­2 The role of Ethics under EU policy and law: EU policy in the making

Proposals were to address issues such as the possible divergence or convergence of ethical standards 
among various regions in the world, the type of ethical ‘expertise’ that is needed for the development of 
public policies, and how this expertise should be governed ­ by ethical committees or otherwise? New 
projects funded by these calls have started.

The call for proposals of the 2011 Science in Society Work Programme closed 20 January 2011. Call top­
ics most relevant to ethics are:

SiS.2011.1.1.1­3 Regulating emerging scientific and technological developments

SiS.2011.1.1.1­4 Integrated assessment methods for measuring societal impacts of emerging scientific and 
technological developments

48 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

New projects funded by these calls are expected to start by the end of 2011. In addition, under the 2011 
Science in Society Work Programme the Commission will launch an Expert group on the ethical and 
regulatory challenges of international biobank research. This group will also contribute to forthcoming 
activities of the Council of Europe with regard to this theme.

Support and coordination activities regarding ethics committees

The Commission supports networking and capacity building activities between ethics committees across 
Europe and beyond, with the overall aim to consolidate and further strengthen the infrastructure for 
ethical review of (research in) science and technology. Examples of such activities are the European 
Network of Research Ethics Councils and the Forum of National Ethics Councils (NEC Forum). The 
European Network of Research Ethics Councils (EURECNET) aims to stimulate networking between 
‘local’ research ethics committees and develops trainings for the members of such committees. 

The Forum of National Ethics Councils is an independent informal platform for exchange of information. 
The 2010 NEC Forum meetings were:

­ 15th Forum: 3­4 March 2010 in Madrid, under the auspices of the Spanish Presidency

­ 16th Forum: 28­29 October 2010 in Brussels, under the auspices of the Belgian Presidency 

The 17th Forum will take place 21­22 September 2011 in Brussels, under the auspices of the Polish and 
Hungarian rotation Council Presidencies. It will be held in conjunction with the third meeting of the 
International Dialogue on Bioethics, taking place 20 September 2011. 

For  more  information  on  the  NEC  Forum,  and  for  the  Opinions  of  National  Ethics  Committees  in 
Europe, please consult:

http://ec.europa.eu/research/science­society

http://europa.eu/sinapse/directaccess/NEC/Public­Library/

Green Paper on a Common Strategic Framework for future EU Research and Innovation Funding 

On 9th February 2011, the European Commission presented a Green Paper which proposes major changes 
to EU research and innovation funding to make participation easier, increase scientific and economic 
impact and provide better value for money:

http://ec.europa.eu/research/csfri/pdf/com_2011_0048_csf_green_paper_en.pdf

The changes, to be introduced in the next EU budget after 2013, would bring together the current Frame­
work Programme for research, the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme, and the European Insti­
tute of Innovation and Technology. 

The Commission is seeking the views of all interested individuals and organisations on these proposed 
changes and on the specific questions set out in the Green Paper. The deadline for contributions was 
Friday 20 May 2011.

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

49

GENERAL INFORMATION 
ON ACTIVITIES of the  
non‑EU national and 
regional ethics committees*

*  For further information on non­EU national and regional ethics committees please see 

http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/international_bioethics_dialogue/docs/IDB_brochure.pdf 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

51

National Research Ethics Committee

Brazil

Pioneering system in Brazil – Resolution 196/96 – part 3 * 

Resolution 196/96 has a conceptual content and lays down bioethical guidelines based on the four princi­
ples of autonomy, beneficence, non­malfeasance and justice. It creates a mechanism for applying stand­
ards and establishes an operational system and a (support) system that ensures autonomous and inde­
pendent social control. This control system is linked to the National Health Council, which is the social 
control  body  under  Brazilian  law.  Resolution  196/96  introduced  the  system  comprising  the  National 
Research Ethics Committee (CONEP) and the Research Ethics Committees (CEP). The resolution was 
drawn up by a (multidisciplinary) bioethics committee and approved after a wide­ranging consultation of 
scientific societies, governmental bodies and various associations representing society.

Research projects must be approved by the Research Ethics Committee (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa – 
CEP) of the institution in question. This committee must be accredited by the National Research Ethics 
Committee (Comissão Nacional de Ética em Pesquisa – CONEP). 

The committees are completely independent and do not take orders from anyone. The CEP and CONEP 
are essentially bioethical in nature (the number of members engaged in the same profession must not be 
more than half the total number of members) and their members must include at least one representative 
of human research subjects. 

CONEP is responsible for standardising and coordinating all research involving human beings in any 
research area. It has 15 members (professionals in the areas of health, human sciences and natural 
sciences and theologians) and 15 alternate members. Of these, four represent people suffering from 
the pathologies that are being researched, four are advisers from the National Health Council and the 
others are nominated by the National Health Council based on names proposed by the Research Ethics 
Committees at various institutions in Brazil. Members are elected for four years, renewable every two 
years. 

When a Committee approves a project it becomes jointly responsible for that project with the author. This 
responsibility cannot be delegated with regard to matters relating to ethics. Quarterly reports on all the 
projects are sent to the CONEP. In addition to a final annual report that must always be submitted by the 
researcher and the researcher’s obligation to indicate any negative events that have taken place and make 
a precise assessment of them, the Committee may also request interim reports.

The research institutes will not release funds until the Research Ethics Committee has issued approval.

Resolution 196/96 is not a law but it is legally binding. Failure to comply with it can lead to prosecution 
before the ordinary courts and the board of the professional body in question.

One  of  the  main  documents  concerns  free  and  informed  consent.  This  document  is  an  instrument 
intended to protect the human being in question and not to obtain “exoneration from responsibility”. It 
must be clearly drafted and contain all the important information. A signed copy is sent to the human 
research subject, who is also given the address and telephone number of the person to be contacted if 
a problem arises during the research.

Before the results of the research can be published, journals require proof that these results have been 
approved.

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

53

The researcher must keep records for at least five years and make them available at any time to the Ethics 
Committee.

Results of research must be made public whether or not they are positive.

In cases of research into a new medicine, where applicable access should be provided to the medicine 
once the project is completed.

In cases of foreign cooperation, supporting documents should be provided to prove that the project will 
also be carried out in the country of origin (or, if not, to explain why). In addition, proof should be pro­
vided of approval by the Ethics Committee in the country of origin. It is recommended that the Brazilian 
researcher take part in drawing up the project. He must declare in writing that he agrees with the proce­
dures to be followed. The foreign researcher who is to coordinate the project and the person responsible 
for the project in Brazil should be identified.

The  researcher  is  responsible  for  providing  guidance  to  the  human  research  subject  (in  the  case  of 
research into medicines) to ensure that he does not participate in another project. The person should 
not be involved in another project for at least a year after the completion of the project unless it is in his 
interest to do so. The researcher is responsible for assessing the advantages of the subject’s involvement 
in another project.

In cases of research into indigenous peoples, the researcher must consider not just the human subject 
but also his entire habitat. Any exploitation of the fauna, flora or subsoil, which must be regarded as an 
integral part of the heritage of indigenous peoples, is forbidden.

In  addition  to  Resolution  196/95,  the  ethics  system  has  seven  other  specific  resolutions  on  research 
involving  new  medicines,  foreign  cooperation,  human  reproduction,  indigenous  populations,  human 
genetics, and multicentric research and setting up databases.

Today the system consists of 610 institutional Ethics Committees (over 10 000 persons). Almost 90% of 
research projects are submitted for approval to the Ethics Committee of the institution in question, while 
the remaining 10% (specific projects) also require the approval of the National Research Ethics Committee.

According to estimates, around 10 000 research projects involving human beings are carried out in Bra­
zil each year. These projects cover all areas of research, not just biomedical projects, and involve half 
a million human subjects. 

This figure includes both retrospective research done on medical records and research on stem cells (of 
adults).

Some additional information:

•  The members of the National Health Commission are proposed by the Ethics Committees and 
appointed by the National Health Council. Multi­disciplinarity is ensured and no one profession 
predominates.  Each  Committee  must  always  include  at  least  one  representative  of  the  human 
research subjects.

•  Cases not dealt with are resolved by the CONEP, which is the body of final appeal.

•  The CONEP­CEP system does not come under any corporate or executive body. It is fully autono­

mous and is directly associated with the National Health Council.

•  The Ethics Committees and the CONEP hold their discussions like collegiate bodies after analys­
ing specific opinions on each project. In addition to members’ opinions, the CEP and CONEP may 
conduct ad hoc expert consultations.

•  The committees must issue their final opinion within 30 days and CONEP within 60 days.

54 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

* By Christian de Paul Barchifontaine and William Saad Hossne. Text updated by Daya Sisson, biologist, 
Masters in bioethics, adviser to the National Health Commission.

Further information
Daya Sisson
Adviser
National Health Commission (Brazil)

Address
Esplanada dos Ministérios ­ Bloco G, Anexo B ­ sala 436 b 
Zip Code: 70.058­900 Brasília ­ DF ­ BRAZIL
Tel: +55 61 3315­2951
Fax: +55 61 3315­3701

Email: daya.sisson@saude.gov.br
Website: http://conselho.saude.gov.br/web_comissoes/conep/index.html

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

55

A Report from NEC in China 

April 2010–May 2011

China

NEC in mainland China is affiliated with the Ministry of Health. During the period April 2010–May 
2011 NEC in mainland China performed the following tasks:

1. Completed Ethical Guidelines on Clinical Trials and Clinical Application of Adult Stem Cells 
and submitted to the Ministry of Health

Since 2000 more and more ethical discussions are about stem cell therapy. In mainland China, there 
may be some 400 health institutions offering unproven and unregulated stem cell treatments which are 
alleged to work. It is difficult to ascertain whether the stem cell products offered are effective or even 
if they are real stem cells rather than ordinary cells, because no third party has tested them, and the 
methods and results have not yet been published in reputable journals. They usually recruit patients by 
advertisements on the internet. In these advertisements, stem cell therapy is described as ‘magic bullet’ 
that can cure any disease. The patients they enrol are desperate with untreatable, debilitating, and ulti­
mately fatal illnesses. They do not know how to assess the efficiency of treatment, how to find experts to 
consult, nor how to claim their rights when they feel they have been deceived. 

One reason is that in mainland China, therapeutic misconceptions have tended to be common. Physi­
cians and researchers have deliberately confused clinical trials with medical care, thereby avoiding any 
ethical review and the informed consent process, but with the intention of making money from unin­
formed patients. And the relationship between drugs/equipment manufacturing companies and physi­
cians/researchers or IRB members has not been regulated.4

In order to promote the successful and ethical translation of stem cell research into clinical application 
and protect patients’ welfare and rights, the Ethics Committee of MOH considered it necessary to draft 
Ethical Guidelines on Clinical Trials and Clinical Application of Adult Stem Cells and submitted it to 
MOH. The draft work is authored by Professor Hu Ching­li, a member of the Committee, and in collabo­
ration with his team members he brilliantly developed the draft work and submitted it to the Committee 
in November 2010. The Committee approved his draft with some revisions, and submitted it to MOH. 
Now the draft is being reviewed in MOH.5

4  Zamiska  N:  2007  Seeking  Hope  in  Chinese  Stem  Cells,  Wall  Street  Journal,  July  2  http://online.wsj.com/article/
SB118334242884354943.html; Qiu, J: 2007 To Walk Again: Can China Transform Therapy for Spinal Injury? New Scientist, 
10 November, 57­59; Qiu J: 2009 Trading on Hope, Nature Biotechnology, 27 (9): 790­792; Qiu J: 2010 Stem Cells in China: 
Wild East or Scientific Feast? Economist, January 14. Chinese translation in Reference News, January 18, 2010, p. 7; Qiu RZ 
& Zhai XM: 2009 Ethical Governance in Stem Cell Research and Its Clinical Application: Retrospective and Prospective, 
Chinese Medical Ethics, no. 5, 3­9; Zhai, XM: 2007 Challenges & Governance/Regulatory Responses in China, presented at 
the BIONET Workshop on Stem Cell Research in Shanghai on 10 October 2007. http://www.bionet­china.org/workshops2.
htm; Zhai, XM: 2009 Ethical Issues in Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research, presented at the Cultural and Education 
Section,  British  Embassy  in  Beijing,  31 March 2009.  www.ebiotrade.com/newsf/2009­4/20094291502.htm  3 April 2009; 
Zhai XM: 2010 Ethical and Governance Issues in Stem Cell Research and Clinical Application, presented at International 
Forum on Stem Cell, Tianjin, November 11­14, 2010; Hu, CL et al. 2009 Genethics, Shanghai Science and Technology Press; 
Cyranovski, D: 2009 Stem cell therapy faces more scrutiny in China, Nature Vol. 459, 14 May; 146­147; CDS (Chinese 
Diabetes Society): 2010 Statement of the Positions on Stem Cell Therapy for Diabetes, 25 November. http://cdschina.org/
news_show.jsp?id=598.html; Dong YP: 2010 Chinese Society for Diabetes: Stem Cell Therapy Not Appropriately Used as 
Routine, 29 December, http://www.cast.org.cn/n35081/n35533/n38575/12529373.html; McMahon DS et al.: 2010 Cultivating 
Regenerative Medicine Innovation in China, Regen. Med. 5(1): 35­44; Xue CH: 2010 Stem Cell Therapy Will Be Regulated, 
22 July, http://www.daifumd.com/_daifumd/blog/html/4011/article_179716.html; Mao KY: 2010 Problems Facing Clinical 
Translation of Stem Cells, 16 September, http://www.hyqb.sh.cn/publish/portal3/tab342/info5424.htm.

5  Ethics Committee, Ministry of Health China: 2010 Ethical Guidelines on Clinical Trials and Clinical Application of Human 

Adult Stem Cells, drafted by the Team with the Chair, Professor Hu Ching­li. 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

57

The  draft  suggested  that  any  action  in  clinical  trials  and  clinical  application  of  adult  stem  cells  (not 
including routine hematopoietic stem cell therapy) should comply with the following ethical principles: 
scientific validity, non­maleficence/beneficence, informed consent, justice, public good, and non­com­
mercialisation.

One aim of the draft is to clarify the relationships between clinical trials and clinical application, and 
between pre­clinical research and clinical research/trials. Pre­clinical (lab and animal) research is the 
premise of clinical trials and clinical trials are the necessary condition for clinical application. Only if suf­
ficient evidence of safety and efficacy are obtained during the two steps of scientific research (pre­clinical 
research and clinical trials), if the results are evaluated scientifically and ethically, and if the application is 
approved by the health administration, can adult stem cells be translated into clinical application.

The draft makes it clear that except for those adult stem cells which are not specially treated in vitro 
(such as hemopoietic stem cells or cartilage cells, and routinely used to treat diseases of the blood sys­
tem, cornea injuries or cartilage injuries), the safety and efficacy of all other adult stem cells used for 
treating diseases have not yet been proved, so before adult stem cells can be applied clinically, clinical 
trials must be conducted in compliance with scientific and ethical principles. It is not permissible for any 
institution to use adult stem cells in clinics as a routine service until safety and efficacy are proved by 
clinical trials.

To ensure the quality and safety of adult stem cells, the draft requires screening of donors for genetic and 
epidemic diseases; use of strict aseptic techniques and preventive measures to ensure non­contamination 
and non­pathogenic bacteria transmission; establishment of unified criteria for preparation and a system 
of quality management; minimisation of genetic variation in vitro, such as genetic recombination, genetic 
deletion and other genetic abnormal change, or oncogenesis etc; and establishment of unified normative 
criteria for transplantation (including time, route, number and evaluation index of clinical observation) to 
ensure the safety of human subjects. 

The draft requires any protocol of clinical trials for stem cell products to be reviewed by an independent 
review committee, and requires this committee to review the following items of a protocol: 

(1) Are the adult stem cells used for clinical trials provided by a qualified institution? There should 
be a scientific authentication report to prove that their biological features meet scientific criteria; 

(2) PI should provide data, reports and scientific evaluation of the safety and efficacy of pre­clinical 

research on adult stem cells; 

(3) Do the researchers’ qualifications and experience meet the requirements for clinical trials? 

(4) What is the scientific validity of the clinical trials? Is the protocol scientifically valid?

(5) Is the ratio between subjects’ risk exposure and expected benefits ethically acceptable? 

(6) In the informed consent process, is the information disclosed to subjects complete and understand­

able? Is the method for obtaining consent appropriate? Is the consent form appropriate? 

(7) Are there measures to safeguard the confidentiality of subjects’ personal information? 

(8) Are the criteria for including and excluding subjects appropriate and fair? 

(9) Are subjects clearly informed of their rights, including the right to withdrawal at any time without 

reason and without being discriminated against? 

(10) Do the subjects get compensation when they are injured or even die due to participating in clini­

cal trials? 

(11) Do the researchers include staffs that are responsible for informed consent and safety of subjects? 

(12) Are there protective measures against the risks borne by subjects?

(13) Is there any conflict of interest between researchers and subjects?

The draft also prescribes the conditions under which stem cell therapy is permitted as innovative therapy 
or experimental treatment. In cases where patients with untreatable and fatal diseases urgently request 
treatment with adult stem cells, experimental treatment with this unproven therapy for a few patients is 
permissible. But the patients selected should be those suffering from terminal or untreatable cancer or 
lingering and fatal diseases. In such cases clinicians should provide a complete written plan of experi­
mental treatment, including the scientific justification for choosing adult stem cell treatment; data on the 
safety and efficacy of pre­clinical research; qualifications of medical staff; patient’s voluntary choice; 
valid consent form; qualified stem cell technical operation facilities; reactions to side­effects, complica­
tions and adverse effects; follow­up plans; etc. And clinicians should take responsibility for recording 
therapeutic results in a systematic and objective manner; reporting therapeutic results including negative 
results and adverse events to the scientific community at conferences or in journals; and turning imme­
diately to clinical trials after obtaining positive results, in order to generalise knowledge.6

2. Completed draft Ethical Guidelines on Medical Publications

The drafting of Ethical Guidelines on Medical Publications was conducted by a team headed by Pro­
fessor Yuan Zhong, Member of NEC, President and Editor­in­Chief of Peking Union Medical College 
Press. Four sessions were organised to review the draft, two organised by the team and two by NEC. 
The revised version of the draft was basically approved by NEC subject to further editorial changes. 
After completion, the draft will be submitted to the Ministry of Health. And it will also be circulated 
in the community of editors and publishers of medical publications, and hopefully it will become the 
professional code of conduct for the community of editors and publishers. The seven chapters are: pre­
amble, authors, peer review, editors and publication institutions, research misconduct, conflict of inter­
est, advertising.

3. Discussed the drafts of the Opinions on several topics

During  this  period,  the  NEC  also  discussed  the  drafts  of  the  Opinions  on  the  following  topics: 
Opinions on Capacity Building for Research Ethics 
Opinions on the Ethical Governance of Institutional Review Committees  
Opinions on Operating Procedures of Institutional Review Committees 
Opinions on Emerging Issues in Human Assisted Reproductive Technologies

The NEC also reviewed the progress of the project on public health ethics.

4. Organising Training Workshops on Research Ethics

During this period of time, the NEC organised two training workshops on research ethics in Hangzhou 
City (Zhejiang Province) and Beijing under the sponsorship of the Ministry of Health. 

6  Zhai XM: 2010 Ethical and Governance Issues in Stem Cell Research and Clinical Application, presented at International

Forum on Stem Cell, Tianjin, November 11­14, 2010.

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

59

 
 
Further information
Title and name:   
Position: 

QIU Renzong
Vice­President of NEC China
Research Professor, Programme in Bioethics
Institute of Philosophy, Chinese Academy of Social Sciences

E­mail:   

renzong@gmail.com

Title and name:   
Position:  

ZHAI Xiaomei
Member of NEC China
Centre for Bioethics, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences/  
Peking Union Medical College

E­mail:  

xmzhai@hotmail.com

60 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Expert Panel on Bioethics

Japan

Recent developments in stem cell policies and regulations in Japan

Professor Ryuichi Ida 

Kyoto University Graduate School of Law

Member of the Expert Panel on Bioethics, CSTP, Japan

Introduction

Recognising that every embryo has a special ethical status as the ‘germ of human life’, in 2001 the Japa­
nese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sport, Science and Technology (MEXT) introduced non­binding 
guidelines to authorise research on human embryonic stem cells (hESC) from surplus embryos. After 
legislation was enacted in 2000 to prohibit reproductive cloning, therapeutic cloning, initially prohibited, 
was cleared by the Council for Science and Technology Policy (CSTP) in 2004, with regulatory experi­
ence and promising advances in hESC research. Later, guidelines along this path were issued in 2009. 
Since then, a tremendous breakthrough was achieved recently in induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) 
technology. This article gives a brief overview of recent developments in ethics policy and in regulations 
on pluripotent stem cells in Japan. 

1. Ethical issues raised by induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) 

Researchers have often said that iPSCs could overcome all the ethical concerns about the status of the 
embryo which they encountered in their research on hESCs. However, apart from the normal ethical 
concerns about research using human material, in particular about the consent procedure for donation of 
samples, iPSCs still raise ethical concerns of their own in at least two respects:

(1) Scientific concerns about the safety and efficacy of iPSCs

As often pointed out, ‘Bad science is bad ethics’. Safety and efficacy concerns are primarily scientific 
issues, but should also be given ethical consideration. From that point of view, the process of deriving 
iPSCs does not raise the same ethical issue of destruction of human embryos and is therefore less conten­
tious than in the case of hESCs. The current method of deriving iPSCs depends on inserting genes using 
a vector virus. There is concern that either gene insertion itself or the process of insertion could give rise 
to adverse and possibly fatal effects that are as yet unknown; especially if stem cells obtained by iPSC 
technology or differentiated cells thereof are applied in the clinical phase. While the process of obtaining 
pluripotent cells from somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) embryos is ethically controversial, there are 
fewer safety and efficacy concerns should such cells be applied therapeutically. 

(2) Potentially controversial use of iPSCs that are differentiated as gametes and brain cells

The second main ethical concern arises in the differentiation phase, such as differentiation of pluripotent 
cells into brain cells or gametes. Although concerns about differentiation of stem cells into brain cells 
may not be so pressing at the moment, the question which must be asked is to what extent cells, tissues 
or organs of a human person may be replaced by cells from foreign sources or artificially generated. The 
same issues arise in research involving humanoids or cyborgs. 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

61

2. Ethical limits of differentiation and use of gametes derived from pluripotent stem cells 

Turning to the ethical concerns about differentiation of stem cells into gametes, gametes offer the pos­
sibility of being used for reproduction. The gametes in question here are those derived from either an 
embryonic stem cell or an iPS cell, i.e. in a somewhat artificial way compared with natural human repro­
duction, although they are not inhuman. The ethical implication hinges on the extent to which ‘assist­
ance’ should be given to human reproduction. Does not use of gametes derived in this way go beyond 
‘assisted reproduction’? 

These ethical concerns apply to both iPSCs and hESCs. Differentiation of pluripotent cells into gametes 
had been prohibited because it was considered unethical to ‘create’ a human being using artificially dif­
ferentiated gametes from hESCs, which are derived from destroying an embryo, the germ of human life. 
However, the CSTP’s Expert Panel on Bioethics and the MEXT decided to open the door to derivation 
of gametes from iPSCs and somatic stem cells. The reason for this is that research on the differentiation 
process by which gametes could be obtained would provide an opportunity to look deeper into the ques­
tion of infertility. Research on the differentiation process of gametes from stem cells will allow reproduc­
tive medicine to develop its scientific knowledge and technology for the procreation of human beings via 
the natural reproductive process. Accordingly, in May 2010, the MEXT issued guidelines for research 
involving the creation of gametes from human iPSCs and hESCs.

However, use of gametes derived from stem cells to create an embryo for reproduction is still prohibited. 
If a human embryo is to be regarded as the beginning (‘germ’) of human life, then creation of gametes 
could be ethically contentious, as they occur one stage before the biological entity (i.e. the embryo) that 
acquires the above­mentioned highly important ethical status. It may be necessary to consider what the 
moral status of gametes is, particularly that of oocytes (eggs). Are they simply cells like other somatic 
cells? The answer is probably no if we follow Japanese ethical reasoning. Or do they have a special status 
since they will generate the germ of human life? If so, which kind? So far the only point that is clear is 
that differentiation of gametes from stem cells could contribute to solving infertility problems. 

Opposition to the differentiation of gametes specifically from hESCs was voiced because of the ethical 
difficulty with having to ‘recreate’ gametes from hESCs that would have been derived from a human 
embryo, thus amounting to reversing the fertilisation process. However, the above­mentioned guidelines 
see no difference between iPSCs and hESCs as regards pluripotentiality, and differentiation from both 
hESCs and iPSCs is permitted for the purpose of research on assisted reproduction. 

3. New developments in regenerative medicine: use of pluripotent stem cells in clinical trials

The ‘road map’ for regenerative medicine has already been drawn up as researchers attempt to move 
from basic research to clinical trials. The MEXT is developing an integrated research project for regen­
erative medicine with four main areas of activity: (1) Research will be extended to search for a process 
to create a safer iPSC line, without using retroviruses as vectors to introduce genes into a somatic cell, 
and for a more efficient and surer process for derivation of ESCs; (2) Research will focus on (a) more 
efficient differentiation of ESCs into cells available for transplantation and (b) technological develop­
ment to create target cells to be used for regenerative medicine; (3) Research on application of cells and 
tissues differentiated from human iPSCs and hESCs in a preclinical study in advance of a clinical trial 
on humans; and (4) Stem cell banking for research, comprising collections of (a) iPSCs and hESCs, (b) 
disease­specific iPSCs and (c) somatic stem cells from cord blood: researchers and doctors of medicine 
do not think it is necessary to create patient­specific stem cells for treatment, because iPSCs or hESCs 
could potentially be applied in therapy, provided there is auto­immune compatibility with the intended 
patient (established by human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing).

The Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (MHLW) guidelines for clinical trials using human stem 
cells which allowed clinical trials to use only adult stem cells were reviewed in August 2010. Use of 
human ESCs and iPSCs in clinical trials is now permitted, but such trials using iPSCs or hESCs may not 

62 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

start for another two or three years. During this time, there is also a need to develop appropriate stand­
ards on good clinical practice for iPSCs and hESCs, since until now the research on these stem cells has 
been done as basic research and the standard of experiments may differ between basic research done in 
vitro and clinical trials conducted in vivo.

Conclusions 

The first derivation from hESCs was obtained little more than ten years ago, raising grave ethical con­
cerns. The creation of iPSCs by Prof. Yamanaka cleared this ethical hurdle and seems to have brought 
us to a more practicable field. However, the bioethical issues have not been completely resolved, even if 
the question of destroying the ‘germ of human life’ is expected to vanish with the success of iPSC, both 
in the evaluation of its pluripotentiality comparable to hESC and in the clinical application to patients’ 
stage. We should always be confident about resolving ethical concerns by understanding and supporting 
development in this field of life and medical sciences for the benefit of humanity and of each individual 
person. In doing so, respect for the diversity of values and conceptions is the key. Each human com­
munity has its own ethical concerns and its specific way of solving ethical legal and social issues. Here 
a leading role is played by the principle of ‘harmony’, upon which rests the belief in living in peace and 
in welfare based on human dignity and human rights. 

Further information
Title and name:  
Position: 

Prof. Ryuichi Ida
Member of the Expert Panel on Bioethics 

Address:
Expert Panel on Bioethics
Council for Science and Technology Policy, The Cabinet Office,
3­1­1, Kasumigaseki, Tiyodaku, Tokyo, 100­8970 Japan 
Tel.: +81­(0)3­3581­9267, Fax: +81­(0)3­3581­9992
Author: 
c/o Kyoto University Graduate School of Law,
Yoshida, Sakyo­ku, Kyoto 606­8501, Japan
Tel.: +81­75­753­3260, Fax: +81­75­753­3290 

E­mail: ida@law.kyoto­u.ac.jp

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

63

 
National Bioethics Commission

Mexico

The  National  Bioethics  Commission  of  Mexico  (NBC)  was  established  in  1992.  However,  it  started 
a new era with the Presidential Decree issued on September 2005 that made it a separate body with tech­
nical and operational autonomy, and tasked it with developing a bioethics culture in Mexico.

Mission and vision of the NBC

The overall mission of the NBC is to promote a bioethics culture in Mexico, by a lay analysis that is plu­
ralistic and inclusive of bioethical dilemmas, based on respect for the rights of human beings, the protec­
tion of living beings and the preservation of the environment.

The  vision  of  the  NBC  is  to  become  a  leading  independent  organisation  recognised  by  society  as 
a national and international reference for the handling of bioethical dilemmas and the development of 
a bioethics culture.

The approach and objectives of the NBC

To promote and establish a bioethics culture in Mexico, the NBC has to foster an attitude of multidisci­
plinary and multisectorial reflection, deliberation and discussion of the topics linked to human health, the 
development of ethical standards for health care, research and education, and humans’ relationship with 
other living beings and the environment.

To comply with its objectives the NBC will:

I.  Establish health policies linked to bioethical topics.

II.  Act as a national consultation body on specific bioethical topics.

III. 

IV. 

 Identify and systematise factors including and/or affecting a bioethical issue in order to offer 
relevant information about them to institutions, social groups, or any other sector interested.

 Collaborate so that the right to health protection is observed in health research and in the qual­
ity of medical care.

V.  Promote debates involving all sectors of society on bioethical issues.

VI.  Promote the teaching of bioethics, particularly in medical care and health research.

VII.  Promote the establishment of bioethical commissions in all Federal States.

VIII. 

 Promote the organisation and operation of hospital bioethical committees and research ethics 
committees in private and public health institutions, with the powers granted by the applicable 
legal provisions, and also support the training of these committee members.

IX. 

 Establish  and  disseminate  guidelines  to  be  considered  by  the  bioethics  and  research  ethics 
committees for their activities.

X.  Organise and participate in research and teaching activities linked to the subject.

XI. 

Issue opinions on health research protocols that are submitted for its consideration.

XII.  Make the collaboration agreements necessary for fulfilment of its objectives.

XIII. 

 Foster communication with universities, higher education institutions, academic and civil soci­
ety groups linked to bioethics issues.

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

65

XIV. 

 Promote respect for bioethical criteria in the various sectors dealing with health­related aspects 
of food, water, environment, education etc. 

XV.  Perform the other functions assigned by the Health Minister.

Thematic axes of the NBC

The key bioethics issues indentified by the NBC to be worked on are:

•  Bioethics and public policy in Mexico

•  Bioethics infrastructure

•  Ethics in research 

•  Bioethics, drugs and medication (prescription, access and advertising)

•  Maternal mortality and other reproductive health issues

•  Ethics in the doctor­patient relationship

• 

Informed consent 

•  Ethical dilemmas at the end of life

•  Protection of personal data and biological samples

The Centre for Bioethical Knowledge (CECOBE) represents a key element for the NBC to accomplish 
its mission. Its activities include:

•  A Bioethics Library

•  The development of media strategies to improve bioethical knowledge

•  The publication of material related to the field

•  The organisation of workshops

•  Public relations

Further information
Title and name: Manuel H Ruiz de Chávez, MD.
Position: Chairman of the Board
Name of National Committee: National Bioethics Commission of Mexico
Address:
Carretera Picacho­Ajusco No 154, Piso 6
Col. Jardines de la Montaña,
Deleg. Tlalpan
14210 México, D.F.
Tel.: +55 5487 9902 ext. 51467

Email: manuelruizdechavez@gmail.com
Website: www.cnb­mexico.salud.gob.mx

66 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

Presidential Commission for the Study of 
Bioethical Issues

United States of America

About the Commission

The Presidential Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues (the “Commission”) is an advisory panel 
of  the  nation’s  leaders  in  medicine,  science,  ethics,  religion,  law,  and  engineering.  The  Commission 
advises the President on bioethical issues arising from advances in biomedicine and related areas of sci­
ence and technology. The Commission seeks to identify and promote policies and practices that ensure 
scientific research, health care delivery, and technological innovation are conducted in a socially and 
ethically responsible manner. To fulfil its mission, the Commission holds public meetings, accepts public 
comment, and engages in consultation with American and foreign experts.

Synthetic Biology and Emerging Technologies

In May 2010, researchers at the J. Craig Venter Institute announced that they had copied and modified 
an entire genome of a small bacterial cell, inserted it into a living cell of another species, and thereby 
created a new synthetic organism not found in nature. Recognizing that this development raises the pros­
pect of important benefits and genuine concerns, President Obama asked the Commission to undertake 
a study of the implications of synthetic biology as its first order of business. Specifically, he directed 
the Commission to consider the potential medical, environmental, security, and other benefits of this 
new field, as well as any potential health, security, or other risks, in order to identify appropriate ethical 
boundaries and develop recommendations for government action. 

Following consultation with a range of constituencies, including scientific and medical communities, 
faith communities, and business and non­profit organizations, the Commission released its report New 
Directions: The Ethics of Synthetic Biology and Emerging Technologies in December 2010. The Com­
mission identified a number of potential near­term benefits from synthetic biology, such as speeding 
up vaccine development, creating medicines, developing hardy crops, and generating environmentally 
friendly biofuels. With the science at such an early stage, it identified no major risks or moral objections 
at present. Considering potential future dangers, the Commission adopted an approach of “prudent vigi­
lance,” a middle ground between either demanding complete proof of safety before permitting research 
or allowing unfettered scientific freedom in the absence of proven risks. In this vein, the Commission 
recommended that no synthetic organism be released into the field without first conducting a reasonable 
risk assessment, and supported identification of reliable containment and control mechanisms. 

The report provides a framework to guide a socially responsible approach to all emerging biotechnologies 
through the application of five principles: (1) public beneficence; (2) responsible stewardship; (3) intel­
lectual freedom and responsibility; (4) democratic deliberation; and (5) justice and fairness. These ethical 
principles served as the basis for 18 recommendations. Among them, the Commission recommended that 
the US government better coordinate synthetic biology activities across all federal agencies, but did not 
encourage the creation of any new agencies or oversight bodies. The Commission also recommended 
coordination of risk assessment activities across the US government, engagement with “do­it­yourself” 
groups and others working in synthetic biology, international collaboration for safety and security, eth­
ics education for researchers and engineers, and the development of tools to help the public understand 
claims about science to encourage informed debate. The Commission advised the US government to 
reassess the benefits, risks, and related moral concerns as the science develops. 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

67

Because synthetic biology is in its infancy, the Commission viewed its report as a beginning, not an end. 
Since reporting, Commissioners have been actively engaging with members of foreign bioethics com­
missions and other stakeholders. For example, in March 2011, the Woodrow Wilson International Centre 
for Scholars hosted a discussion of the implications and governance of synthetic biology with representa­
tives from the Commission and the European Group on Ethics. The Commission welcomes comment and 
input from others on this issue. 

The Commission had one overriding goal in its deliberations on synthetic biology: to maximize public 
benefits of emerging technologies by encouraging scientific progress, while minimizing risk to present 
and future generations. For the full report and recommendations, see www.bioethics.gov/documents/
synthetic­biology/PCSBI­Synthetic­Biology­Report­12.16.10.pdf. 

Human Subjects Protection

Following the revelation in October, 2010 that the US government sponsored research on vulnerable 
populations in Guatemala from 1946­48, President Barack Obama apologized to the government and 
people of Guatemala and asked the Commission to undertake two distinct tasks, one historical and the 
other contemporary. 

The President directed the Commission to oversee a thorough fact­finding investigation into the specifics 
of the Guatemala study in which human subjects were intentionally infected with sexually transmitted 
diseases without their consent. The investigation will cover government and personal records from uni­
versities and national archives across the United States. Guatemala’s Vice President Dr. Rafael Espada, 
leading his country’s own investigation, is working closely with the Commission. The Commission’s 
investigation launched in January 2011, and will be completed this summer.

President Obama also directed the Commission to review the adequacy of human subjects protection 
today, which is key to preserving trust in the scientific research enterprise responsible for socially import­
ant  medical  advances.  Specifically,  the  President  asked  the  Commission  to  convene  an  international 
panel to review US regulations and international standards and consider if they adequately safeguard 
participants in scientific studies supported by the US government. 

In March 2011, the Commission announced the members of its International Research Panel, comprised 
of 14 experts on medical ethics, science, and clinical research from academia, government, and industry. 
The Panel Members hail from many countries, including Argentina, Brazil, China, Guatemala, India, 
Russia, Uganda, and the United States. The Panel will report to the full Commission, which will deliber­
ate and complete its report by the end of the year. 

The Commission also heard from a number of experts on global health, human subjects research, and 
ethics at its recent public meetings. Meeting materials, video, and transcripts can be found on the Com­
mission website.

Genetic Technology and Neuroimaging

In addition to reports directly requested by the President, the Commission has the authority to examine 
other topics that it deems important. The first project of this sort will focus on the problems raised by 
the emergence of whole genome sequencing as an addition to clinical care and genetic research. Given 
the scale of collected and available genetic data, particular issues of interest to the Commission include 
data protection, privacy, consent, incidental findings, counselling, and use/abuse for nonmedical reasons. 

A second Commission­selected topic will address the challenges posed by advances in neuroscience, 
especially to understandings of the self and personhood. The Commission’s bioethical inquiry will focus 
on advances in neuroimaging and the implications for moral and legal responsibility. Both reports are 
anticipated in 2012.

68 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

Further information
Dr. Amy Gutmann, Chair
Valerie Bonham, J.D., Executive Director

Address 
Presidential Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues
1425 New York Avenue, NW, Suite C­100
Washington, DC 20005, USA

Tel: (202) 233­3960
Fax: (202) 233­3990

E­mail: info@bioethics.gov 
Web­site: www.bioethics.gov 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

69

GENERAL INFORMATION 
ON ACTIVITIES of the 
international organisations

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

71

Bioethics Division

The Council of Europe 

A Symposium on the decision‑making process regarding medical treatment in end‑of‑life situa‑
tions was held on 30 November — 1 December 2010. It was attended by some 150 professionals from 
all relevant disciplines (e.g. medical doctors, nurses, carers, lawyers, philosophers) as well as representa­
tives of patients. The objective was to clarify certain concepts and identify points of convergence and 
possible divergences, on issues related to the decision­making process concerning medical treatment in 
an end­of­life situation. The conclusions of the Symposium, by its general rapporteur Dr Regis Aubry 
(France) and co­rapporteurs Dr Beatrice Ioan (Romania) and Dr Takis Vidalis (Greece) will be presented 
to the Steering Committee on Bioethics (CDBI) in June 2011 and might be used as a basis for guidelines 
on such end­of­life decision­making processes. 

Predictivity, Genetic Testing and Insurance

The Steering Committee on Bioethics is continuing its work on predictivity and genetic testing in the 
field of insurance, with a view to drawing up a legal instrument. A Green Paper on predictivity, genetic 
testing and insurance is being finalised and should go public for consultation by the end of 2011.

It will identify and examine the problems arising from collecting and processing health related­personal 
data for insurance purposes, in particular predictive information and social aspects, and will propose 
ways of addressing them. Comments from all stakeholders will be sought during the consultation proc­
ess, the input being taken into account in drafting the future legal instrument.

Biobanks — Research on biological materials

In 2006, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted its Recommendation (2006) 4 on 
Research using Biological Materials of Human Origin. The Recommendation applies to the full range of 
research activities in the health field involving:

­ The removal of materials of human origin to be stored for research purposes (research biobanking), 

­ The use of biological materials of human origin either stored for research purposes or initially removed 
for another purpose.

Article 26 provides for the Recommendation to be re­examined within five years of its adoption, notably 
in the light of experience and of scientific developments in the field. This process will start in 2011 in 
close cooperation with the European Commission. A symposium in spring 2012 will provide a basis for 
any revision of the Recommendation. 

Guide for Research Ethics Committee members

In December 2010 the Steering Committee on Bioethics (CDBI) adopted a guide for Research Ethics 
Committee members. It was made public in February 2011. Currently available in French and English, 
the guide is being translated into German, Russian, Spanish, Turkish and Ukrainian. 

It lays down no new principles, but highlights the ethical basis for the principles set out in the European 
instruments covering biomedical research, indicating practical operational procedures. 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

73

Draft Declaration on the ethics of biomedical research in countries with developing or emerging 
economies

The Spanish authorities, holding the chair of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe in 
2009,  took  the  initiative  of  organising  a  ‘High  level  conference  on  the  ethics  of  biomedical  research 
in countries with an emerging or developing economy’. The end purpose of this initiative is to secure 
agreement on a Declaration by the representatives of states participating as members or observers in the 
Council of Europe’s work on bioethics.

The draft Declaration is now being finalised, and will then be made public for consultation. 

For more information on the above items, please consult our website:

http://www.coe.int/bioethics

Further information

Laurence Lwoff,
Head of the Bioethics Division
Tel.: +33 (0)3 88 41 22 68 
Fax: +33 (0)3 88 41 37 45

Email: laurence.lwoff@coe.int
Website: http://www.coe.int/bioethics

74 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

Ethics of Science and Technology 
Division – Bioethics Section

UNESCO

1.  Work  of  the  International  Bioethics  Committee  of  UNESCO  (IBC)  and  the  Intergovernmental 
Bioethics Committee (IGBC) 

Through its advisory bodies in the field of bioethics, UNESCO continues to offer a unique platform for 
reflection and debate based on its interdisciplinary, multicultural and pluralist approach. The Interna­
tional Bioethics Committee (IBC) builds on the universal values enshrined in the Universal Declaration 
on Bioethics and human Rights to ensure that progress in science and new technologies serve all human 
beings, in particular those who are the most vulnerable.

The programmatic biennium 2010­2011 has been marked by an extensive reflection on three major top­
ics: the principle of respect for human vulnerability and personal integrity, as set forth in article 8 of the 
UNESCO Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights (2005); the issue of human cloning 
and international governance; and the issue of the ethical implications of traditional medicine. The Eigh­
teenth (ordinary) session of IBC, held in Baku from 31 May to 2 June 2011 at the invitation of the Gov­
ernment of Azerbaijan was an occasion to further advance the reflection on these issues, as well as to 
bring to the forefront the bioethical challenges in Azerbaijan and the Eastern European region. It was 
also an occasion to pave the way for considering possible new issues which would require special atten­
tion of IBC within the framework of UNESCO’s mandate, including new areas of scientific and techno­
logical developments such as synthetic DNA and regenerative medicine, bio­banks or neuro­ethics. 

The  seventh  session  of  the  Intergovernmental  Bioethics  Committee  (IGBC),  which  is  comprised  of 
36 Member States whose representatives meet at least once every two years to examine the advice and 
recommendations of the IBC, will be convened in Paris in September 2011.

2. UNESCO’s Response to the ECOSOC resolution on genetic privacy and non‑discrimination 

In its decisions 2008/233 and 2010/259, the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) 
invited  the  Director  General  of  the  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural  Organiza­
tion  (UNESCO)  to  consult  with  Member  States  and  relevant  United  Nations  entities,  including  the 
UN Inter­Agency Committee on Bioethics (UNIACB), on the (1) implementation of and follow­up to 
the ECOSOC resolutions on genetic privacy and non­discrimination; (2) normative instruments adopted 
within the United Nations system that are relevant to this topic, as well as (3) on a possible inter­agency 
coordination mechanism in this field. 

In response to ECOSOC resolutions, UNESCO carried out a number of actions to assess the current 
situation at national and international levels in the domain of genetic privacy and non­discrimination, 
and to identify the optimal mechanism for continuing international reflection in this area, based on the 
consultations with Member States, the relevant UN agencies and other intergovernmental organizations 
and institutions. 

The consultations with Member States, conducted by the means of a questionnaire, revealed that some 
countries have already put in place or are in the process of elaborating legislative and institutional meas­
ures to safeguard human rights from discrimination based on genetic information. The data provided by 
the respondents does point to a diversity of existing legislative and institutional measures at the national 
level to safeguard human rights from the potential discrimination based on genetic information. The 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

75

majority of countries responding to the questionnaire have also identified the need to develop specific 
legislation to address policies and practices concerning bio­banking, management of electronic clini­
cal files, forensic identification, biometrics, and selling genetic tests over the counter. At the same time, 
countries have expressed the need to promote international initiatives in the area of genetic privacy and 
non­discrimination in order to strengthen national capacities to address these issues, as well as the need 
to coordinate international action in this area for enhanced effectiveness and efficiency. 

The consultations with the relevant UN agencies and other intergovernmental entities were also based on 
questionnaire designed to solicit information concerning various normative and programmatic activities 
in this field. The collected information indicates that UN agencies (UNESCO, WHO), as well as other 
international and regional organizations and institutions (OECD, Council of Europe, European Union), 
have put in place or are in the process of developing a wide range of programmes and initiatives to safe­
guard human rights against discrimination on genetic bases. 

Moreover, following the request of ECOSOC, UNESCO invited the UNIACB to enrich the discussion on 
the appropriate international response to the challenges arising from the genetic science and its applica­
tions. Towards this end, genetic privacy and non­discrimination was included in the agenda of the tenth 
meeting of the UNIACB (UNESCO Headquarters, 4­5 March 2011), which served as an occasion to 
highlight the multiple dimensions of ethical issues ensuing from the recent scientific and technological 
developments in genetics. The discussions, involving the invited experts from medical, legal and aca­
demic fields, revealed the need to treat genetic data not as an exceptional area, but as a part of a larger 
domain of health information that should be accorded an appropriate protection by legal or other means. 
Therefore, it was argued that the primary focus of international and national public policy should be to 
avoid discrimination in all applicable social, institutional and clinical contexts by preventing the misuse 
of not only genetic, but all types of health­related information. 

As the outcome of the discussion within the UNIACB, the establishment of a specific mechanism dealing 
with genetic privacy and non­discrimination was not considered to be an optimal response to the wish of 
the Member States to promote international initiatives for strengthening national capacities in this area. 
It was a shared opinion that within the framework of its mandate, as defined in its Terms of Reference 
(in particular in regards to providing a forum for debate and exchange of information and promoting 
coordination of activities undertaken in this field by the United Nations and its specialized agencies), 
the UNIACB could continue to regularly address the issue of genetic privacy and non­discrimination, 
in order to identify areas calling for concerted or joint efforts, as well as major gaps and constraints that 
need to be addressed for enhanced cooperation in the field.

The results of these consultations will be presented in the Report of the Director­General of UNESCO to 
ECOSOC at the upcoming substantive session of ECOSOC (4­29 July 2011).

3.  Building  international  networks:  European  Commission  ‑  UNESCO  Conference  on  Capacity‑ 
building in Bioethics (JACOB)

The JACOB Conference, organized jointly by UNESCO and European Commission in Mexico City, 
Mexico, on 26­28 November 2009, brought together more than 100 participants representing national 
bioethics  bodies,  as  well  as  regional  and  international  organizations  working  in  the  field  of  bioeth­
ics  for  mutual  capacity­building  through  sharing  relevant  knowledge  and  experiences.  The  project, 
funded through the FP7 framework of the European Commission, was an exemplary case of coopera­
tion between the EC and UNESCO with an aim to reinforce bioethics capacities of countries that have 
recently established, or are planning to establish bioethics bodies at the national level. The project was 
designed to capitalize on the respective strengths of the two entities in the field of bioethics and to exploit 
the existing synergies.

76 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

UNESCO derives its mandate to work with its Members States to bolster their national bioethics infra­
structure from the Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights, which, in article 19, states that 
“independent, multidisciplinary and pluralist ethics committees should be established, promoted and 
supported at the appropriate level”. This Conference was an important contribution towards building 
bioethics capacities of countries around the world, to make sure that the national infrastructure essential 
for the protection of human dignity and human rights of their populations is in place.

The Conference gave a unique chance for experts from the newly established national bioethics commit­
tees to share their experiences about the challenges they face after the official inauguration of their com­
mittees. The conference also featured speakers from Members States that are in the process of setting­up 
a national committee, and the representatives of well­established national committees, who exchanged 
their knowledge on good practices and lessons learned during the operation of their committees. 

The presentations and debates revealed a number of interesting questions that every bioethics commit­
tee has to consider. Can a committee which is financially sustained from the government organ, such as 
a ministry, be truly independent and free from undue influence from government? Should every voice 
be heard during the deliberation, even those who directly challenge the basic human rights principles 
underlying bioethics? Most participants agreed that that it is essential for the argument set forth by the 
committee to be informed by the plurality of reasonable views, and that regardless of the source of fund­
ing, the independence is earned through day­to­day activity of the committee, the quality of its work, 
and the personal integrity of its members. 

The debates revealed that bioethics is increasingly prominent on the political agenda of governments 
around the world. This creates an atmosphere conducive to awareness­raising on pressing bioethics top­
ics and positive interventions from the national bioethics committees. UNESCO, in collaboration with 
other key organizations working to promote bioethics globally, was asked to continue assistance pro­
vided to Member States to build and support national bioethics infrastructures and share information 
through active bioethics networks. 

Towards the end of the conference, the participants agreed on a document: Conclusions in order to pro­
mote  international  cooperation  for  knowledge­sharing  and  mutual  capacity­building  among  national 
bioethics committees. 

One of the major outputs of the conference was the UNESCO publication – National Bioethics Commit‑
tees in Action, which compiled articles produced by the participants of the Conference that together draw 
a multicoloured picture of national bioethics committees as they tackle various ethical issues around the 
world in various cultural settings. 

Anyone interested in the debates and the outcomes of the conference can visit its Web page at www.
unesco.org/bioethics and view the relevant materials, including the presentations and their summaries, 
the report, and the final statement. 

4. Assisting Bioethics Committees project

Although the bioethics committees have assumed indispensible role in addressing bioethical challenges 
in various countries, they are mostly absent from the picture in the developing countries, contributing 
to a serious handicap of these societies to confront important ethical questions that put at risk millions 
of vulnerable persons. Member States of UNESCO have recognized the significance of supporting such 
committees by dedicating a separate article to this issue in UNESCO’s Universal Declaration on Bioeth­
ics and Human Rights (2005), which calls for the establishment and support of independent, multidis­
ciplinary and pluralist ethics committees at the appropriate level. As a response, Bioethics Programme 
designed Assisting Bioethics Committees (ABC) project to offer Member States a comprehensive capac­
ity­building assistance for a period of three years. After graduating from ABC, the newly established 
committees will have undertaken three separate training modules, established a working partnership 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

77

with a long­standing committee, and developed independent internal capacity to carry on its important 
mandate. 

The project is characterized by its depth of engagement with the participating Member States – it makes 
a concerted effort to holistically develop capacities of the Committees in order to make sure that they can 
stand on their feet independently and address the bioethical challenges, both substantively and procedurally, 
after being weaned off the project. By the end of 2010, eight countries have established national bioethics 
committees in the framework of the ABC, and several more are expected to join the project in 2011.

Up to this date, the following countries have signed MoU with UNESCO in the framework of ABC:

• 

Ivory Coast (first training held in December 2009)

•  Gabon (first training held in June 2009)

•  Ghana (first training held in January 2009)

•  Guinea (first training held in April 2009)

•  Jamaica (first training held in March 2009)

•  Kenya (first training held in November 2009)

•  Togo (first training held in January 2009)

•  El Salvador (First training in Sep. 2010)

Bioethics programme will ensure that these countries remain fully committed to the ABC objectives, 
and receive the capacity­building assistance as elaborated in the MoUs, including the subsequent train­
ings (total of three), as well as partnerships established with the experienced Committees. However, 
efforts will be made to significantly expand the coverage of countries by the project. Negotiations are 
currently ongoing with the following countries, with a possibility that their newly established commit­
tees will join ABC:

•  Botswana

•  Cap­Verde

•  Chad

•  Colombia

•  Comoros

•  Malaysia

•  Malawi 

•  Namibia

•  Nigeria 

•  Oman

•  Trinidad and Tobago

Beyond these specific countries, which have expressed interest in establishing the NBCs, or have already 
established them and would like to receive UNESCO’s technical guidance, Bioethics programme will 
assess the possibility of launching a sustainable programme based on new information technologies and 
innovative web­based training modules that will enable UNESCO to provide bioethics capacity­building 
training on a significantly enhanced scale.

In 2011, trainings are scheduled to be held in the following countries:

•  Jamaica 

•  Guinea 

78 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

•  Gabon 

•  Togo 

•  Colombia 

•  Ghana

•  El Salvador

•  Kenya

Besides the trainings, partnerships are under preparation between Denmark and Kenya, UK and Jamaica, 
Switzerland and Togo, and Belgium and Guinea. After the establishment of these partnerships, intern­
ships will be arranged for the members of Secretariat of the newly established committees to receive 
hands­on training with the partner NBC secretariat. 

5. Ethics Education Programme

UNESCO’s Ethics Education Programme (EEP), much like the ABC activity, stems from the Univer­
sal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights, the Article 23 of which requests to “foster bioethics 
education and training at all levels as well as to encourage information and knowledge dissemination 
programmes about bioethics”. EEP is designed to respond to the request of Member States for UNESCO 
to initiate and support teaching ethics in all relevant scientific and professional modules of education. 

In recent times, ethics has become an important part of the higher education curricula in various disci­
plines – not only in medical sciences but also in law, social sciences, public policy, philosophy, and oth­
ers. In order to gain a clear picture of the state of the art in ethics teaching around the world, UNESCO 
is mapping existing ethics teaching programmes in its Member States. Over 230 ethics teaching pro­
grammes have been identified and entered into the Global Ethics Observatory of UNESCO (GEObs) 
for easy public access. Teachers interested in launching or strengthening ethics teaching programmes in 
their institutions can consult the database to find suggestions and ideas from the existing programmes. 

The Bioethics Core Curriculum is yet another tool created by UNESCO in order to promote bioethics 
education around the world. The Core Curriculum, which was developed by a special group of experts 
from diverse cultural backgrounds, is based on the Declaration and is designed to introduce the bioethi­
cal principles of the Declaration to university students. It therefore does not impose a particular model 
or specific view of bioethics, but articulates ethical principles that are shared by scientific experts, poli­
cymakers and health professionals from various countries with different cultural, historical and religious 
backgrounds. In order to ensure a flexible application of this tool, the Curriculum invites teachers and 
students to expand its contents and approaches based on the local context. The Curriculum has been 
already successfully integrated into university programmes in many countries around the world. 

While practical educational tools, such as GEObs database and Bioethics Core Curriculum are help­
ful, the quality of ethics education also depends on the substantive and pedagogic competencies of the 
teacher.  In  other  words,  an  effective  ethics  teacher  should  be  knowledgeable  about  how  to  teach,  as 
well as what to teach to the students. The Ethics Teacher Training Courses (ETTC) project, designed 
to targets the young generation of experts and educators who are engaged in teaching ethics at various 
academic faculties and institutions around the world, complements the practical ethics teaching tools 
developed by UNESCO by focusing on the methodology and pedagogy behind ethics education. 

In the past, the Ethics Teacher Training Courses have been held in Bucharest, Romania (2006); Eger­
ton University Njoro Campus, Kenya (2007); Bratislava, Slovakia (2007); Riyadh, Saudi Arabia (2007); 
Minsk, Belarus (2008) and Dubrovnik, Croatia (2010). 

In 2011, ETTC will be held in Belgrade, Serbia (27 June – 1 July) and Dubrovnik, Croatia (4 – 8 July), as 
well as in Baku, Azerbaijan; Windhoek, Namibia; and Nairobi, Kenya (dates to be determined).

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

79

Ethics and Health  
World Health Organization

WHO

•  Guidance on Ethics of tuberculosis prevention, care and control

In December 2010, the Ethics and Health Unit and the Stop TB department jointly published the guid­
ance document ‘Guidance on ethics of tuberculosis prevention, care and control’. This document is the 
first of its kind and is available in English in: http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2010/9789241500531_
eng.pdf. 

It is currently being translated into the 5 other official UN languages.

Since the publication of this guidance document, the Ethics and Health team has been working on the 
implementation  and  dissemination  of  the  guidelines  in  countries;  an  online  training  course  is  being 
developed with the support of the University of Miami Ethics Programs, one of the WHO Collaborating 
Centre for Bioethics. The intended targets of this course are healthcare managers, policymakers, and 
national TB programmes. The impact of this document will be evaluated considering the extent to which 
the ethics guidance has been incorporated into formal policies.

•  Standards  and  Operational  Guidance  for  Ethics  Review  of  Health  Related  Research  with 
Human Participants

A new edition of the WHO’s guidelines for Research Ethics Committees (RECs) will be available in 
2011.  The  standards  put  forward  in  this  document  do  not  represent  new  ideas  for  REC  functioning; 
rather, they are based on requirements for RECs delineated in existing international guidance docu­
ments. Accompanying the standards is a  series of “operational guidance” points, which reflect com­
monly­used strategies for implementing and fulfilling each of the standards. This document is the result 
of a wide consultation process in which RECs and international organizations actively contributed.

The Global Summit of National Ethics Committees

Following the 8th Global Summit of National Ethics Committees (NECs) hosted by Singapore’s Bio ethics 
Advisory Committee and the Ministry of Health on the 26th and 27th of July 2010, the Ethics and Health 
Unit, which provides the Permanent Secretariat, established four working groups of NECs to address the 
following issues

•  Organ, cell and tissue transplantation and compliance;

•  Research Ethics Committees;

•  Ethical issues in tuberculosis prevention care and control;

•  Biobanking and research on stored human biological materials. 

The groups will provide reports to the next Global Summit, which will take place on 26­27 September, 
2012, in Carthage, Tunisia.

Designation of a New WHO Collaborating Centre for Bioethics

The Institute of Biomedical Ethics (IBME) at the University of Zurich has been designated a WHO Col­
laborating Centre for Bioethics. The inaugural event took place on 25­26 October 2010 at the University 
of Zurich. IBME joins five other institutions which form the Global Network of WHO Collaborating 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

81

Centres for Bioethics. The Network supports the WHO Secretariat in implementing its mandated work 
in the field of ethics and health. 

The third meeting of the Global Network of WHO Collaborating Centres for Bioethics will take place in 
Zurich, Switzerland, on 18­19 August 2011.
For more information on the IBME: http://www.ethik.uzh.ch/ibme_en.html
For more information on the Global Network of collaborating centres: http://www.who.int/ethics/partner­
ships/global_network/en/index.html.

Further information

Ethics and Health Unit
Department of Ethics, Equity, Trade and Human Rights
World Health Organization
Avenue Appia 20
CH ­ 1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland

ethics@who.int 
http://www.who.int/ethics 

82 

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011

The Secretariat of the EGE

Address
European Commission
Berl 5/118 ­ B­1049 Brussels
Fax: (32­2) 299 45 65 
Email: BEPA­ETHICS­GROUP@ec.europa.eu

Maurizio SALVI
European Commission 
Head of the EGE Secretariat
Berl 08/359­B­1049 Brussels
Tel: (32­2) 299 11 79
E­mail: Maurizio.SALVI@ec.europa.eu

Lauren O’CONNOR
European Commission
Berl 08/362­B­1049 Brussels
Tel: (32­2) 296 80 76
Email: Lauren.O’CONNOR@ec.europa.eu

Kim-Hoang LE
European Commission
Berl 08/362­B­1049 Brussels
Tel: (32­2) 299 92 28
Email: Kim­Hoang.LE@ec.europa.eu

Maria Alberta RIBEIRO
European Commission
Berl 08/364­B­1049 Brussels
Tel: (32­2) 295 09 01
Email: Maria­Alberta.RIBEIRO@ec.europa.eu

The secretariat of the EGE is provided by the European Commission’s Bureau of European Policy Advisers.

Ethically Speaking 15, July 2011 

83

	  
