N
J
-
3
1
-
1
1
-
4
2
8
-
E
N

-
C

E
t
h
i
c
a
l

a
s
p
e
c
t
s

o
f

i
n
f
o
r
m
a
t
i
o
n
a
n
d
c
o
m
m
u
n
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
t
e
c
h
n
o
l
o
g
i
e
s

Ethical aspects of  
information and  
communication technologies 

Proceedings of the round-table debate

Brussels, 15 NovemBer 2011

d oi:10. 279 6/13 497

 
 
 
 
 
 
HOW TO OBTAIN EU PUBLICATIONS 

Free publications: 

•  via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu); 

•  at the European Union’s representations or delegations. You can obtain their 

contact details on the Internet (http://ec.europa.eu) or by sending a fax  
to +352 2929-42758. 

Priced publications: 

•  via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu). 

Priced subscriptions (e.g. annual series of the Official Journal of the 
European Union and reports of cases before the Court of Justice  
of the European Union): 

•  via one of the sales agents of the Publications Office of the European Union 

(http://publications.europa.eu/others/agents/index_en.htm). 

 
Ethical aspects  
of information  
and communication  
technologies

Proceedings of the round-table debate

Brussels, 15 NovemBer 2011

Maurizio SALVI
Chief Editor

Head of the EGE Secretariat

Maurizo SALVI
Chief Editor
Head of the EGE Secretariat

Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers 
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers 
or these calls may be billed.

More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu).

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication.

Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2012

ISBN 978-92-79-22327-3
doi:10.2796/13497

© European Union, 2012
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Photo © Julien Eichinger

Printed in Luxembourg

Printed on white chlorine-free PaPer

Contents

INTRODUCTION
The European Group on Ethics 

ROUND-TABLE REPORT 

PROGRAMME FOR 15 NOVEMBER 2011 

PRESENTATIONS 
Welcome address by Professor Julian Kinderlerer,  
EGE President 

Fabrizio SESTINI
Future Internet 

Chengetai MASANGO
The UN Internet Governance Forum 

Dixie HAWTIN
Internet and society 

William ECHIKSON
Internet governance, Google perspective 

Peter HUSTINX
Data protection in an Internet-driven society 

Lee HIBBARD
Council of Europe work on Internet governance 

Michele BELLAVITE
Digital society: an industrial perspective 

Bernd CARSTEN-STAHL
Ethics and future Internet 

Guido VAN STEENDAM
Social determinants of ICT 

ANNEX I
Participants 

ANNEX II
Secretariat of the European Group on Ethics 

5

7

19

21

23

25

33

41

47

63

121

135

139

145

167

171

Ethical aspects of information  
and communication technologies

Introduction
The European Group on Ethics

The  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New 
Technologies  (EGE)  is  an  independent,  pluralist  and 
multidisciplinary  body  which  advises  the  European 
Commission  on  ethical  aspects  of  science  and  new 
technologies  in  connection  with  the  preparation  and 
implementation of European Union legislation or policies.

The  group  is  made  up  of  15  independent  experts  ap-
pointed by the Commission for their expertise and per-
sonal qualities.

The EGE was set up by the European Commission in De-
cember 1997, to succeed the Group of Advisers on the 
Ethical  Implications  of  Biotechnologies  (GAEIB,  1991–
97). During its first term (1998–2000), the EGE gave opin-
ions  on  subjects  as  diverse  as  human  tissue  banking, 
human embryo research, personal health data in the in-
formation society, doping in sport and human stem cell 
research.

In  April  2001,  the  Commission  appointed  12  members 
for  the  period  2001–04.  During  its  second  term,  the 
group published opinions on the ethical aspects of pa-
tenting inventions involving human stem cells (Opinion 
No  16  —  7  May  2002),  clinical  research  in  developing 
countries (No 17 — 4 February 2003), genetic testing in 
the workplace (No 18 — 28 July 2003) and umbilical cord 
blood banking (No 19 — 16 March 2004).

On 11 May 2005, the Commission decided to renew the 
Group’s mandate for a further four-year period. For this 
third  term,  the  EGE  was  increased  in  size  from  12  to 
15  members.  In  the  same  year  the  group  published  its 

opinion  on  the  ethical  aspects  of  ICT  implants  in  the 
human  body  (No  20  —  16  March  2005).  So  far  in  this 
term the EGE has given opinions on ethics and nanomedi-
cine (1) (No 21 — 17 January 2007), an ethics review of 
seventh framework programme (FP7) human embryonic 
stem cells projects (2) (No 22 — 13 July 2007), the ethical 
aspects  of  animal  cloning  for  food  supply  (No  23  — 
16 January 2008), the ethics of modern developments in 
agricultural  technologies  (3)  (No  24  —  17  Decem-
ber 2008) and  the ethics of synthetic biology (4) (No 25 — 
17  November  2009),  as  well  as  its  general  activity 
report (5) (September 2010).

On 10 January 2011, the President of the European Com-
mission José Manuel Barroso appointed the 15 members 
of the EGE (6) for 2011–16. The selected members serve in 
a personal capacity and are asked to offer independent 
advice to the Commission (7). On 22 March, Mr Barroso 
requested the EGE to issue an opinion on the ethical im-
plications  of  information  and  communication  techno-
logies (ICT). He also asked for an opinion on the ethical 
implications of security and surveillance technologies.

When preparing its opinions, the EGE engages in a broad 
consultation,  involving  individual  experts,  representa-
tives  of  European  institutions,  of  other  international 
institutions  and  of  civil  society  and  the  chairs  of  the 
national ethics councils in the European Union Member 
States. The group organised a round table in Brussels on 
15  November  2011  in  order  to  promote  a  transparent 
dialogue  between  parties  representing  many  different 
interests. This report gives a summary of the presentations 
and discussions.

(1)  http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european-group-ethics/docs/publications/opinion_21_nano_en.pdf.
(2)  http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european-group-ethics/docs/publications/opinion_22_final_follow_up_en.pdf.
(3)  http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european-group-ethics/docs/opinion24_en.pdf.
(5) 
(6) 

 http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european-group-ethics/docs/gar_ege_2005-2010_web.pdf.
 The EGE consists of 15 members. They are appointed on the basis of their expertise and a geographical distribution that reflects the diversity 
in Europe. EGE Members are nominated ad personam; they do not represent Member States, political parties, lobby groups or religions. 
 http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european-group-ethics/welcome/mandate-2011-2016/index_en.htm.

(7) 

5

Ethical aspects of information  
and communication technologies

Round-Table Report

1.  Main goal of the round table

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Techno-
logies (EGE) is preparing an opinion on the ethical aspects 
of information and communication technologies. As part 
of its preparatory work, the EGE held an open round-table 
debate on the issues raised by ICT. The round table was or-
ganised by the Bureau of European Policy Advisers (BEPA).

As was the case for previous EGE opinions and in accord-
ance  with  the  Commission  decision  on  the  EGE’s  man-
date  (Decision  2005/383/EC),  a  public  round  table  was 
organised to debate openly the ethical, social and legal 
implications of ICT. The main goal was to give stakehold-
ers  an  opportunity  to  provide  the  EGE  with  relevant 
data,  considerations  and  viewpoints  before  finalisation 
of Opinion 26, which is to be adopted in February 2012.

2.  The round table

The European Group on Ethics in Science  
and New Technologies (EGE)

On 10 January 2011, the President of the European Com-
mission José Manuel Barroso appointed the 15 members 
of  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New 
Technologies (EGE) for 2011–16. The selected EGE mem-
bers  serve  in  a  personal  capacity  and  are  asked  to  offer 
independent  advice  to  the  Commission  (10).  They  have 
been appointed on the basis of their expertise and a geo-
graphical distribution that reflects the diversity in Europe. 
The EGE held its first meeting on 8 and 9 February in Brus-
sels and had a session with President Barroso. A second 
meeting took place on 15 and 16 March, also in Brussels. 
Professor  Julian  Kinderlerer  was  elected  as  the  group’s 
President  and  Professor  Linda  Nielsen  as Vice-President. 
Rules of procedure were adopted on 15 March.

The EGE opinion on the ethics of ICT

At  the  request  of  the  President  of  the  European  Com-
mission, the EGE is currently working on an opinion on 
the ethics of information and communication technolo-
gies (11), which will provide the Commission with policy 
options for the governance of ICT.

The  EGE  was  established  in  1991  (with  the  name  of  the 
Group of Advisers on the Ethical Implications of Biotechno-
logy (GAEIB), and the new EGE mandate was adopted by a 
Commission decision on 23 December 2009 (8) (2010/1/EU). 
According  to  the  above  remit,  the  role  of  the  EGE  is  to 
provide  the  Commission  with  high-quality  and  inde-
pendent advice on the ethical aspects of science and new 
technologies  in  connection  with  the  preparation  and  im-
plementation of European Union legislation or policies (9).

The  EGE  held  its  third  meeting  on  12  and  13  April,  its 
fourth meeting on 17 and 18 May and its fifth meeting  
on 21 and 22 June, all in Brussels (12). The forthcoming 
opinion on ethics and ICT was discussed with the chairs 
of the EU-27 national ethics councils on 21 September. 
The  EGE  was  then  due  to  have  a  number  of  working 
meetings 
in  November  and  December  2011  and 
January 2012, before the final approval of the opinion in 
February 2012.

(8) 

(9) 
(10) 
(11) 

(12) 

 The EGE’s mandate was renewed by the Commission decision of 26 March 2001 for a four-year period and its remit was slightly modified to 
improve the group’s working methods. The EGE’s mandate was decided on 11 May 2005 (Decision 2005/383/EC), and extended by a Commis-
sion decision of 14 October 2009 (Decision 2009/757/EC). Members of the European Parliament cannot be selected as EGE members because 
this may determine conflict of interest and would contradict provisions stated in the remit of the group (Legal Service (JUR(2006)30358 JFP/fag, 
dated 3.7.2006).
 The Parliament and the Council may draw the Commission’s attention to questions which they consider to be of major ethical importance.
 http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european-group-ethics/welcome/mandate-2011-2016/index_en.htm
 The President of the European Commission has also asked the EGE to issue  an opinion on the ethical implications of security and surveil-
lance technologies. Following the last Competiveness Council on the Euratom programme, the Commission is considering asking the EGE to 
contribute to the debate on a sustainable energy mix in Europe by issuing an opinion on the ethical impact of research on different energy 
sources on human wellbeing.
 http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european-group-ethics/welcome/activities/index_en.htm.

7

The EGE round table on ethics in ICT

When preparing its opinions, the EGE engages in broad 
consultation,  involving  individual  experts,  representa-
tives  of  European  institutions,  other  international  insti-
tutions  and  civil  society  and  the  chairs  of  the  national 
ethics councils in the European Union Member States.

It  organised  a  round  table  on  15  November  2011,  at  the  
European Commission, in the Robert Schuman Room at the 
Berlaymont Building at Rond Point Schuman in Brussels.

Participants came from a broad cross-section of Euro pean 
society,  including  the  scientific  community,  industry, 
civil society, policymakers, media and the general public. 
Invited  speakers  included:  Fabrizio  Sestini  (European 
Commission,  Directorate-General  for  the  Information 
Society  and  Media);  Chengetai  Masango  (UN  Internet 
Governance  Forum);  Dixie  Hawtin  (Research  and  Pol-
icy,  Global  Partners  and  Associates);  William  Echikson 
(External Relations, Communications and Public Affairs, 
Head of Free Expression EMEA at Google); Peter Hustinx 
(EU, European Data Protection Supervisor); Lee Hibbard 
(Council  of  Europe’s  coordinator  on  the  information 
society  and  Internet  governance);  Michele  Bellavite 
(European  Telecommunications  Network  Operators’  
Association  (ETNO),  Chairman  of  the  Digital  Society 
Working  Group);  Bernd  Carsten  Stahl  (Director  of  the 
Centre  for  Computing  and  Social  Responsibility,  De 
Montfort  University);  Guido  Van  Steendam  (Professor 
of the Philosophy of Technology, KU Leuven, and Director, 
International Forum for Biophilosophy (IFB)).

Report of the EGE round table

Professor Julian Kinderlerer, the EGE President, chair-
ed the meeting. He welcomed participants and explain-
ed the group’s new remit for 2011–16. He said this has 

been extended to the ethics of science and technology 
as a whole and not only biomedicine or biotechnology, 
as in the past. He explained that on 21 March 2011 Pre-
sident José Manuel Barroso had asked the EGE to draft 
an  opinion  on  the  ethical  issues  arising  from  the  rapid 
expansion of information and communication technolo-
gies (ICT). President Barroso indicated that the opinion 
could ‘offer a reference point to the Commission to pro-
mote a responsible use of the digital agenda for Europe 
and facilitate the societal acceptance of such an import-
ant policy item’. The EGE accepted the request and decid-
ed to mainly focus on Internet technologies.

Professor Kinderlerer then underlined that the EGE pro-
motes  open  and  transparent  dialogue  with  relevant 
stakeholders. He said that, in addition to what it had re-
ceived in the hearings it had organised and the meeting 
with the chairs of the EU-27 national ethics councils, the 
group was aiming to get critical arguments and inputs 
for the requested opinion.

Dr  Sestini  (Information  Society  and  Media  DG)  made 
a presentation on future uses of the Internet.  He said 
that  understanding  the  Internet,  as  the  biggest  arte-
fact of humankind, requires competences coming from 
both the life and human sciences, that are not limited 
to technological or infrastructural aspects, but also in-
clude sociology, art, policy and economy. This is due to 
the fact that Internet is bringing about radical changes 
such  as  economic  transformation,  social  expansion, 
psychological changes and new legal aspects. All these 
competences are required to understand how the Inter-
net  is  going  to  look  in  the  future,  and  in  particular  to 
determine if and how it may help the transition towards 
a more sustainable future (in environmental, economic 
or social terms), which can in itself be seen as an ethical 
aspect. Dr Sestini presented two extreme scenarios de-
veloped in a recent study on the future Internet carried 
out by the University of Oxford: the ‘Big Brother’, where 

8

the  Internet  is  evolving  towards  a  purely  commercial, 
centrally  controlled  entertainment-delivery  infrastruc-
ture,  and  ‘collective  awareness’  (see  also  the  upcom-
ing  related  initiative  at  http://ec.europa.eu/informa-
tion_society/activities/collectiveawareness),  where  it 
is evolving towards an open and distributed discussion 
platform to share information and collectively produce 
content and awareness, contributing to social and de-
mocratic life. The emergence of such scenarios can be 
linked to key technological and policy choices, such as 
network architectures, security policies, digital intellec-
tual  property  rights  (IPR)  approaches,  open  standards 
and  network  neutrality.  He  concluded  with  a  quick 
overview of all the technological, application or policy 
choices  which  may  involve  significant  ethical  aspects, 
as  they  can  drive  future  Internet  developments  more 
towards the fulfilling of societal needs rather than com-
mercial objectives. The list included elements such as: 
community  networks;  cloud  strategy;  autonomic  net-
works;  next  generation  networks  (NGN);  safeguarding 
the end-to-end principle; quality of service (QoS); deep 
packet  inspection  (DPI);  freedom  of  expression;  priv-
acy, trust and reputation; identity management; secur-
ity;  environmental  monitoring;  customer  control  and 
profiling; sensor networks; the Internet of Things (IoT); 
ambient intelligence; peer to peer (P2P); IPR; and open 
standards.

Following Dr Sestini’s presentation, there was a debate 
on topics including:

•	

the impact of the Internet on human culture;

•	 actions to promote education about the Internet;

•	

the use of the Internet for policymaking purposes.

Dr  Masango  (United  Nations)  reported  on  the  United 
Nations Internet Governance Forum (IGF). He explained 
that the UN started to work on Internet governance in 
2003 and established the IGF as a multi-stakeholder de-
bate forum with no normative powers. In 2010, the remit 
of the IGF was extended until 2015. The forum aims to 
create an interdisciplinary platform where NGOs, indus-
try  and  governments  debate  issues  at  paritetic  level.  
The next meeting will be in Baku in 2012. Dr Masango 
explained  that  Internet  governance  implies  actions  by 
government,  civil  society  and  private  enterprises.  He 
also underlined that shared principles, norms and rules 
are  key  elements  to  promote  a  proper  governance  of 
the Internet and recalled that Unesco has addressed the 
ethical  considerations  of  ICT.  He  then  underlined  that 
dynamic  coalitions  across  relevant  stakeholder  groups 
so  far  established  via  the  IGF  include:  open  standards; 
Internet  rights;  freedom  of  expression;  and  media  and 
child online safety.

9

Following  Dr  Masango’s  presentation,  there  was  a  de-
bate on topics including:

•	

•	

•	

•	

the possibility to establish minimal normative stand-
ards at UN level (Internet governance);

awareness-raising processes;

the role the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
plays in the debate over Internet governance;

the current debate on the role the UN may play in 
Internet governance (institutional level).

Dixie Hawtin (Global Partners and Associates) made a pre-
sentation on the Internet and society. She explained that 
democratic freedom of expression and the Internet aim to 
receive free information. She underlined that the Internet 
was created in a libertarian spirit, but governments have 
now realised its potential and its control is being promot-
ed  by  several  actors  (governments  and  multinationals) 
for commercial interests. She advocated that three values 
should  be  promoted  in  Internet  governance:  (1)  global 
public  value;  (2)  a  multi-stakeholder  approach;  and  (3)  a 
space of human rights protection. She explained that gov-
ernments around the world are now alert to the potential 
disruption  caused  by  access  to  digital  communications. 
Many  less  democratic  governments  are  seeking  to  con-
trol and monitor the online space with new tools such as: 
filtering  and  blocking;  registration  requirements;  surveil-
lance powers; intermediary liability; and persecuting users 
in real life. She stated that China and Russia are preparing 
Internet security protocols and that Internet governance 
is now being debated in organisations dominated by de-
veloped countries (OECD), jeopardising both the role UN 
is  having  in  this  global  governance  effort  and  the  role 
developing  countries  may  play  in  international  debates. 
She  underlined  that  the  European  Union  should  make  a 
strong  investment  in  the  multi-stakeholder  approach  in 

contrast  to  actions  being  established  by  OECD  and  the 
Council of Europe in order to adopt normative documents 
with no participation by non-governmental organisations 
and  other  non-institutional  stakeholders  from  different  
regions of the world. She also underlined that IPR is a key 
issue  to  address,  in  particular  with  regard  to  developing 
countries where high risks of e-exclusion exist.

She concluded by stating that access to information is a 
key element to preserve and that we should be driven by 
an understanding of the Internet as a global public value 
space;  multi-stakeholder  actors  should  be  protected 
in  order  to  achieve  a  proper  Internet  governance  and 
human rights should apply to the Internet domain. She in-
dicated some useful approaches in Internet governance, 
namely: (1) to promote discussion and build consensus; 
(2)  to  allow  countries/institutions  to  coordinate  policy 
efforts  which  protect  flexibility  and  innovation;  and 
(3) to tend to be less formal than, say treaties, allowing 
more involvement of civil society.

Dr Echikson (Google) made a presentation on Google’s 
views  on  Internet  governance.  He  noted  that  2  billion 
people  can  express  themselves  daily  via  the  Internet, 
there  are  325  billion  websites  and  70  000  pictures  are 
downloaded every minute. He underlined that the Inter-
net is the most powerful communication tool in history. 
Blogs,  social  networks  and  online  video  platforms  are 
now widely available for everyone with access to it.

Dr Echikson said that repressive governments are deter-
mined to block this free flow of information. At Google, 
they saw technology used to stifle speech every day. He 
explained that Google products, from search and Blogger 
to YouTube and Google Docs, have been blocked in more 
than 25 of the approximately 150 countries where they 
offer  their  services.  At  least  17  countries  have  blocked 
YouTube  at  some  time  and  it  is  still  fully  blocked  in  
China, Iran and North Korea. He also reported that Google 

10

employees  have  been  convicted  in  Milan  in  a  criminal 
case that represents a severe threat to the freedom of the  
Internet  and  is  inconsistent  with  both  Italian  and  Euro-
pean Union law. The conviction stems from an incident in 
2006 when students at a school in Turin filmed and then 
uploaded  a  video  to  Google  Video  that  showed  them 
bullying a disabled schoolmate. He explained that in Iran 
the government closed down the Internet system during 
political  rebellions.  He  stated  that  in  navigating  online 
speech, two guiding principles should be kept in mind. 
The primary responsibility is to Internet users, to maximise 
their access to information and provide an open platform 
for  their  free  expression. The  second  is  the  principle  of 
transparency.  He  mentioned  the  Google  Transparency 
Report 
(http://www.google.com/transparencyreport/) 
established in 2010 and featuring data, listed on a coun-
try-by-country  basis,  of  the  number  of  requests  receiv-
ed  from  governments  to  either  hand  over  data  about 
Google users or remove content.

Dr  Echikson  explained  that  in  2009  Google  joined  nego-
tiations  with  Microsoft,  Yahoo,  human  rights  groups  and 
others in the USA to try to arrive at a code of conduct for 
how technology companies operating in countries with re-
pressive regimes could best operate to promote freedom of 
expression and protect the privacy of users. The result, called 
the Global Network Initiative, holds companies accountable 
for their commitments to protect their users and maximises 
the power of its membership to effect change and prevent 
backsliding. Yet so far, no European company has signed up. 
He  concluded  by  stating  that  Google’s  aim  for  preserving 
the openness of the Internet is to get governments to em-
brace its power and not try to stop it in recognition that the 
Internet can be a powerful tool to advance their economies 
and improve the lives of their citizens.

He  advocated  the  need  for  European  political  support 
for freedom of expression as well as launching a proper 
debate on Internet governance in the EU.

•	

•	

•	

•	

the notion of freedom of expression in ICT;

the potential clash between privacy and copyright on 
the Internet (including the debate on open source);

the right to be connected;

freedom  of  expression  and  child  pornography  on 
video;

•	

the right to be forgotten;

•	 privacy  by  design  (the  link  between  transparency 

and consumer interests);

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

the rule of law in the EU and guidelines prepared by 
governmental bodies;

the involvement of users in ICT design;

the embedding of ethics in Internet technology design;

the control of open Internet platforms;

consent forms and individual rights;

the  role  of  information  providers  and  risks  of  mon-
opolies;

•	 human rights versus cybersecurity;

•	 access to new ICT products in Africa and the less de-

veloped regions of the world.

•	

the tension between human rights and law enforce-
ment provisions in ICT;

•	 different interpretations of freedom of expression in 

different regions of the world;

Following the presentation, there was a general debate 
on topics including:

•	

the  concept  of  multi-stakeholder  governance  and 
actions  to  bypass  it  when  powerful  stakeholders 
(governments, corporations) feel in danger;

•	 normative  intervention  to  control  information  in 

emergency cases;

•	

the empowerment of law on the Internet;

11

•	 data protection and cloud computing;

•	

•	

the neutrality of the Internet;

Internet providers’ responsibility and mechanisms to 
implement it;

•	 open access issues and their role in developing countries.

Dr Hustinx (European Data Protection Supervisor, EDPS) 
made a presentation on data protection in an Internet-
driven  society.  He  mentioned  the  importance  of  the 
opinion  on  Internet  neutrality  issued  by  the  EDPS  in 
October 2011. He explained that 27 data protection au-
thorities  deal  with  the  national  compliance  of  EU  data 
protection regulatory frameworks and that the EDPS ad-
dresses the EU dimension of this issue. He stated that a 
review of the data protection directive is ongoing, and is 
a top priority of the EU Vice-President and Commissioner 
for Justice, Fundamental Rights and Citizenship Viviane 
Reding.  He  underlined  that  the  Lisbon  Treaty (13)  (Arti-
cle 16) has introduced a stronger role for data protection 
in the European Union but globalisation is complicating 
the notion of territoriality and law enforcement (think of 
ICT and cloud computing).

He stated that responsibility is the main issue to address, 
both as a value and as an element having legal signifi-
cance. The enforcement of data protection law, he said,  

needs incentives for compliance and measures for infringe-
ments  (accountability  issues).  He  stressed  the  need  for 
reinforcing  tools  for  implementing  existing  legal  data  
protection measures. The rights of data subjects have to 
be  reinforced  and  their  exercise  in  practice  facilitated,  
while transparency is needed by the controllers (includ ing  
informed  and  reversible  consent  procedures).  Dr  Husinx  
explained  that  national  data  protection  supervisory  
authorities  in  the  EU  have  different  levels  of  autonomy 
and  powers,  but  advocated  uniform  standards  for  
independence and enforcement powers to ensure a har-
monised  transparent  approach  to  data  protection  (14).  
He stated that a regulation or a directive for law enforce-
ment may be proposed in January by the Commission and 
that effectiveness, transparency and harmonisation are all 
elements in the new regulatory frameworks.

He  then  approached  issues  related  to  Internet  neutral-
ity (the idea that Internet providers should not interfere 
with the content and the place of the information con-
veyed  on  Internet)  and  stressed  that  ‘traffic  manage-
ment’ tools often violate EU data protection provisions. 
There  is  a  need  for  greater  clarity  on  the  distinction 
between legitimate (for example, protection from viru-
ses)  and  unacceptable  screening  techniques,  including 
‘deep packet inspection’. He concluded that screening of 
messages is often a tool to monitor the content of com-
munications and that telecom providers have to comply 
with data protection rules.

(13)  Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
(14) 

 He stated that UK has 300–400 breaches of rules every year. Some 80 % of cases refer to lack of ownership of data and technical features. Sanc-
tions are needed as well as measures to prize proper respect of data protection measures.

12

Following Dr Hustinx’s presentation, there was a debate 
on topics including:

•	

•	

•	

•	

legal enforcement provisions for data protection;

territoriality  and  protection  of  data  protection  in 
cloud computing and among EU consumers outside 
the EU;

data protection provisions in the EU, USA, Africa and 
China;

confidentiality  of  personal  data  on  the  Internet  
(privacy);

•	

responsibility and accountability on the Internet.

Dr Hibbard (Council of Europe, CoE) made a presenta-
tion on Internet governance activities at the Council of 
Europe. He underlined that privacy on the Internet is a 
key to address (cloud computing) and that this impacts 
on  the  notion  of  democracy.  He  stressed  the  need  for 
mutual  reinforcement  between  European  Commission 
and CoE actions on human rights protection (including 
the Internet).

He  underlined  that  human  rights  also  have  to  be  re-
spected in the digital world and that several internatio-
nal bodies are addressing this issue, including the OECD, 
World Bank and NATO.

He stressed that Article 10 of the European Convention 
on Human Rights affirms the right of freedom of expres-
sion and responsibility for its infringement. He recalled 
the  magnitude  of  the  problem,  with  2  billion  Internet 
users  and  700  million  of  Facebook.  He  referred  to  a  
number  of  legal  cases  such  as  those  in  France  (Hado-
pi),  Italy  (Google)  and  Turkey  (YouTube),  where  Inter-
net providers have been prosecuted for the content of 

information introduced on the Internet. He pointed out 
that Unesco has prepared a code of ethics on the infor-
mation society and stressed the need for shaping ethical 
understanding of the ICT in the EU and globally.

He stressed that an ethical process requires bottom-up 
multi-stakeholder  dialogue  policy  processes.  He  an-
nounced that the Council of Europe will work on search 
engine provider guidelines, social network provider guide-
lines  and  a  user’s  charter  and  on  the  ethics  of  the  ICT  
private  sector.  He  recalled  that  the  Council  of  Europe 
ethical principles on Internet declaration were adopted 
in September 2011.

Dr Bellavite (ETNO) reported on the industrial perspec-
tive  of  the  Internet  governance  debate.  He  explained 
that ETNO clusters 42 telecom companies in the EU and 
said that while the topics on Internet governance are not 
new, the relevance this debate is acquiring is a new phe-
nomenon  (previous  topics  include  liberalisation  of  the 
markets, price setting and access regulations).

He said that, as regards governance of the Internet, ETNO 
fully supports a multi-stakeholder approach with no re-
gulatory  oversight  by  any  Government  entity,  conside-
ring that the challenges of Internet governance and prin-
ciples  mainly  concern  its  global  reach  and  nature.  This 
collaborative,  bottom-up  approach  is  fitting  in  view  of 
the global nature of the Internet. The recent emergence 
and  development  of  high-level  Internet  principles  (e.g. 
the  OECD  Principles  on  Internet  Economy,  the  Aspen 
Principles for the Future of the Internet) is helpful in set-
ting out best practice and guidelines for the online world. 
It is therefore important that the EU starts a reflection on 
how it can make sure that European values and human 
rights traditions can be safeguarded on a global level.

Dr  Bellavite  stressed  that  the  public  policy  debate  on 
the  Internet  is  increasingly  centred  on  the  relationship 

13

between  the  end-user  and  the  online  world/service 
providers and indeed on appropriate behaviour online. 
Many  argue  for  applying  in  the  online  world  the  same 
level of protection afforded in the offline world. Telecom 
players  are  already  committed  to  provide  transparent 
and meaningful information regarding their offers and, 
in particular, any limitations on consumers’ ability to ac-
cess content and/or applications of their choice, further 
strengthening consumer choice in this field. In addition, 
the  telecoms  regulatory  framework  offers  numerous 
consumer  protection  safeguards,  such  as  the  contrac-
tual rights set out in the citizens’ rights directive. He ex-
plained  that  ETNO  believes  that  no  further  regulatory 
intervention is needed and that it is important to allow 

industry the freedom to innovate and adopt new busi-
ness  models  and  services  in  a  fast-moving  technology 
environment.

He stressed that the digital agenda targets provision of 
high-speed Internet in the EU as a key priority for indus-
try, but said this requires a conductive regulatory frame-
work to foster investment.

He  also  stressed  that  the  role  of  regulators  for  new 
technologies should reflect the plastic evolution of the 
technological  tools  under  consideration,  remaining 
technologically neutral.

14

Following the presentation, there was a general debate 
on topics including:

•	

•	

•	

Internet neutrality and different kinds of Internet users;

technology neutrality;

corporate  responsibility  and  soft  law  governance 
models;

•	 minimal  regulatory  requirements  welcomed  by  the 

ICT industry.

Professor Carsten-Stahl (Professor of Critical Research 
in Technology and Director of the Centre for Computing 
and Social Responsibility, De Montfort University) spoke 
about  the  ethics  of  new  Internet  technologies.  He  re-
ported on an EU-funded project (ETICA) that addresses 
new ICT domains from an interdisciplinary point of view 
and explained that new features of emerging ICT in clude 
natural  interaction,  invisibility  and  a  detailed  under-
standing of users, pervasive and autonomous. Some of 
the predictable ethical issues of emerging ICTs include 
privacy, security, trust, liabilities and digital divides, and 
he said that many of these will take new forms. Privacy, 
for  example,  is  likely  to  become  even  more  prominent 
due  to  new  quantities  of  data,  new  ways  of  linking  it 
and maybe even new types of data (e.g. emotional data) 
which may raise qualitatively new issues. What these is-
sues have in common, however, is that they are currently 
on the social and political agenda and are recognised as 
important and in need of further attention.

Professor  Carsten-Stahl  also  addressed  what  he  called 
less  predictable  ethical  issues  arising  from  the  emer-
ging ICTs and said that they tend to be centred on dif-
ficult  conceptual  issues,  such  as  human  identity,  the 
relationship  between  humans  and  technologies,  and 
relationships  among  individuals  or  groups.  Individual 

identities may change due to the way we interact with 
technology. What  we  perceive  to  be  normal  is  partly  a 
function of the affordance that technologies offer us and 
therefore potentially subject to change. A good example 
for this is the difficult distinction between therapy and 
human  enhancement.  Related  issues  can  arise  due  to 
the way in which new technologies can change power 
relationships  and  traditional  balances  between  indivi-
duals and groups. In extreme cases, such changes can af-
fect not only local cultures and collective self-views but 
also the ways in which societies organise and reproduce 
themselves. This does not have to be morally problem-
atic, but it may well be in some respects. The scale of the 
change  means  that  potential  ethical  issues  need  to  be 
monitored closely.

He also stressed that the majority of ICT moral issues are 
technology  and  context-dependent.  He  explained  that 
diverging perceptions of technologies and their afford-
ances  as  well  as  different  sociomaterial  enactments  of  
sociotechnical networks preclude an abstract and decon-
textualised appreciation of what the real issues will turn 
out  to  be.  He  said  that  governance  arrangements  that 
are used to identify and address ethical issues of emer-
ging ICTs must be flexible and open to development and 
deliberation. They need to be able to combine ethically 
justified  procedures  with  guidance  on  local  and  estab-
lished moral issues and examples of their resolution.

He explained that some of the issues to consider include 
security, trust, liability and digital divide, enhancement, 
normality,  mortality,  identity,  power  relationships,  the 
environment,  the  nature  of  society  and  changing  cul-
tures.  He  advocated  that  ethical  impact  assessment 
should be requested in normative frames to apply to ICT. 
He also underlined that the EGE opinion should consider 
that ICT is more than Internet governance and addition-
al  ethics  debates  will  be  needed  in  other  applications 
of ICT.

15

Professor Van Steendam (Professor of the Philosophy 
of  Technology,  KU  Leuven  and  Director,  Internation al 
Forum  for  Biophilosophy)  made  a  presentation  on  
the  social  determinants  of  information  and  commu-
nication  technologies.  He  focused  on  the  difference  
between (a) using information as abstract material and 
(b)  dealing  with  information  as  part  of  embodied  and 
embedded human activities. Much of the strength and 
efficiency  of  the  Internet  and  ICT  lies  in  their  object-
ive  of  using  abstract  information  (building  on  Claude 
Shannon’s  mathematical  theory  of  information  and 
communication). He remarked, however, that this ideal 
of abstract information is also a major reason why ICT 
gets dissociated from real life concerns and becomes a 
major source of ethical issues. To properly address eth-
ical issues linked to ICT, he underlined, we have to con-
sider information as an embodied and embedded reality.  
He first illustrated this point in the context of compil-
ing and organising information. In this process we often 
perceive  information  as  ‘material  units’  that  can  be  
collected and combined to build up intelligence. While 
our  society  has  learned  that  this  compilation  of  infor-
mation has its own value, we are also aware of its limits. 
We realise that information is more than the mere ma-
terial that can be stored on a hard disk. In real life, the 
same material information can trigger different actions 
and understandings, depending on the specific way in 
which  people  who  receive  the  information  are  em-
bodied and embedded. The meaning of the information 
depends on the physical conditions of the people who 
are  informed,  on  their  ambitions  and  plans,  available 
infrastructure  and  contacts  and  many  other  elements 
that  identify  their  activity  world.  The  intelligence  
people  develop  in  their  lifetime  is  only  intelligent  in 
their own body and social and natural context. Should 
we be able to transfer the intelligence of an experienced 
and wise older Indian woman to a young American boy, 
this boy would not become intelligent. He has to build 
up  his  own  intelligence.  Ignoring  this  weakens  the 

real-life  social  impact  of  ICT  and  raises  ethical  issues. 
When Google more or less succeeds in identifying some 
dozens  or  hundreds  of  relevant  documents  selected 
from  the  millions  of  possible  documents  available  in 
cyber space, the reason is not that Google has superior 
tools  to  analyse  the  abstract  information  online,  but 
that  it  uses  the  intelligence  of  its  embodied  and  
embedded users by analysing their clicking behaviour, 
preferences and assessments.

As a second illustration, Professor Van Steendam discuss-
ed the process of communication of information. In an 
abstract vision of information, transfer of information is 
compared to the flow of dead material from one context 
to  another. When  we  realise  that  information  is  always 
embedded,  the  transfer  means  that  information  is 
detach ed  from  its  original  meaning  in  one  embedded 
context and is injected into a new embedded context. In 
this new context, the transferred information acquires a 
new meaning. Quite often people feel that information 
‘is  taken  out  of  its  context’. We  now  realise  that  such  a 
change of meaning is not only happening on exception-
al occasions. Information that is re-told or transferred is 
always taken out of its context. This unavoidable aspect 
of communication requires special attention, and there 
are no easy solutions for finding out which changes of 
meaning are acceptable or unacceptable.

The last illustration presented is the role of people in the 
process of information transfer. In an abstract view of in-
formation, the flow of information is seen as the active 
agent, while the people are seen as the passive medium 
through which information is flowing. In real life, people 
never passively absorb information. They are the active  
and  enthusiast  agents  who  actively  absorb,  reinterpret  
and transfer information. When an ethical analysis does 
not address this active process, we miss the most import-
ant  ethical  issues  linked  to  information  and  communi-
cation technologies.

16

Professor Kinderlerer delivered the final conclusions. He 
thanked participants and stressed that that the EGE will 
take into due considerations all the inputs it has received.

A  video  of  the  round  table  is  available  on  the  EGE 
website (15).

Following the presentation, there was a general debate 
on topics including:

•	

•	

•	

•	

the decontestalisation of information;

critical  infrastructure  protection  of  digital  informa-
tion;

the notion of dependency in the Internet domain;

the notion of a homogenous society and its link with 
complexity;

•	

identity and identification in the Internet;

•	 embedding information and people in the Internet;

•	

the  implementation  of  the  digital  agenda  and  the 
role ethics may play in this process.

Maurizio SALVI, PhD,
Head of the EGE Secretariat

(15) 

 http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/activities/index_en.htm.

17

Ethical aspects of information  
and communication technologies

Programme

Brussels, 15 November 2011

Afternoon session

09.30 

Registration

14.30–14.50 

10.00–10.10 

 Welcome address by Julian Kinderlerer 
President of the EGE

10.10–10.30  Future Internet

 Fabrizio Sestini (European Commission, 
Directorate-General for the Information 
Society and Media)
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

14.50–15.10 

 Data protection in an Internet-driven 
society
 Peter Hustinx, (EU, European Data 
Protection Supervisor) 
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

 Council of Europe work on Internet 
governance
 Lee Hibbard (Council of Europe’s 
coordinator on the information society 
and Internet governance)
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

10.30–10.50  The UN Internet Governance Forum

 Chengetai Masango (Programme 
and Technology Manager, UN Internet 
Governance Forum) 
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

10.50–11.10 

Internet and society
 Dixie Hawtin (Research and Policy, Global 
Partners and Associates)  
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

11.10–11.30 

Internet governance, Google perspective
 William Echikson (External Relations, 
Communications and Public Affairs, Head 
of Free Expression EMEA at Google) 
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

15.10–15.30  Digital Society: an industrial perspective
 Michele Bellavite (European 
Telecommunications Network Operators’ 
Association (ETNO), Chairman of the 
Digital Society Working Group)
Followed by discussion (10 minutes) 

15.30–16.00  Coffee break

16.00–16.10  Ethics and future Internet

 Bernd Carsten-Stahl (Professor of Critical 
Research in Technology and Director 
of the Centre for Computing and Social 
Responsibility, De Montfort University)

11.30–12.00  Coffee break

16.10–16.20  Social determinants of ICT

12.00–13.00 

 Discussion and contributions from 
participants

13.00 

Lunch

 Guido Van Steendam (Professor of the 
Philosophy of Technology, KU Leuven; 
Director, International Forum for 
Biophilosophy)

16.20–17.20 

 Discussion and contributions from 
participants  

17.20–17.30  Closing remarks from the EGE President 

17.30 

End of the round table

The round table was broadcast on http://webcast.ec.europa.eu

19

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presentations

Ethical aspects of information  
and communication technologies

21

Ethical aspects of information  
and communication technologies

Julian KINDERLERER

President, European Group on Ethics  
in Science and New Technologies

Julian Kinderlerer is:

1.  Professor  of  Intellectual  Property  Law  and  head  of 
the  research  unit  on  IP  law  in  the  Department  of 
Private Law, University of Cape Town;

2.  Professor of Biotechnology and Society in the Tech-

nology University in Delft, the Netherlands;

3.  former  Professor  of  Biotechnology  Law  and  former 
Director of the Sheffield Institute of Biotechnological 
Law and Ethics in the University of Sheffield;

4.  President of the European Group on Ethics in Science 
and  New Technologies  (EGE)  that  advises  the  Euro-
pean Parliament, the Council and the Commission on 
ethical issues in relation to new science and technolo-
gies 
(http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/
index_en.htm).

He  is  a  biochemist  who  moved  from  research  interests 
in  the  theoretical  aspects  of  enzymology  and  enzyme 
kinetics to looking at law, ethics, risk assessment and risk 
analysis in biotechnology, and then to leading a group at 
UCT on intellectual property law and policy.

He is the President of the European Group on Ethics in 
Science and New Technologies (EGE) that reports to the 
European  Parliament  and  to  the  President  and  Council 
of  the  European  Union.  In  February  2009,  he  was  the 
legal adviser to the small team representing South Africa 
that  was  involved  in  negotiating  a  new  international  
treaty  on  liability  and  redress  in  the  event  of  harm  
caused  by  living  modified  organisms  that  have  their 
origin in transboundary movement between countries. 
At  the  negotiations  he  took  the  lead  on  behalf  of 
South  Africa  and  was  part  of  the  African  delegation 
that was allowed a total of six negotiators at the table. 
The  negotiations  eventually  led  to  the  Nagoya–Kuala  
Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability and Redress 

to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety that was agreed last 
year by the parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity  
and  the  Biosafety  Protocol.  Julian  has  advised  the  South 
African Department of Science and Technology. Globally he 
has attended (and chaired) an inter-agency group involving  
the  UN  organisations,  the  World  Trade  Organisation 
and  the  European  Union  looking  at  the  ethical  issues  of  
intellectual  property  protection  and  has  advised  and  
worked with the European Patent Office (EPO) in relation to 
biotechnology patents. During June 2009, he was invited 
to work with the directors of the EPO biotechnology teams 
at a retreat looking at patents in this important area. 

During 2000, he was seconded to work in Nairobi for the 
United Nations Environment Programme, and prepared a 
project that has been funded by the Global Environment 
Facility (GEF) to assist in the provision of biosafety frame-
works in 119 developing countries. He was also one of 
the  prime  authors  of  the  initial  strategy  for  biosafety 
agreed by the GEF. He remained involved as the primary 
‘consultant’ for the project and works with and in many 
of the 124 countries involved in the development phase 
of the project. He was the specialist adviser, during 1998, 
to a House of Lords Select Committee investigation into 
modern biotechnology with particular reference to Euro-
pean  law  as  it  impacts  on  agriculture  and  food.  This  
was  a  major  report  on  the  manner  in  which  European 
legislation in relation to genetically modified organisms 
should be handled.

Julian was a member of the Advisory Committee for Gen-
etic Modification (ACGM) from 1984 to 2003, a member of 
the  independent  technical  subcommittee  of  ACGM  till 
2003  and  a  member  of  the  Advisory  Committee  for  Re-
leases  into  the  Environment  (ACRE)  since  releases  were 
first considered in the UK until 1999. He has contributed to 
the drafting of legislation or guidelines for the safe use of 
the products of biotechnology in many countries, including 
Malaysia,  Thailand,  the  Baltic  states,  Russia,  Bulgaria,  the 
Czech Republic, Namibia, South Africa, Mexico and Brazil.

23

Opening by Julian Kinderlerer, 
President of the European Group on 
Ethics of Science and New Technologies

Every  day,  more  than  250  million  Europeans  are  con-
necting  to  the  Internet,  to  work,  learn,  communicate, 
play  and  socialise.  But  the  digital  economy  which  has 
rapidly grown up around all those activities poses new  
challenges to governments and regulators. Business mod-
els  are  likely  to  change  significantly  as  Internet  access 
permits comparison of goods and prices and the ability 
to shop across borders. Work and play will also change 
dramatically as personal interaction changes from word 
of mouth and personal meetings to include interactions 
unlimited by place or time. Communication and mechan-
isms  for  interacting  with  others  are  already  changed 
beyond recognition, and will almost certainly continue 
to change at an accelerating pace. The digital revolution  
will  impact  on  everything  people  do,  including  life  
choices, health, shopping, education and communication. 
Most importantly, national and regional boundaries are 
being diluted and will continue to be through the speed 
and accessibility of new technologies.

On  21  March  2011,  President  José  Manuel  Barroso 
asked the EGE to draft an opinion on the ethical issues 
arising  from  the  rapid  expansion  of  information  and 

communication  technologies  (ICT).  President  Barroso 
indicated that the opinion could ‘offer a reference point 
to  the  Commission  to  promote  a  responsible  use  of 
the digital agenda for Europe and facilitate the societal  
acceptance  of  such  an  important  policy  item’. The  EGE 
accepted  the  request  and  decided  to  focus  mainly  on 
Internet  technologies.  This  opinion  should  provide  
suggestions for an ethically sound use of ICT.

Before finalising each EGE opinion, the group discusses 
the  subjects  with  relevant  stakeholders  (industry,  civil 
society, patients, NGOs, representatives of churches and 
religious  groups,  etc.).  To  allow  this  consultation  step,  
today’s  round  table  has  been  organised  prior  to  the 
adoption of the EGE opinion. The round table is open and 
structured in such a way that participants have the time 
and  opportunity  to  speak  directly  to  EGE  members  on 
issues they feel deserve specific attention by the group 
in  preparing  its  opinion. To  maximise  the  participation  
in the discussion, the round table is being web streamed 
and  a  written  consultation  on  ethics  and  ICT  has  been 
launched. I thank you all for coming here today and look 
forward to your comments and suggestions.

24

Ethical aspects of information  
and communication technologies

Fabrizio SESTINI

Scientific Officer, European Commission,  
Directorate-General for the  
Information Society and Media

Fabrizio Sestini is a scientific officer with the Informa-
tion Society and Media DG of the European Commission. 
He has been involved in the definition and management 
of several research initiatives related to different aspects 
of future Internet developments, including mobile Inter-
net  access,  new  paradigms  for  Internet  infrastructures 
(also  as  part  of ‘Future  and  emerging  technologies’  — 
FET) and experimental facilities.

His current interests are in the social and ethical implica-
tions  of  future  Internet  technologies,  and  in  the  defini-
tion of new multidisciplinary research priorities with high 
social and economic impact. In particular, he is launching 
a new area called ‘Collective awareness platforms for so-
cial innovation and sustainable social changes’, and he is 
in charge of the multidisciplinary ‘Network of excellence 
in Internet science’, aiming to better understand the com-
plex interrelation between technological developments 
and the socioeconomic impacts of the Internet.

In previous years, he has developed and launched SAC 
(‘Situated and autonomic communications’), a FET Pro-
active  initiative  launched  in  2004,  and  FIRE  (‘Future 

Internet  research  and  experimentation’),  a  flagship  ini-
tiative launched in 2007. In 2009 and 2011, he was the 
European Commission organiser of the Paradiso ‘ICT for 
a global sustainable future’ high-level events, proposing 
that ICT developments be focused to solve the sustain-
ability issues of society and the planet.

Before  joining  the  Commission,  Fabrizio  received  both 
his PhD in information and communication engineering 
and his degree in electronic engineering from the ‘La Sa-
pienza’ University of Rome. He worked with CSELT (now 
Telecom Italia Lab) in Turin on the adaptation of dynamic 
channel allocation techniques to the existing GSM net-
work, and later with RAI, the Italian public broadcasting 
company,  developing  data  broadcasting  systems  and 
services in collaboration with IBM and Olivetti.

Fabrizio is a senior member of the Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics  Engineers  (IEEE),  holds  an  industrial  patent, 
has  served  on  the  Technical  Program  Committee  (TPC) 
of  several  international  conferences  and  is  the  author  of 
more  than  30  scientific  papers,  mostly  published  in  IEEE 
journals and in conference proceedings.

25

Future Internet

Fabrizio SESTINI

Future Internet: 
ethical aspects 

Drawing made 
by primary class 
children for the 
Paradiso contest 
“the Internet 
of the future 
seen by the 
children of 
today” 

Fabrizio.Sestini @ ec.europa.eu 
http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/fire/future-internet-and-society_en.html  
European Commission DG Information Society & Media 

"The views expressed in this presentation are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the European Commission" 

••• 1 

what is 
the biggest artefact ever built by mankind? 

26

what is 
the biggest artefact ever built by mankind? 

tecnology / 
infrastructures 

sociology 

Life and Humanistic Sciences 

art 

policy / 
economy 

EU ICT research 2006/2013 in Future Internet  

Approx. budget: 2 billion euro 

FI PPP      

The Future Internet 

t
e
n
r
e
t
n
I

y
h
t
r
o
w
t
s
u
r
T
4
.
1

1.5 Networked  
Media & 3D Internet 

1.3 Internet of  
Things 

1.2 Internet of SW & Service 

1.1 The Network of the Future 

27

d
n
a

y
t
i
l
i
c
a
f

l
a
t
n
e
m

i
r
e
p
x
E
6
.
1

h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r
n
e
v
i
r
d
-
y
l
l
a
t
n
e
m

i
r
e
p
x
e

••• 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internet is not just about technology... 

•  Economic transformation 

–  Productivity gains in standard businesses 

–  New businesses/SMEs, new advertisement paradigms, energy grids 

–  New economic models (skype, google, apple, cloud, …) 

•  Social expansion 

–  Ubiquitous access to information (copyrighted or free: wikipedias, googlemaps, ...) 

–  Online social networking (Linkedin, Facebook, Twitter, ...) 

–  Personal expression (Youtube, Flickr, …) 

•  Psychological change 

– 

Internet time (affecting  workstyles and lifestyles) 

–  Globalisation, multilinguality, Augmented Reality 

–  Online Trust 

•  Legal Impact 

–  Redefinition of Privacy and Identity 

–  Copyrights in the digital era 

–  Cybercrime 

••• 5 

two questions… 

•  the present Internet: was it … 

planned? 

or just serendipitous? 

•  the future Internet: what will it look like? 

••• 6 

2828

Future Internet & sustainability:  
an ethical question? 

•  We are facing the convergence of multiple 

crises 
–  Financial, Environmental, Energy, Social 

•  How can Internet help the transition 
towards a more sustainable future? 
–  Environmental-friendly way of living 
•  Product ranking, Life footprint, efficiency 
–  Sustainable economic development 

•  Empowering people, new market models, new IPR 

–  Participative global governance 

•  Based on cooperation, sharing, low-cost access 

Future Internet scenarios 

(See also the  
Oxford Internet Institute Study on Technological, Social and Economic aspects of FI, 
http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/fire ) 

y
t
e
i
c
o
s
/
e
l
p
o
e
p

distributed 

Collective 
Awareness: 
(user-gen. knowledge) 
P2P, blogs  
social nets 
e-democracy 

Big Brother: 
commercial services 
entertainment (e.g. 
IPTV) 
DRM-heavy 
apolitical 

centrally controlled 

••• 8 

2929

s
s
e
n
i
s
u
b
/
s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n

I

 
 
Technological and Policy choices have  
Social and Economic impacts  
(OII Study, MIT workshop) 

Collective Awareness  

Big Brother 

Internet 
infrastructure 

Current architecture 
ad hoc/mesh, user driven 

Vertically integrated 
specialized nets 

Technological 
developments 

Interoperability 
Distributed control 
Generalized wiki 

NGN or "clean slate“ for 
streaming  
Walled gardens  

Security and Privacy 

Privacy / identity more than 
security 
Online Reputation 

Strong Security,  
proprietary 

Policy  

Light / no IPR protection 
Transparency 

Strong IPR protection 

Standards 

Open or Open source standards 
Multi-cultural support 

Competing closed standards may 
prevail 
National customisation 

Network Neutrality 

Key, to enforce 

Just a burden 

ethical aspects of 
technological / application / policy choices  

community networks, ad-hoc 

centralised control, clouds 

end-to-end principle 

NGN, autonomic networks 

network neutrality 

quality of service 

freedom of expression 

deep packet inspection 

privacy 

trust/reputation 

identity 

security 

environmental monitoring 

customer control/profiling 

y
t
e
i
c
o
s

/

e
l
p
o
e
P

sensors/IoT 

ambient intelligence 

P2P 

IPR 

open standards 

proprietary systems 

s
s
e
n
i
s
u
b

/

s
l
a
u
d
i
v
i
d
n

I

30

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thanks! 

31

Ethical aspects of information  
and communication technologies

Chengetai MASANGO

Programme and Technology Manager,  
UN Internet Governance Forum

Chengetai Masango is the Programme and Technology 
Manager at the United Nations Secretariat for the Inter-
net Governance Forum. He was a speaker at Africa Elec-
tronic  Privacy  and  Public  Voice  Symposium  and  holds 
both  a  PhD  in  information  policy  and  an  MA  in  inter-
national relations from Syracuse University.

Mr Masango conducted a study of the politics of the .zw 
top-level  domain  (TLD)  and  generic  second-level  do-
mains (SLDs) under it (.org, .com etc.) as part of an inde-
pendent study.

Publications

Encouraging Internet public policy development and cap-
acity  building  in  developing  countries:  Lessons  from  the 
FLOSS  community  and,  as  a  co-author,  Internet  govern-
ance  and  the  information  society:  Global  perspectives 
and  European  dimensions  and  Effective  work  practices 
for  software  engineering:  free/libre  open  source  software 
development.

33

The UN Internet Governance Forum

Chengetai MASANGO

The Internet Governance 
Forum  
European Group on Ethics Roundtable 
on ICT 
15 November 2011 

Chengetai Masango 
Secretariat of the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) 
http://www.intgovforum.org/ 

IGF Background 

•  One of the major outcomes of the World 

Summit of the Information Society 
(WSIS) 

•  Geneva Phase 2003 
•  WGIG 
•  Tunis Phase 2005 
(cid:1)

2 

34

 
 
 
Internet Governance  
(Definition WGIG) 

•  Internet governance is the development 
and application by Governments, the 
private sector and civil society, in their 
respective roles, of shared principles, 
norms, rules, decision-making procedures, 
and programmes that shape the evolution 
and use of the Internet. 

3 

Internet Governance Forum 

•  Paragraph 72 of the Tunis Agenda 
•  Discuss public policy issues related to key 
elements of Internet governance in order 
to foster the sustainability, robustness, 
security, stability and development of the 
Internet. 

•  Mandate of the IGF was for 5 years  
•  Renewed in 2010 for a further 5 years 

4 

35

What is the IGF: 

•  A platform for multi-stakeholder policy 

dialogue. 

•  It is based on a (cid:1)soft governance(cid:2) 

approach. 

•   IGF can shape public opinion and 

decision making. 

5 

36

Multi-stakeholder nature of the IGF 

•  The Tunis Agenda states that the IGF in 

its working and function will be multilateral, 
multi-stakeholder, democratic and 
transparent. (Tunis Agenda, section 73) 

37

 
 
IGF Annual Meetings 

•  Annual meeting of four days. 
•  Six meetings so far:  
–  Athens, 2006; 
–  Rio de Janeiro, 2007; 
–  Hyderabad, 2008; 
–  Sharm El Sheikh, 2009; 
–  Vilnius,  2010; 
–  Nairobi, 2011; 
–  Baku, 2012; 
–  Indonesia, 2013 (Bid) 

9 

(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:1)
Regional & National IGF Initiatives 

•  There are approximately 

9 regional IGFs  
–  LAC Regional IGF  
–  Caribbean IGF 
–  East Africa IGF  
–  West Africa IGF 
–  Central Africa IGF 
–  EuroDIG  
–  Commonwealth IGF 
–  Asia Pacific IGF 
–  Southern African IGF 

(cid:1)(cid:1)

•  There are approximately 

16 national IGFs 
–  Kenya 
–  Côte d'Ivoire  
–  Finland  
–  Germany  
–  Sweden 
–  Spain 
–  Russia 
–  USA 
–  New Zealand 

10 

38

Internet Governance  
(Definition WGIG) 

•  Internet governance is the development 
and application by Governments, the 
private sector and civil society, in their 
respective roles, of shared principles, 
norms, rules, decision-making procedures, 
and programmes that shape the evolution 
and use of the Internet. 

11 

Promoting Principles, Norms & Standards   

• No universal standards or principles on 

ethics. 

• Scope, definition 
• Multistakeholder approach 
• Provide a space for discussion 
• Raise awareness of issues  
• Dynamic Coalitions 

39

Dynamic Coalitions 

Dynamic Coalitions emerging from the workshops: 

- Open Standards (Brazil, W3C, Sun..); 
- Internet Rights and Principles (Brazil, ISOC Italy, IP 
Justice…); 
-  FOEonline (Freedom of Expression and the Media) 
- Child online Safety (ECPAT, Save the Children, 
Childnet International) 

13 

14 

More Information 

www.intgovforum.org 

igf@unog.ch 

40

 
 
Ethical aspects of information  
and communication technologies

Dixie HAWTIN

Project Manager, Freedom of Expression,  
Global Partners and Associates

Dixie  Hawtin  is  Project  Manager  for  Freedom  of  Ex-
pression  and  Digital  Communications  work  at  Global 
Partners  and  Associates.  Her  expertise  lies  in  policy  re-
search,  advocacy  work  and  capacity  building  aimed  at 
fostering a global digital communications environment 
that is open and empowering and that supports human 
rights.  Current  activities  include:  a  major  international 
study on the impact of the Internet and mobile phones 

on  the  media  and  human  rights  sectors;  a  civil  society  
capacity-building project in south Asia; and a project map-
ping global issues and regulatory responses to protecting  
privacy  on  the  Internet.  Dixie  is  also  co-chair  of  the 
Dynamic  Coalition  on  Internet  Rights  and  Principles,  
an international multi-stakeholder network of individuals  
and  organisations  working  to  uphold  human  rights  in 
and through Internet governance.

41

Internet and society

Dixie HAWTIN

The	  Internet	  and	  Human	  Rights:	  
A	  Pivotal	  Moment	  in	  Time	  

Dixie	  Haw)n	  
Global	  Partners	  &	  Associates	  

The	  Poten9al:	  
To	  Democra9se	  Freedom	  of	  
Expression	  

o  To	  receive	  diverse	  informa)on	  
o  To	  seek	  informa)on	  we	  want	  and	  need	  
o  To	  impart	  informa)on	  and	  ideas	  	  

42

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
The	  Threats:	  

The	  Internet	  faces	  a	  challenge	  from	  both	  public	  
power	  and	  private	  power,	  and	  some)mes	  a	  
deadly	  combina)on	  of	  the	  two.	  

o Governments	  –	  illegi)mate	  reasons	  
o Governments	  –	  legi)mate	  reasons	  
o Businesses	  –	  commercial	  priori)es	  	  

Three	  values:	  

o  A	  GLOBAL	  PUBLIC	  VALUE	  SPACE	  
o  A	  MULTI-­‐STAKEHOLDER	  approach	  
o  HUMAN	  RIGHTS	  as	  driving	  principles	  

43

	  
	  
	  
Addressing	  the	  PROCESS	  crisis:	  

Invest	  in	  global	  mul9-­‐stakeholder	  
processes	  

Addressing	  the	  POLICY	  crisis:	  

Invest	  in	  building	  a	  posi9ve	  
norma9ve	  framework	  

44

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
A	  major	  cross-­‐cuQng	  issues:	  

Put	  copyright	  in	  its	  place	  

Ques9ons?	  

Thank	  you	  

45

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Ethical aspects of information  
and communication technologies

William ECHIKSON

External Relations, Communications and  
Public Affairs, Head of Free Expression EMEA  
at Google

William Echikson is Head of Free Expression Policy and 
PR,  Europe,  Middle  East  and  Africa  for  Google.  He  is  a 
veteran  Europe  correspondent,  who  has  written  for  a 
series of prestigious US publications including the Chris-
tian  Science  Monitor,  Wall  Street  Journal,  Fortune  and  
BusinessWeek over the past 25 years. From 1985 to 1990, 
he  covered  the  collapse  of  communism  in  central  Eur-
ope,  publishing  a  book  Lighting  the  night:  Revolution  in 
eastern Europe containing his observations and experien-
ces. He turned to business and cultural reporting in the 
1990s, and published two more books, Burgundy stars, a 
behind-the-scenes look at a French gastronomic shrine, 
and Noble rot, on the Bordeaux wine world.  From 2001 to 
2007, he managed the Brussels bureau for Dow Jones as 

bureau  chief.  He  has  considerable  experience  with  EU  
issues, most prominently antitrust, trade and environment.

William has other interesting journalistic experience. He 
worked for a European newspaper, serving as editor-in-
chief  of  Libération’s  special  international  supplements 
during the mid-1990s. He also has written, directed and 
produced television documentaries for America’s Public 
Broadcasting Service. William joined Google in 2008 as 
the company’s Brussels spokesman. He became respon-
sible  for  communications  in  southern  and  eastern  Eur-
ope, the Middle East and Africa the following year and 
now focuses on free expression throughout Europe, the 
Middle East and Africa.

47

Internet governance, Google perspective

William ECHIKSON

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION 
IN THE DIGITAL AGE 

Presenter: xxxxxx xxxxx 
Head of xxxxxx  
Google 

Web is the most powerful communication tool in history 

2 BILLION  
people online today 

48

UGC is fuelling web growth 

325 million 
websites online in May 2011 

UGC is fuelling web growth 

5 exabytes of data   
created each day in 2011 

49

UGC is fuelling web growth 

250,000 words per minute 
written on Blogger in 2010 

UGC is fuelling web growth 

48 hours of video 
uploaded to YouTube per minute 

50

UGC is fuelling web growth 

70,000 photos 
uploaded to Facebook  per minute 
as of mid- 2011 

UGC is fuelling web growth 

100,000 tweets 
posted per minute as of March 2011 

51

Web is a powerful force for societal transformation 

Technology is a double-edged sword 

52

Example: Iran 

Growing threat of Internet censorship 

53

Growing threat of Internet censorship 

(cid:2)Everyone has the right to freedom of 
opinion and expression; this right includes 
freedom to hold opinions without interference 
and to seek, receive and impart information 
and ideas through any media and 
regardless of frontiers(cid:3)  

– Article 19, 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights 

Google supports free expression – within limits 

EXTRA 

54

 
Google's default position is to let information flow 

EXTRA 

We seek to be transparent about government requests 

EXTRA 

55

Example: Transparency report 

EXTRA 

Example: Web traffic visualisation 

EXTRA 

56

Example: Speak2Tweet in Egypt 

Promoting trade benefits of an open internet 

57

The Global Network Initiative 
Global Network Initiative 

European political support for freedom of expression 

58

European political support for freedom of expression 

(cid:2)When you set people free you set the 
conditions for society and the economy to 
develop… The most important instrument 
of change in our time is the Internet(cid:3)  

– Swedish Foreign Minister, Carl Bildt 

European political support for freedom of expression 

Respect for media pluralism, protection of 
journalists  sources, freedom to criticise 
private and government powers
 are all 
essential for the full exercise of freedom of 
expression, and the Commission is fully 
committed to the defence of fundamental 
rights   

– Vice President of the European Commission, Neelie Kroes 

59

 
 
European political support for freedom of expression 

(cid:2)Promoting internet freedom is vital… 
Freedom of expression opens the gate to the 
enjoyment of many other human rights.  
Without it, the road to the rule of law and 
democracy remains closed.  And free trade is 
being hindered(cid:3) 

– Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, Uri Rosenthal 

Battling online censorship needs sustained cooperation 

60

 
THANK YOU 

61

Ethical aspects of information  
and communication technologies

Peter HUSTINX

European Data Protection Supervisor

Mr Hustinx has been European Data Protection Super-
visor since January 2004 and was reappointed by the 
European Parliament and the Council in January 2009 
for  a  second  term  of  five  years.  He  has  been  closely  
involved  in  the  development  of  data  protection  law 
from  the  start,  at  both  national  and  international 
levels.

Before entering office, Mr Hustinx was President of the 
Dutch Data Protection Authority since 1991. From 1996 
to 2000, he was Chairman of the Article 29 Working Party.

He  has  law  degrees  from  universities  in  Nijmegen,  the 
Netherlands, and Ann Arbor, USA. Since 1986 he has been 
a deputy judge in the Court of Appeal in Amsterdam.

63

Data protection in an Internet-driven society

Peter HUSTINX

Opinion of the European Data Protection Supervisor  

on  net  neutrality,  traffic  management  and  the  protection  of  privacy  and 
personal data   

THE EUROPEAN DATA PROTECTION SUPERVISOR, 

Having  regard  to  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union,  and  in 
particular Article 16 thereof, 

Having regard to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, and in 
particular Articles 7 and 8 thereof, 

Having  regard  to  Directive  95/46/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the 
Council  of  24  October  1995  on  the  protection  of  individuals  with  regard  to  the 
processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data1, 

Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of 
the  Council  of  18  December  2000  on  the  protection  of  individuals  with  regard  to 
the  processing  of  personal  data  by  the  Community  institutions  and  bodies  and  on 
the free movement of such data2, and in particular Article 41(2) thereof,

Having  regard  to  Directive  2002/58/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the 
Council  of  12  July  2002  concerning  the  processing  of  personal  data  and  the 
protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector3,  

HAS ADOPTED THE FOLLOWING OPINION: 

I. INTRODUCTION 

I.1. Background 

1. On 19 April 2011, the Commission adopted a Communication on the open internet 

and net neutrality in Europe4.   

2. This Opinion can be seen as the reaction of the EDPS to this Communication and 
aims at contributing to the ongoing policy debate within the EU on net neutrality, 
especially on aspects related to data protection and privacy. 

1 OJ  L 281/31, 23.11.95, pp. 31–50, the ‘Data Protection Directive’. 
2 OJ L 8, 12.1.2001, p. 1, the  ‘Data Protection Regulation’. 
3 OJ L 201, 31.7.2002, p. 37, as amended by Directive 2009/136/EC of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 25 November 2009 (see footnote 15), the ‘ePrivacy Directive’. 
4 COM(2011) 222 final. 

Postal address: rue Wiertz 60 - B-1047 Brussels 
Offices: rue Montoyer 63 
E-mail : edps@edps.europa.eu - Website: www.edps.europa.eu
Tel.: 02-283 19 00 - Fax : 02-283 19 50 

64

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
3. The  Opinion  builds  on  the  answer5  of  the  EDPS  to  the  Commission's  public 
consultation  on  The  Open  internet  and  net  neutrality  in  Europe,  which  preceded 
the  Commission's  Communication.  The  EDPS  has  also  taken  note  of  the  recent 
draft Council conclusions on net neutrality6.  

I.2. The concept of net neutrality 

4. Net  neutrality  refers  to  an  ongoing  debate  on  whether  Internet  service  providers 
(‘ISPs7’)  should  be  allowed  to  limit,  filter,  or  block  Internet  access  or  otherwise 
affect  its  performance.  The  concept  of  net  neutrality  builds  on  the  view  that 
information  on  the  Internet  should  be  transmitted  impartially,  without  regard  to 
content,  destination  or  source,  and  that  users  should  be  able  to  decide  what 
applications, services and hardware they want to use. This means that ISPs cannot, 
at  their  own  choice,  prioritise  or  slow  down  access  to  certain  applications  or 
services such as Peer to Peer (‘P2P’), etc8.   

5. Filtering, blocking and inspecting network traffic raises important questions, often 
overlooked  or  sidelined,  regarding  the  confidentiality  of  communications  and  the 
respect  for  the  privacy  of  individuals  and  their  personal  data  when  they  use  the 
Internet.  For  instance,  certain  inspection  techniques  involve  the  monitoring  of 
content  of  communications,  websites  visited,  emails  sent  and  received,  the  time 
when this takes place, etc, enabling filtering of communications.   

6. By  inspecting  communications  data,  ISPs  may  breach  the  confidentiality  of 
communications,  which  is  a  fundamental  right,  guaranteed  by  Article  8  of  the 
European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and  Fundamental 
Freedoms (the ‘ECHR’) and Article 7 and 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights 
of  the  European  Union  (the  ‘Charter’).  Confidentiality  is  further  protected  in 
secondary EU legislation, namely Article 5 of the ePrivacy Directive.  

I.3. Focus and structure of the Opinion 

7. The EDPS considers that a serious policy debate on net neutrality must address the 
confidentiality  of  communications  as  well  as  other  privacy  and  data  protection 
implications.   

8. This Opinion contributes to this ongoing EU debate. Its goal is threefold:   



It  flags  the  relevance  of  privacy  and  data  protection  in  the  current 
discussions  on  net  neutrality.  More  particularly,  it  highlights  the  need  to 
respect  the  existing  rules  on  confidentiality  of  communications.  Only 
practices that respect such rules should be allowed.   

and 

rights 

values. 

  The 

existing 

5  EDPS  responded  stressing  the  importance  of  taking  into  account  data  protection  and  privacy  issues 
together  with  other 
at: 
http://www.edps.europa.eu/EDPSWEB/webdav/site/mySite/shared/Documents/Consultation/Comm
ents/2010/10-10-06_EC_Consultation_Open_Internet_EN.pdf.  
6 Available at http://register.consilium.europa.eu/pdf/en/11/st14/st14209.en11.pdf. 
7 This includes the provision of both fixed and mobile access to the Internet.    
8  Although  the  principle  does  apply  to  ISPs  putting  limits  on  the  speed  or  amount  of  information  a 
subscriber is able to send or receive through subscriptions with bandwidth or volume limits.  Therefore, 
under  a  net  neutrality  principle  ISPs  would  still  be  able  to  offer  Internet  access  subscriptions  limiting 
access based on criteria such as speed or volume as long as it does not require discriminating in favour or 
against particular content.   

response 

available 

is 

2

65

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Net neutrality relates to relatively new - technological - possibilities and there 
is  little  experience  on  how  the  legal  framework  applies.  This  Opinion 
therefore  provides  guidance  on  how  ISPs  must  apply  and  respect  the  data 
protection  legal  framework  if  they  engage  in  filtering,  blocking  and 
inspecting  network  traffic.  This  should  be  helpful  for  ISPs  and  also  for 
authorities in charge of enforcing the framework.   

 Within  the  scope  of  data  protection  and  privacy,  this  Opinion  identifies 
areas  which  call  for  special  attention  and  which  may  require  action  at  EU 
level. This is particularly important in the light of the ongoing debate at EU 
level  and the policy  measures that may be launched by the Commission in 
this context.   

9. The EDPS is aware that net neutrality raises other issues, further described below, 
such as those related to access to information. These issues are only addressed to 
the extent that they are related to or have an impact on data protection and privacy.  

10. The  Opinion  is  structured  as  follows.  Section  II  starts  by  providing  a  short 
overview  of  practices  on  filtering  by  ISPs.  Section  III  outlines  the  EU  legal 
framework  on  net  neutrality.  Section  IV  continues  with  a  technical  description 
followed by an assessment of the privacy implications, depending on the technique 
used. Section V analyses the practical details regarding the application of the current 
EU  privacy  and  data  protection  framework.  Building  on  the  analysis,  Section  VI 
contains suggestions for further policy developments and identifies the areas where 
clarification and improvement of the legal framework might be needed. Section VII 
contains the conclusions.       

II. 

NET NEUTRALITY AND TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT POLICIES 

Increasing use of traffic management policies  

11. Traditionally, ISPs have engaged in monitoring and influencing network traffic only 
in limited circumstances. For example, ISPs have applied inspection techniques and 
restricted  information  flows  to  preserve  the  security  of  the  network,  e.g.  to  fight 
viruses.  Therefore,  generally  speaking,  the  Internet  has  grown  while  preserving  a 
great degree of neutrality. 

12. However, in recent years, some ISPs have shown an interest in inspecting network 
traffic  in  order  to  differentiate  and  apply  different  policies  to  it,  for  example,  to 
block  specific  services  or  give  preference  access  to  others.  This  is  sometimes 
referred to as ‘traffic management policies’9.   

13. The reasons for ISPs to inspect and differentiate traffic are manifold. For example, 
traffic management policies may help ISPs to manage traffic during periods of high 
congestion, for example, by prioritising certain time-sensitive traffic, such as video 
streaming and downgrading other types of traffic which may be less time sensitive, 

9 See for example, OFCOM Report entitled ‘Site blocking to reduce online copyright infringement’, 
adopted on 27 May 2011, available at: http://www.culture.gov.uk/images/publications/Ofcom_Site-
Blocking-_report_with_redactions_vs2.pdf: ‘Some ISPs already deploy packet inspection systems in their 
network for traffic management and other purposes, so we assume that it can be deployed, albeit that this 
would involve a high level of complexity and cost for those not already running such services. It may be 
that in the short to medium term DPI could only be deployed by the larger ISPs given the capital 
investment required’.  

3

66

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such as P2P10. Furthermore, traffic management may be a means for ISPs to obtain 
a  potential  revenue  stream,  which  could  originate  from  different  sources.  On  the 
one hand, ISPs could charge fees to content service providers, for example, those 
whose services require using higher bandwidth, in exchange of giving them priority 
(and thus speed). This would mean that accessing a certain service, for example, a 
service providing videos on demand, would be faster than accessing another similar 
service which has not signed up to high speed transmission. Revenues could also be 
obtained  from  subscribers  interested  in  paying  higher  (or  lower)  fees  for  certain 
types of differentiated subscriptions. For example, a subscription without access to 
P2P could be cheaper than one giving unlimited access.   

14. In  addition  to  the  ISP's  own  reasons  for  the  use  of  traffic  management  policies, 
other parties may also have an interest in ISP's using traffic management policies.  
If  ISPs  manage  their  networks  and  engage  in  inspection  of  content  which  goes 
through  their  facilities,  they  are  likely  to  increase  their  capacity  to  detect  alleged 
unlawful usage, e.g. breach of copyright or pornographic use. 

Other interests at stake, including data protection and privacy 

15. This  trend  has  triggered  a  debate  on  the  legitimacy  of  this  type  of  practices  and 
more  particularly  whether  specific  net  neutrality  obligations  should  be  further 
developed by law.   

16. Increasing use by ISPs of traffic management policies could possibly limit access to 
information. If this behaviour became common practice and it was not possible (or 
highly  expensive)  for  users  to  have  access  to  the  full  Internet  as  we  know  it,  this 
would  jeopardise  access  to  information  and  user's  ability  to  send  and  receive  the 
content  they  want  using  the  applications  or  services  of  their  choice.  A  legally 
mandatory principle on net neutrality may avoid this problem. 

17. This  brings  the  EDPS  to  the  implications  for  data  protection  and  privacy  when 

ISPs engage in traffic management.  More particularly:   

 When  ISPs  process  traffic  data  with  the  sole  purpose  of  routing  the 
information  flow  from  the  sender  to  the  receiver,  they  generally  carry  out 
limited  personal  data  processing11.  In  the  same  way  as  the  postal  service 
processes  the  information  included  on  the  envelope  of  a  letter,  the  ISP 
processes the information needed to route the communication towards the 
recipient.  This  does  not  conflict  with  the  legal  requirements  of  data 
protection, privacy and confidentiality of communications. 

 However,  when  ISPs  inspect  communication  data  in  order  to  differentiate 
each  communication  flow  and  to  apply  specific  policies,  which  may  be 
implications  are  more  significant. 
unfavourable 
Depending  on  the  circumstances  of  each  case  and  on  the  type  of  analysis 
performed, the processing may be highly intrusive for an individual's privacy 

individuals, 

the 

to 

10  The  quality  of  real-time  applications  such  as  video  streaming  is,  among  other  things,  dependent  on 
latency, i.e., delay due for example to network congestion.   
11 This excludes operations aimed at increasing the security of the network and detecting harmful traffic 
and also operations required for billing and interconnection. It also excludes obligations that derive from 
the Data Retention Directive, Directive 2006/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
15  March  2006  on  the  retention  of  data  generated  or  processed  in  connection  with  the  provision  of 
publicly  available  electronic  communications  services  or  of  public  communications  networks  and 
amending Directive 2002/58/EC, OJ 2006, L 105/54 (‘Data Retention Directive’).   

4

67

 
 
 
 
 
 
and personal data. This is more obvious where management policies reveal 
the  content  of  individuals’  Internet  communications,  including  emails  sent 
and received, websites visited, files downloaded or uploaded, etc.  

III.  OVERVIEW  OF  THE  EU  LEGAL  FRAMEWORK  ON  NET 

NEUTRALITY AND FURTHER POLICY DEVELOPMENTS 

III.1. The legal framework in a nutshell 

18. Until  2009,  EU  legislative  instruments  did  not  contain  provisions  explicitly 
prohibiting  ISPs  from  engaging  in  filtering  or  blocking  or  charging  extra  costs  to 
subscribers for access to services. At the same time, they did not contain provisions 
explicitly  recognising  this  practice.  The  situation  was,  to  some  extent,  one  of 
uncertainty.    

19. The  2009  Telecom  package  changed  this  by  including  provisions  favouring  the 
openness  of  the  Internet.  For  example,  Article  8(4)  on  a  common  regulatory 
framework  for  electronic  communications  networks  and  services  (‘Framework 
Directive’) establishes an obligation on regulatory authorities to promote the ability 
of  end  users  to  access  content,  applications  or  services  of  their  choice12.  This 
provision applies to the network as a whole, not at the level of individual providers. 
Recent  draft  Council  conclusions  also  highlighted  the  need  to  maintain  the 
openness of the Internet 13.   

20. The  Universal  Service  Directive14  contains  more  concrete  obligations.  Articles 20 
and  21  set  forth  transparency  requirements  regarding  limitations  on  access  to 
and/or  use  of  services  and  applications.  It  also  requires  minimum  service  quality 
levels.    

21. For  ISP  practices  entailing  the 

individuals'  communications, 
Recital 28  of  the  Directive  amending  the  Universal  Service  and  ePrivacy 
Directives15  highlights  that  ‘depending  on  the  technology  used  and  the  type  of 

inspection  of 

12  Directive  2002/21/EC  of  7  March  2002  on  a  common  regulatory  framework  for  electronic 
communications  networks  and  services,  as  amended  by  Directive  2009/140/EC  and  Regulation 
544/2009, OJ 337, 18.12.2009, p. 37.  
13  See  point  3(e),  where  Council  recognises:  ‘The  need  to  maintain  the  openness  of  Internet  while 
ensuring that it can continue to provide high-quality services in a framework that promotes and respects 
fundamental  rights  such  as  freedom  of  expression  and  freedom  to  conduct  business’  and  8(d),  inviting 
Member States to ‘Promote the open and neutral character of the Internet as their policy objective’. 
14 Directive 2002/22/EC as amended by Directive 2009/136/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council  of  25  November  2009  amending  Directive  2002/22/EC  on  universal  service  and  users'  rights 
relating  to  electronic  communications  networks  and  services,  Directive  2002/58/EC  concerning  the 
processing  of  personal  data  and  the  protection  of  privacy  in  the  electronic  communications  sector  and 
Regulation  (EC)  No  2006/2004  on  cooperation  between  national  authorities  responsible  for  the 
enforcement of consumer protection laws. OJ L 337/11, 18.12.2009. Compare also Article 1(3), stating 
that the Directive neither mandates nor prohibits ISPs from limiting end-users' access to, and/or use of, 
services and applications, where allowed under national law and in conformity with Community law, but 
requires them to inform about any such conditions.   
15  Directive  2009/136/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  25  November  2009 
amending  Directive  2002/22/EC  on  universal  service  and  users'  rights  relating  to  electronic 
communications  networks  and  services,  Directive  2002/58/EC  concerning  the  processing  of  personal 
data  and  the  protection  of  privacy  in  the  electronic  communications  sector  and  Regulation  (EC) 
No 2006/2004 on cooperation between national authorities responsible for the enforcement of consumer 
protection laws. OJ L 337/11, 18.12.2009. 

5

68

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
limitation, such limitation may require user consent under the ePrivacy Directive’. 
Thus,  Recital 28  recalls  the  need  for  consent  pursuant  to  Article  5(1)  of  the 
ePrivacy  Directive  for  any  limitations  based  on  monitoring  of  communications. 
Section  IV  below  further  analyses  the  application  of  Article  5(1)  and  the  overall 
data protection and privacy legal framework.   

22. Finally,  Article  22(3)  of  the  Universal  Service  Directive  now  empowers  national 
regulatory  authorities  to  impose,  if  necessary,  minimum  quality  of  service 
requirements  on  ISPs  in  order  to  prevent  the  degradation  of  services  and  the 
hindering or slowing down of traffic over public networks.   

23. The  above  means  that  at  the  EU  level  there  is  a  broad  aspiration  to  an  open 
Internet  (see  Article  8(4)  of  the  Framework  Directive).  However,  this  policy 
objective,  which  applies  to  the  network  as  a  whole,  is  not  directly  linked  to 
prohibitions or obligations on individual ISPs. In other words, an ISP could engage 
in  traffic  management  policies,  which  may  exclude  access  to  certain  applications, 
provided that end-users are fully informed, and have expressed their consent freely, 
specifically and unambiguously.     

24. The  situation  may  differ  depending  on  Member  States.  In  some  Member  States 
ISPs  can,  under  specific  conditions,  engage  in  traffic  management  policies,  for 
example,  to  block  applications  such  as  VoIP  (as  part  of  a  cheaper  Internet 
subscription),  provided  that  individuals  have  given  their  free,  specific  and 
unambiguous, informed consent. Other Member States have chosen to strengthen 
the  principle  of  net  neutrality.  For  instance,  in  July  2011  the  Dutch  Parliament 
passed  a  law  generally  prohibiting  providers  from  hindering  or  slowing  down 
applications  or  services  on  the  internet  (such  as  VoIP),  unless  necessary  to 
minimise the effects of congestion, for integrity or security reasons, to fight spam 
or in accordance with a court order.16      

III.2. The Communication on Net Neutrality  

25. In  its  Communication  on  net  neutrality17,  the  European  Commission  concluded 
that  the  situation  on  net  neutrality  is  one  that  requires  monitoring  and  further 
analysis.  Its  policy  has  been  dubbed  as  ‘wait  and  see’,  before  considering  further 
regulatory steps.   

26. The  Commission's  Communication  recognised  that  any  measure  and  further 
regulatory steps would be subject to an in-depth assessment of data protection and 
privacy  aspects.  The  draft  Council  conclusions  also  note  the  data  protection  and 
privacy issues at stake.18 

27. The  question  to  be  assessed  from  a  data  protection  and  privacy  perspective  is 
whether  a  wait  and  see  policy  is  sufficient.  While  the  data  protection  and  privacy 
framework  does,  at  the  present  time,  foresee  some  safeguards  especially  through 

16  The  original  Dutch  amendment  can  be  found  at:  https//zoek.officielebekendmakingen.nl/kst-32549-
A.html  The reasons reported by the press for such a policy option did not refer to data protection and 
privacy  considerations  but  rather  to  reasons  related  to  ensuring  that  users  are  not  deprived  of  or  are 
offered limited access to information. So it seems that issues relating to access to information motivated 
this amendment.   
17 See footnote 4. 
18  See  point  4(e),  where  Council  notes:  ‘The  existence  of  some  concerns,  mainly  emerging  from 
consumers and data protection authorities, in regard to personal data protection’. 

6

69

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the principle of confidentiality of communications, it appears necessary to monitor 
closely  the level of  compliance and issue  guidance on several aspects that are not 
particularly clear. In addition, some thoughts should be put forward as to how the 
framework  could  be  clarified  and  further  improved,  in  the  light  of  technological 
developments.  If  the  monitoring  reveals  that  the  market  is  evolving  towards 
massive,  real-time  inspection  of  communications  and  issues  related  to  complying 
with  the  framework,  legislative  measures  will  be  necessary.  Concrete  suggestions 
will be made in that respect in Section VI. 

TECHNICAL  BACKGROUND  AND  RELATED  PRIVACY  AND 

IV. 
DATA PROTECTION IMPLICATIONS 

28. Before going more deeply into the subject, it is important to have a better view of 
the  inspection  techniques  that  may  be  used  by  ISPs  to  engage  in  traffic 
management and how this may impact the principle of net neutrality. The privacy 
and  data  protection  implications  derived  from  such  techniques  vary  substantially 
depending  on  which  technique/s  is  or  are  used.  This  technical  background  is 
necessary  to  understand  and  apply  properly  the  legal  data  protection  framework 
described  in  Section  V.  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  this  is  a  constantly 
changing and complex area. The description below therefore is not intended to be 
exhaustive and fully up-to-date, but only to provide the technical information that 
is indispensable for understanding the legal reasoning.   

IV.1. Transmission of information through the Internet: the basics 

29. When a user transmits a communication via Internet, the information transmitted is 
divided  into  packets.  These  packets  are  transmitted  across  the  Internet  from  the 
sender to the recipient. Each packet will include, among others, information about 
the source and the destination. In addition, ISPs might enclose these packets into 
additional layers and protocols19, which will be used to manage the different traffic 
flows within the ISP network.   

30. To  refer  back  to  the  analogy  of  the  postal  letter,  using  a  network  transmission 
protocol  is  equivalent  to  including  the  content  of  a  postal  letter  into  an  envelope 
with  a  destination  address  to  be  read  by  the  postal  service  and  then  having  the 
postal  service  deliver  it.  The  postal  service  may  use  additional  protocols  in  its 
internal transits to manage all the envelopes to be transmitted, the goal being that 
each envelope reaches its destination as originally drafted by the sender. Using this 
analogy, each packet has two parts, the IP payload that includes the content of the 
communication  and  will  be  the  equivalent  to  the  letter.  It  contains  information 
addressed only to the recipient. The second part of the packet is the IP header that 
includes, among others, the address of the recipient and the sender and will be the 
equivalent to the envelope. The IP header allows the ISPs and other intermediaries 
to route the payload from its source address to its destination address.   

31. ISPs  and  other  intermediaries  ensure  that  IP  packets  travel  across  the  network 
through nodes that read the IP header information, check it versus routing tables, 
and then forward them towards the next node in the path to the destination. This 

19 As further described in Section IV.2, such protocols code the information being transmitted end-to-end 
in an agreed way so that the parties involved in the communication can understand each other, such as 
HTTP, FTP, etc.   

7

70

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process is done across the network using a ‘best effort memoryless’ approach since 
all the packets arriving to a node are treated in a neutral way. When they have been 
forwarded  to  the  next  node,  there  is  no  need  to  retain  further  information  in  the 
router20. 

IV.2. Inspection techniques  

32. As illustrated above, ISPs read IP headers for the purpose of routing them towards 
their  destination.  However,  as outlined above, the analysis of traffic (involving IP 
headers and IP payloads) can be performed for other purposes and with different 
types of  technologies.  New  trends may include for instance  slowing down  certain 
applications  being  used  by  users,  such  as  P2P,  or  alternatively,  enhancing  traffic 
speed for certain services like video-on-demand services for premium subscribers. 
While  all  inspection  techniques  technically  perform  packet  inspection,  they  involve 
different  levels  of  intrusiveness.  There  are  two  main  categories  of  inspection 
techniques. One is based on just the IP header, the other also on the IP payload.  

●  Based  on  the  IP  header  information.  The  inspection  of  an  IP  packet  header  reveals 
some fields that may allow ISPs to apply a number of specific policies to manage 
the traffic. These techniques based only on inspection of IP headers process data 
which,  in  principle,  is  meant  for  routing  information,  for  a  different  purpose  (i.e. 
differentiating  traffic).  Looking  at  the  source  IP  address,  the  ISP  can  link  it  to  a 
concrete subscriber and apply some specific policies, for instance routing the packet 
through a faster or a slower link. Looking at the destination IP address, the ISP can 
also  apply  specific  policies,  for  instance  blocking  or  filtering  access  to  certain 
websites. 

●  Based  on  a  deeper  inspection.  Deep  packet  inspection  enables  the  ISP  to  access 
information addressed to the recipient of the communication only. Going back to 
the postal service example, this approach is equivalent to opening the envelope and 
inside  to  perform  an  analysis  of  the  content  of  the 
reading  the 
communication  (encapsulated  inside  the  IP  packets)  in  order  to  apply  a  specific 
network  policy.  There  are  different  ways  of  carrying  out  the  inspection,  each 
presenting different threats to the data subject.     

letter 

 Deep packet inspection based on the analysis of protocols and on statistical records. In 
addition  to  the  IP  protocol,  which  is  meant  to  enable  the  data  to  be 
transmitted  across  the  Internet,  there  are  additional  protocols  that  code 
the  information  being  transmitted  in  an  agreed  way  (transport,  session, 
presentation  and  application,  etc.).  The  goal  of  these  protocols  is  to 
ensure  that  the  parties  involved  in  the  communication  can  understand 
each  other.  For  instance,  there  are  some  protocols  that  are  associated 
with  web  browsing21,  others  are  for  file  transfer22,  etc.  Therefore 
inspection  techniques  based  on  the 
inspection  of  protocols  and 
combined with statistical analysis aim at looking for specific patterns or 

20 Nevertheless, Internet network equipment uses routing protocols that will log activity, process traffic 
statistics, and exchange information with other network equipment in order to route IP packets using the 
most  efficient  path.  For  instance,  when  a  link  is  congested  or  broken,  and  a  router  receives  this 
information,  it  will  update  its  routing  table  with  some  alternative  not  using  that  link.  It  is  also  worth 
noting  the  collection  and  processing  that  in  some  cases  may  be  done  for  billing  purposes  or  even  in 
accordance with the requirements of the Data Retention Directive.  
21 HTTP - Hypertext transfer protocol - or HTML - Hypertext Markup Language.  
22 FTP - File transfer protocol.  

8

71

 
 
 
 
 
fingerprints  that  determine  which  protocols  are  present23.  These 
inspection  techniques  enable  the  ISPs  to  understand  the  type  of 
communication  (email,  web  browsing,  uploading  files)  and,  in  some 
cases, to identify the specific service or application used, such as the case 
of  some  VoIP  communications  where  the  protocols  used  are  very 
specific to a concrete vendor or service provider. The knowledge of the 
type of communication by itself can allow ISPs to apply concrete traffic 
management policies. For example, to block web traffic.  It may also be 
the first step in allowing the ISP to perform further analyses that might 
require full access to the metadata and content of the communication.   

 Deep  packet  inspection  based  on  the  analysis  of  the  content  of  the  communication.  
Finally, it is also possible to inspect the metadata24
 and the content of a 
communication  itself.  This  technique  consists  in  the  interception  of  all 
the  IP  packets  that  are part of the original communication flow so that 
the  original  content  of  the  communication  can  be  reconstructed  in  full 
and  analysed.  For  example,  to  detect  harmful  or  illegal  content  like 
viruses, child pornography, etc, it is necessary to reconstruct the content 
itself  so  that  it  can  be  analysed.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  sometimes  the 
communication  can  be  explicitly  encrypted  end-to-end  by  the  parties 
involved  and  this  practice  will  impede  ISPs  to  perform  analysis  of  the 
content of the communication.    

IV.3.  Privacy and data protection implications 

33. Inspection  techniques  based  on  IP  headers  and  more  particularly  those  based  on 
packet  inspection  involve  the  monitoring  and  filtering  of  these  data  and  have 
serious  implications  in  terms  of  privacy  and  data  protection.  They  can  also  be  in 
conflict with the right to confidentiality of communications.  

34. Looking  into  individuals'  communications  has,  in  itself,  serious  privacy  and  data 
protection implications. Yet, the problem is broader since, depending on the effects 
pursued with the monitoring and interception, the privacy implications may further 
increase. Indeed, it is not the same to merely inspect communications, for example, 
to  ensure  that  the  system  works  well,  and  to  inspect  communications  to  apply 
policies  which  may  have  an  impact  on  individuals.  When  traffic  and  selection 
policies may seek to avoid network congestion only, there will usually be no major 
implications  for  individual's  privacy.  However,  traffic  management  policies  may 
seek  to  block  some  content  information,  or  influence  the  communication  for 
instance  through  behavioural  advertising.  In  those  cases  the  effects  are  more 
intrusive.  The  concern  becomes  more  critical  if  one  realises  that  this  type  of 
information would be collected not for a small group of individuals but rather on a 
generalised  basis,  for  all  ISP  customers25.  If  all  ISPs  embrace  filtering  techniques, 

23  There  are  different  ways  of  identifying  the  protocols  used.  For  example,  it  is  possible  to  search  in 
specific fields in inner protocols, e.g. to identify ports used to establish the communication. A statistical 
characterization of a communication flow can also be inferred from the analysis of some specific fields, 
correlation of the protocols used simultaneously between two IP addresses. 
24 Each protocol has some specific fields in its header that provide additional informal information about 
the  communication  being  transmitted.  Therefore  the  content  of  those  fields  can  be  referred  to  as  the 
metadata  of  the  communication.  An  example  of  these  fields  can  be  the  port  number  used,  where,  for 
instance if it is number 80, it is quite likely that the type of communication is web browsing. 
25  Of  course,  tracking  capabilities  are  not  exclusive  to  ISPs.  Instead,  ad.  network  providers  are  also 
capable, through the use of third party cookies to track users across websites.  See for example a recent 
9

72

 
 
 
 
this could lead to a generalised monitoring of Internet usage. Furthermore, if one 
focuses  on  the  type  of  information  being  processed,  the  risks  to  privacy  are 
obviously  high,  as  much  of  the  information  being  collected  is  likely  to  be  very 
sensitive  and,  after  collection,  is  available  to  ISPs  and  to  those  who  would  seek 
information from them. Furthermore, the information might also be very valuable 
in commercial terms. In itself, this represents a high risk of function creep where 
the initial purposes could easily evolve into commercial or other exploitation of the 
information collected. 

35. The correct application of monitoring and inspection and filtering techniques must 
be done in conformity with the applicable data protection and privacy safeguards, 
which  lay  down  limits  as  to  what  can  be  done  and  under  which  circumstances.  
Next follows an overview of the applicable safeguards under the current EU data 
protection and privacy legal framework.   

V.  APPLICATION  OF  THE  EU  PRIVACY  AND  DATA  PROTECTION    
  LEGAL FRAMEWORK  

36. The  EU  data  protection  framework  is  technologically  neutral;  as  such,  it  does  not 
regulate  specific  inspection  techniques  as  those  described  above.  The  ePrivacy 
Directive regulates privacy in the provision of electronic communication services in 
public networks (typically Internet access and telephony)26 and the Data Protection 
Directive regulates data processing in general. Taken as a whole this legal framework 
sets out different obligations that apply to ISPs that process and monitor traffic and 
communications data.    

V.1. Legal grounds to process traffic and content data 

37. Under  data  protection  legislation,  the  processing  of  personal  data,  such  as  in  this 
case  the  processing  of  traffic  and  communication  data,  requires  an  adequate  legal 
ground. In addition to this general requirement, specific requirements may apply in 
certain cases.    

38. In this case, the type of personal data that are processed by ISPs refers to the traffic 
data  and  content  of  communications.  The  content  of  communications  and  the 
traffic  data  are  both  protected  by  the  right  to  confidentiality  of  correspondence, 
which is guaranteed by Article 8 ECHR and Article 7 and 8 of the Charter. More 
particularly,  Article  5(1)  of  the  ePrivacy  Directive,  entitled  'confidentiality  of 
communications’  requires  Member  States  to  ensure  the  confidentiality  of 

academic article  showing  that  Google  has  a presence  on  97  of  the top  100  websites,  which  means that 
Google  can  track  users  who  have  not  opted  out  of  third  party  cookies  as  they  browse  these  popular 
websites. See:  Ayenson, Mika, Wambach, Dietrich James, Soltani, Ashkan, Good, Nathan and Hoofnagle, 
Chris  Jay,  Flash  Cookies  and  Privacy  II:  Now  with  HTML5  and  ETag  Respawning  (July  29,  2011). 
Available  at  SSRN:  http://ssrn.com/abstract=1898390.  The  tracking  of  users  through  third  party 
cookies has been addressed by the Article 29 Working Party. See Opinion 2/2010 on online behavioural 
advertising, adopted on 22 June 2010 (WP 171). 
26  Article  1.2  of  the  ePrivacy  Directive  reads:    ‘In  the  electronic  communications  sector,  Directive 
95/46/EC applies in particular to all matters concerning protection of fundamental rights and freedoms, 
which  are  not  specifically  covered  by  the  provisions  of  this  Directive,  including  the  obligations  on  the 
controller and the rights of individuals’.  Also, Recital 17 is relevant in relation to data subject consent: 
‘For the purposes of this Directive, consent of a user or subscriber, regardless of whether the latter is a 
natural  or  a  legal  person,  should  have  the  same  meaning  as  the  data  subject’s  consent  as  defined  and 
further specified in Directive 95/46/EC’. 

10

73

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communications and the related traffic data by means of a public communications 
network  and  publicly  available  electronic  communications  services.  At  the  same 
time,  Article  5(1)  of  the  ePrivacy  Directive  foresees  that  the  processing  of  traffic 
and  content  data  by  ISPs  may  be  allowed,  in  certain  circumstances,  with  the 
consent  of  the  users.  This  is  done  by  setting  forth  a  prohibition  to  the  ‘listening, 
tapping,  storage or  other  kinds of interception or surveillance of communications 
and the related traffic data by persons other than users, without the consent of the 
users concerned, except when legally authorised to do so in accordance with Article 
15(1)’ . This is further developed below.  

39. In addition to the consent of users concerned, the ePrivacy Directive foresees other 
grounds  that  may  legitimise  ISPs'  processing  of  traffic  and  communication  data. 
The relevant legal grounds for processing in this case are (i) delivering the service; 
(ii) safeguarding the security of the service, and (iii) minimizing congestion. Other 
traffic  or 
possible  grounds 
communication data are discussed below under (iv).   

legitimise  management  policies  based  on 

to 

(i) Legal grounds for delivering the service 

40. As  illustrated  in  Section  IV,  ISPs  process  the  information  on  IP  headers  for 
purposes consisting in routing each IP packet towards its destination. Article 6(1) 
and  Article  6(2)  of  the  ePrivacy  Directive  allow  processing  of  traffic  data  for  the 
purposes  of  conveyance  of  a  communication.  Thus,  ISPs  may  process  the 
information that is necessary for the delivery of the service.    

(ii) Legal grounds for safeguarding the security of the service 

41. Pursuant to Article 4 of the ePrivacy Directive, an ISP is under a general obligation 
to  take  appropriate  measures  to  safeguard  security  of  its  services.  The  practice  of 
filtering viruses may involve the processing of IP headers and IP payload. Taking 
into  account  that  Article  4  of  the  ePrivacy  Directive  requires  ISPs  to  ensure  the 
security  of  the  network,  this  provision  legitimises  inspection  techniques  based  on 
IP headers and content that aim strictly to achieve such purpose. In practice, this 
means  that,  within  the  limits  set  forth  by  the  proportionality  principle  (see 
Section V.3), ISPs may engage in monitoring and filtering of communications data 
to fight viruses and overall ensure the security of the network.27    

 (iii) Legal grounds for minimising the effects of congestion 

42. The  rationale  for  this  legal  ground  is  to  be  found  in  Recital  22  to  the  ePrivacy 
Directive,  explaining  the  Article  5(1)  prohibition  on  storage  of  communications.  
This does not prohibit any automatic, intermediate and transient storage in so far as 
it takes place for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission and does not last 
longer  than  necessary  for  the  transmission  and  traffic  management  purposes,  and 
the confidentiality of the communications remains guaranteed.  

43. If  there  is  a  congestion,  the  question  arises  whether  ISPs  may  consider  randomly 
dropping  or  delaying  traffic  or  rather  slowing  communications  that  are  not  time-

27 Article 29 Working Party’s Opinion 2/2006 on privacy issues related to the provision of email screening 
services, adopted on 21 February 2006 (WP 118).  In this Opinion the Working Party considers that using 
filters for the purpose of Article 4 can be compatible with Article 5 of the ePrivacy Directive.   

11

74

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
sensitive,  e.g.  P2P  or  email  traffic,  enabling,  for  example,  voice  traffic  to  pass  at 
acceptable quality.  

44. Given  the  overall  societal  interest  of  guaranteeing  a  usable  communications 
network, ISPs may argue that prioritising or throttling traffic to address congestion 
is  a  legitimate  measure  which  is  necessary  to  deliver  an  adequate  service.  This 
means  that  in  these  cases  and  for  this  purpose,  there  would  be  a  general  legal 
ground  for  processing  personal  data  and  specific  consent  by  users  would  not  be 
necessary.  

45. At the same time, the ability to interfere in this way is not unrestricted. If ISPs need 
to  inspect  communications,  from  the  perspective  of  confidentiality,  and  applying 
strictly  the  proportionality  principle,  they  must  use  the  least  intrusive  method 
available to achieve the purpose (avoiding deep packet inspection), and they must 
only apply it for as long as necessary to resolve the congestion.   

(iv) Legal grounds for processing data for other purposes 

46. ISPs  may  also  want  to  inspect  traffic  and  content  data  for  other  purposes,  for 
example offering targeted subscriptions (e.g. a subscription that limits access to P2P 
or  a  subscription  that  increases  speed  for  certain  applications).  Inspection  and 
further  use  of  traffic  and  communication  data  for  purposes  other  than  delivering 
the  service  or  ensuring  its  security  and  lack  of  congestion  is  only  allowed  under 
strict conditions, in compliance with the legal framework.    

47. The legal framework is mainly Article 5(1) of the ePrivacy Directive which requires 
consent  from  users  concerned  to  listen,  tap,  store  or  engage  in  other  kinds  of 
interception  or  surveillance  of  communications  and  the  related  traffic  data.  In 
practice this means that consent of users involved in a communication is necessary 
to  legitimise  the  processing  of  both  traffic  and  communications  data  pursuant  to 
Article 5(1).      

48. As explained above, the application of inspection and filtering techniques is either 
based  on  IP  headers,  which  constitute  traffic  data,  or  based  on  deep  packet 
inspection  which  also  entails  IP  payloads  and  constitute  communication  data. 
Therefore, in principle, the application of such techniques for purposes other than 
the  conveyance  of  the  service  or  security  would  be  forbidden  unless  a  legitimate 
ground allows for the processing, such as consent (Article 5(1)). An example where 
Article 5(1) would apply is when an ISP decides to offer customers a reduced rate 
for  Internet  access  in  return  for  receiving  behavioural  advertising,  using  deep 
packet  inspection,  and  thus  communication  data,  in  order  to  do  so.  Real,  specific 
and informed consent is therefore necessary according to Article 5(1).   

49. Furthermore,  Article  6  of  the  ePrivacy  Directive  entitled  'traffic  data’  provides 
certain  rules  applying  specifically  to  traffic  data.    More  particularly  it  foresees  the 
possibility for ISPs to process traffic data based on users' consent to receive value 
added  services28.  This  provision  specifies  the  consent  requirement  foreseen  in 
Article 5(1) when traffic data are at stake.    

28 Recital 18 of the Directive contains a list exemplifying value added services. Whether services to which 
traffic management policies apply could be interpreted as part of the list is not clear. Traffic management 
policies aiming at prioritising certain content could be understood as providing a quality of the service. 
For example, traffic management that entails merely the processing of IP headers and has as its objective 
12

75

 
 
 
 
 
 
50. In  practice,  it  may  not  always  be  easy  to  ascertain,  for  example,  in  which  cases 
consent is necessary, and in which cases the security of the network may legitimise 
the processing, particularly if the purposes of the inspection techniques are twofold 
(for instance avoiding congestion and providing added value services). It should be 
emphasised that consent cannot be considered as an easy and systemic gateway to 
compliance with data protection principles.  

51. There is little experience on the application of the framework and more particularly 
on the various aspects that have been outlined above. This is an area where further 
guidance  is  essential,  as  further  developed  in  Section  VI.  Furthermore,  there  are 
additional,  relevant  aspects  related  to  obtaining  consent  that  also  require  special 
consideration. These are described below.   

V. 2. 

Issues related to providing informed consent as a legal ground 

52. The consent required under Articles 5 and 6 of the ePrivacy Directive has the same 
meaning as the data subject’s consent as defined and further specified in Directive 
95/46/EC.29 According to Article 2(h) of the Data Protection Directive, ‘the data 
subject's consent' shall mean ‘any freely given specific and informed indication of his wishes by 
which  the  data  subject  signifies  his  agreement  to  personal  data  relating  to  him  being  processed’. 
Recently,  the  role  of  consent  and  the  requirements  for  it  to  be  valid  have  been 
addressed by the Article 29 Working Party in its Opinion 15/2011 on consent30.   

53. ISPs requiring consent to engage in inspection and filtering of traffic and content 
data must therefore ensure that consent is free and specified, and it must be a fully 
informed indication of the individual's wishes by which he signifies his agreement 
to  personal  data  relating  to  him  being  processed.  Recital  17  of  the  ePrivacy 
Directive  re-affirms  this  ‘(…)  Consent  may  be  given  by  any  appropriate  method 
enabling  a  freely  given  specific  and  informed  indication  of  the  user's  wishes, 
including by ticking a box when visiting an Internet website ’  Below follow some 
practical examples of what it means in this context for consent to be free, specific 
and informed.  

Consent: Free, specific and informed indication of wishes 

54. Free  consent.  Users  should  not  have  to  suffer  constraints  linking  consent  to  the 

Internet subscription they want to sign up to.   

55. Individuals'  consent  would  not  be  freely  given  if  they  had  to  consent  to  the 
monitoring of their communication data in order to get access to a communication 
service.  This  would  be  even  more  true  if all providers  in  a  given  market  were  to 
engage  in  traffic  management  for  purposes  that  went  beyond  security  of  the 
network. The only option left would be not to subscribe to an Internet service at 
all.  Given  that  the  Internet  has  become  an  essential  tool  both  for  work  and  for 
leisure purposes, not subscribing to an Internet service does not constitute a valid 

to offer premium-priced gaming services, where users' personal gaming traffic is prioritised through the 
network could be seen as a value added service. On the other hand, it is far from clear whether traffic 
management to throttle certain types of traffic, for example to downgrade P2P traffic could be deemed as 
such. 
29 See Recital 17 and Article 2(f) of the ePrivacy Directive.   
30 Adopted on 13 July 2011 (WP 187). 

13

76

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
alternative. The result would be that the individuals would have no real choice, i.e. 
they would not be able to freely give consent31.   

56. The  EDPS  considers  that  there  is  a  clear  need  for  the  Commission  and  national 
authorities to monitor the market, particularly to ascertain whether this scenario - 
i.e.  providers  linking  telecommunication  services  to  communication  monitoring  - 
becomes  mainstream.  Providers  should  offer  alternative  services,  including  an 
Internet  subscription  not  subject  to  traffic  management,  without  imposing  higher 
costs to individuals. 

57. Specific consent. The need for consent to be specific requires, in this case, that ISPs 
seek consent for the monitoring of traffic and communications data in a clear and 
distinctive  way.  According  to  the  Article  29  Working  Party,  ‘…  to  be  specific, 
consent  must  be  intelligible:  it  should  refer  clearly  and  precisely  to  the  scope  and 
the consequences of the data processing. It cannot apply to an open-ended set of 
processing activities. This means in other words that the context in which consent 
applies is limited.  ’ Specific consent is not likely to be obtained if the consent for 
the  inspection  of  traffic  and  communications  data  is  'bundled'  with  the  overall 
consent to subscribe for the service. Instead, specificity calls for the use of targeted 
means to obtain consent, such as a specific consent form or a separate box clearly 
dedicated to the purpose of monitoring (rather than inserting the information in the 
general  conditions  of  the  contract  and  requiring  signature  of  the  contract  as  it 
stand). 

58. Informed consent. For consent to be valid it must be informed. The need to provide 
adequate prior information derives not only from the ePrivacy and Data Protection 
Directives but also from Articles 20 and 21 of the Universal Service Directive, as 
amended  by  Directive  2009/13632.  The  need  for  information  and  consent  was 
expressly confirmed in Recital 28 of Directive 2009/136: ‘Users should in any case 
be  fully  informed  of  any  limiting  conditions  imposed  on  the  use  of  electronic 
the  service  and/or  network  provider.  Such 
communications  services  by 
information  should,  at  the  option  of  the  provider,  specify  the  type  of  content, 
application  or  service  concerned,  individual  applications  or  services,  or  both  ’.  It 
then specifies that: ‘Depending on the technology used and the type of limitation, 
such limitations may require user consent under Directive 2002/58/EC ’ 

59. Given  the  complexity  of  these  monitoring  techniques,  giving  meaningful  prior 
information  is  one  of  the  main  challenges  to  obtain  valid  consent.  Consumers 
should be informed in a way that they are able to understand the information that is 
being processed, how it is being used and the impact on the user experience and the 
level of privacy invasion related to the techniques.   

60. This means not only that the information itself must be clear and understandable to 
average  users,  but  also  that  the  information  is  given  directly  to  individuals  in  a 
conspicuous way so that they cannot overlook it.    

31 A similar case is PNR where it was discussed whether the consent of passengers to transfer the booking 
details to the US authorities was valid.  The Working Party considered that passengers’ consent cannot be 
given  freely  as  the  airlines  are  obliged  to  send  the  data  before  the  flight  departure,  and  passengers 
therefore  have  no  real  choice  if  they  wish  to  fly;  Opinion  6/2002  of  the  Article  29  Working  Party  on 
transmission of passenger manifest information and other data from airlines to the United States. 
32 Directive 2009/136/EC of 25 November 2009 amending Directive 2002/22/EC on universal service 
and users’ rights relating to electronic communications networks and services (see footnote 15). 

14

77

 
 
 
 
 
 
61. Indication  of  wishes.  Consent  under  the  applicable  legal  framework  also  requires  an 
affirmative action by the user to signify his/her agreement. Implied consent would 
not  meet  this  standard.  This  also  confirms  the  need  to  use  dedicated  means  to 
obtain consent enabling the ISP to inspect traffic and communications data in the 
context of applying traffic management policies. In its recent opinion on consent, 
the Article 29 Working Party stressed the need for granularity in obtaining consent 
with regard to the different elements that constitute the data processing.   

62. One could argue that if the parties involved in a communication do not want ISPs 
to intercept it in order to apply traffic management policies, they can always encrypt 
the communication. This approach can be considered as helpful in practical terms, 
however it requires some effort and technical knowledge and it cannot be deemed 
similar  to  a  free,  specific  and  informed  consent.  Also,  the  use  of  encryption 
techniques  do  not  keep  a  communication  fully  confidential  since  the  ISP  at  least 
will  be  able  to  access    the  IP  header  information  in  order  to  route  the 
communication and it also will be in a position to apply statistical analysis.  

63. According to Article 5(1) of the ePrivacy Directive, consent must be obtained from 
the  users  concerned.  In  many  cases,  the  user  will  be  the  same  person  as  the 
subscriber,  which  allows  consent  at  the  moment  of  subscription  of  the 
telecommunication  service.  In  other  cases,  including  those  where  more  than  one 
person may be involved, consent of the users concerned will need to be obtained 
separately. This may raise practical issues as developed below.   

Consent of all the users concerned  

64. Article 5(1) provides for user consent to legitimise the processing. Consent must be 
obtained from all users involved in a communication. The rationale behind this is that 
a  communication  usually  concerns  at  least  two  individuals  (the  sender  and  the 
recipient). For example, if an ISP scans IP payloads which refer to an email, they 
are  inspecting  information  that  relates  to  both  the  sender  and  the  receiver  of  the 
email.    

65. When monitoring and intercepting traffic and communications (for example, some 
web traffic), it may suffice for ISPs to obtain the consent of the user, that is, the 
subscriber.  This  is  because  the  other  party  to  the  communication,  in  this  case,  a 
website  visited,  may  not  be  considered  as  a  ‘user  concerned’33.  However,  the 
situation  may  be  more  complex  when  such  monitoring  involves  inspecting  the 
content of emails and thus, personal information of the email sender and recipient, 
who  may  not  both  have  a  contractual  relationship  with  the  same  ISP.  Indeed,  in 
these  cases,  the  ISP  would  be  processing  personal  data  (name,  email  address  and 
potentially  sensitive  content  data)  of  non-customers.  From  a  practical  perspective 
obtaining consent from such individuals may be more difficult, as it should be done 
on  a  case-by-case  basis  rather  than  at  the  occasion  of  the  conclusion  of  the 
telecommunication service. Nor would it be realistic to assume that the subscriber’s 
consent was also given on behalf of other users, as may often be the case in private 
households.   

33 Notwithstanding those cases where the web traffic involves the transfer of personal information such 
as,  for  example,  pictures  of  identifiable  natural  persons  posted  on  a  website.  The  processing  of  such 
information requires a legal basis, but would not be covered by Article 5(1) as those persons would not be 
‘users concerned’.   

15

78

 
 
 
 
 
 
66. In  this  context,  the  EDPS  considers  that  ISPs  should  abide  by  existing  legal 
requirements  and  implement  policies  which  do  not  involve  the  monitoring  and 
inspection  of  information.  This  is  all  the  more  essential  with  regard  to 
communication services which involve third parties who are not able to consent to 
the monitoring, particularly with regard to emails sent and received (this does not 
apply when the purpose is based on security considerations).  

67. At the same time, it should be noted that national law implementing Article 5(1) of 
the  ePrivacy  Directive  may  not  always  be  satisfactory  on  this  point,  and  that  in 
general there seems rather to be a need for better guidance as to the requirements 
of  the  ePrivacy  Directive  in  this  context.  The  EDPS  therefore  invites  the 
Commission  to  be  more  active  in  this  respect  and  take  an  initiative  which  might 
benefit  from  the  input  from  supervisory  authorities  assembled  in  the  Article  29 
Working Party and from other stakeholders. If necessary, a case should be brought 
before the Court of Justice in order to create full clarity about the meaning and the 
consequences of Article 5(1).   

V.3. Proportionality - data minimisation principle 

68. Article  6(c)  of  the  Data  Protection  Directive  lays  down  the  proportionality 
principle34, which applies to ISPs, as they are data controllers in the meaning of this 
directive, when they engage in monitoring and filtering. 

69. Pursuant to that principle, personal data may be processed only insofar as they are 
‘adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the purposes for which they are 
collected  and/or  further  processed’.  The  application  of  this  principle  entails  the 
need  to  make  an  assessment  as  to  whether  the  means  employed  for  the  data 
processing and the types of personal data used are suitable and reasonably likely to 
achieve  their  objectives.  If  the  conclusion  is  that  more  data  is  collected  than 
necessary, then, the principle is not met. 

70. The  conformity  with  the  proportionality  principle  of  certain  types  of  inspection 
technique  must  be  assessed  on  a  case  by  case  basis.  It  is  not  possible  to  reach 
conclusions in abstracto. However, it is possible to point at various concrete aspects 
that should be evaluated in assessing compliance with the proportionality principle.   

71. The amount of information processed. Surveillance of communications of ISP customers 
at the deepest possible levels will in most of the cases be excessive and illegal. The 
fact that this may be done by means that are not apparent to individuals and that it 
may be difficult for them to understand what is happening increases the impact on 
their  privacy.  ISPs  should  assess  which  less  intrusive  means  may  be  available  to 
achieve the result required. For example, can monitoring of IP headers achieve the 
result  required,  in  place  of  engaging  in  deep  packet  inspection?  Even  when  using 
deep packet inspection, the identification of only certain protocols may deliver the 
necessary  information.  The  application  of  data  protection  safeguards,  including 
pseudo-anonymization, may also be relevant. The outcome of the assessment must 
confirm that the data processing is proportional.   

34As  outlined  above,  the  Data  Protection  Directive  applies  to  all  matters  concerning  protection  of 
fundamental rights and freedoms, which are not specifically covered by the ePrivacy Directive. 

16

79

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72. The effects of processing (directly linked to the purposes). Proportionality may be lacking in 
cases  where  ISPs  use  traffic  management  policies  excluding  access  to  certain 
services without allowing a fair share of the resulting benefit to users in return.   

73. It is important to recall that the proportionality principle continues to apply even if 
other mandatory legal requirements have been satisfied, including if an ISP has, for 
example, obtained consent from individuals to engage in content monitoring. This 
means that the data processing carried out through content monitoring may still be 
illegal if it violates the underlying fundamental principle of proportionality.  

V.4. 

 Security and organizational measures 

74. Article  4  of  the  ePrivacy  Directive  explicitly  requires  ISPs  to  take  technical  and 
organizational  measures  to  ensure  (i)  that  personal  data  is  only  accessed  by 
authorised personnel and for lawful purposes; (ii) protection of personal data from 
accidental or unlawful processing, and (iii) implementation of a security policy with 
respect  to  the  processing  of  personal  data.  It  also  enables  national  competent 
authorities to perform audits on these measures. 

75. In addition, pursuant to Article 4(3) and (2) of the ePrivacy Directive, ISPs are also 
obliged to notify respectively competent national authorities in the event of a data 
breach,  as  well  as  the  individuals  affected  in  case  that  the  disclosure  can  have 
adverse consequences for them.  

76. Processing  personal  information  included  in  communications  with  the  goal  of 
applying traffic management policies can give ISPs access to data that is even more 
sensitive that traffic data.  

77. Therefore,  the  security  policies  developed  by  ISPs  should  incorporate  specific 
safeguards  to  ensure  that  the  measures  taken  are  adequate  to  these  risks.  At  the 
same  time,  national  competent  authorities  auditing  these  measures  should  be 
particularly  demanding.  Finally,  it  should  be  ensured  that  effective  notification 
procedures  are  put  in  place  to  inform  data  subjects  whose  information  has  been 
compromised and who may thus be affected negatively. 

VI. 

SUGGESTIONS FOR POLICY AND LEGISLATIVE MEASURES    

78. Inspection techniques based on traffic data and inspection of IP payloads, i.e. the 
content of communications, may reveal users’ Internet activity: websites visited and 
activities on those sites, use of P2P applications, files downloaded, emails sent and 
received, from whom, on what subject and in which terms, etc. ISPs may want to 
use this information to prioritise some communications, such as video on demand, 
over others. They may want to use it to identify viruses, or to build profiles in order 
to  serve  behavioural  advertising.  These  actions  interfere  with  the  right  to  the 
confidentiality of communications.   

79. Depending  on  the  techniques  used  and  on  the  specifics  of  the  case,  the  privacy 
implications  will  increase.  The  deeper  the  interception  and  analysis  of  the 
information  collected,  the  greater  the  conflict  with  the  principle  of  confidentiality 
of  communications.  The  purposes  for  which  the  monitoring  takes  place  and  the 
data  protection  safeguards  that  have  been  applied  are  also  key  elements  to 

17

80

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
determine the degree of intrusion into the privacy and personal data of individuals. 
Blocking  and  monitoring  for  purposes  of  fighting  malware,  with  strict  limitations 
on  the  retention  and  use  of  the  data  inspected,  cannot  be  compared  to  situations 
where  the  information  is  logged  to  build  individual  profiles  to  serve  behavioural 
ads.   

80.

In principle, the EDPS considers that the existing EU privacy and data protection 
framework, if properly interpreted, applied and enforced, would be appropriate to 
guarantee that the right to confidentiality is upheld and overall that the protection 
of the privacy and data protection of individuals is not jeopardised35. ISPs should 
not  use  such  mechanisms  unless  they  have  properly  applied  the  legal  framework.  
More  particularly,  the  relevant  elements  of  the  framework  that  ISPs  should 
consider and respect include the following: 





ISPs can apply traffic management policies intending to provide security of 
the service, delivering the service, including limiting congestion, pursuant to 
Article 4 and 6 of the ePrivacy Directive. 

ISPs  need  another  specific  legal  ground,  and  possibly  users'  consent,  to 
apply traffic management policies which entail processing of traffic and/or 
communication data for purposes other than the above. For example, users' 
informed consent is necessary to monitor and filter the communications of 
individuals  for  the  purposes  of  limiting  (or  allowing)  access  to  certain 
applications and services such as P2P or VoIP.   

 Consent must be free, explicit and informed. It should be indicated through 
an affirmative action. These requirements put strong emphasis on the need 
to step up the efforts to ensure that individuals are properly informed, in a 
way  that  is  direct,  understandable  and  specific  so  that  they  can  assess  the 
effects of the practices and ultimately make an informed decision. Given the 
complexity of these techniques, giving meaningful prior information to users 
is one of the main challenges to obtain valid consent. Besides, there should 
be  no  detrimental  consequences  (including  financial  costs)  towards  users 
who do not consent to any monitoring.    

 The proportionality principle plays a crucial role when ISPs engage in traffic 
management  policies,  whatever  the  legal  ground  for  processing  and  the 
purpose:  delivering  the  service,  avoiding  congestion  or  providing  targeted 
subscriptions  with  or  without  access  to  certain  services  and  applications.  
This principle limits ISPs ability to engage in monitoring of the content of 
individual's communications that entail processing of excessive information 
or  accruing  benefits  for  ISPs  only.  What  can  logistically  be  performed  by 
ISPs  will  depend  on  the  level  of  intrusion  of  the  techniques,  the  results 
required  (for  which  they  may  accrue  benefits)  and  the  specific  privacy  and 
data protection safeguards applied. Prior to deploying inspection techniques, 
ISPs  must  engage  in  an  assessment  of  whether  these  comply  with  the 
proportionality principle.   

35 This is without prejudice to the need for changes in the law based on other considerations, particularly 
in the context of the general review of the EU legal framework for data protection, with a view to making 
it more effective in the light of new technologies and globalisation. 

18

81

 
 
 
 
 
 
81. While  currently  the  legal  framework  includes  relevant  conditions  and  safeguards, 
there  is  a  need to  pay  particular attention as to whether ISPs effectively meet the 
legal requirements, whether they provide the necessary information for consumers 
to  make  meaningful  choices,  and  whether  they  observe  the  proportionality 
principle.  At  national  level,  the  authorities  competent  for  the  above  include  the 
national telecommunication authorities on the one hand, and on the other, national 
data protection authorities. At EU level, relevant EU-level bodies include BEREC. 
The EDPS may also be able to play a role in this context.   

82. In addition to monitoring the present level of compliance, given the relative novelty 
of the possibility of massive, real-time inspection of communications, some aspects 
related  to  the  application  of  the  framework  that  have  been  discussed  in  this 
Opinion require further more in-depth analysis and ulterior clarification. Guidance 
particularly relevant in several areas includes: 

 Determining  the  inspection  practices  that  are  legitimate  to  ensure  the 
smooth  flow  of  traffic  which  may  not  require  users'  consent,  such  as,  for 
example,  the  fight  against  spam.  In  addition  to  the  intrusiveness  of  the 
monitoring applied, aspects such as, for example, the level of disturbance to 
the smooth flow of traffic that would otherwise occur, are relevant.  

 Determining  which  inspection  techniques  can  be  carried  out  for  security 

purposes, which may not require users' consent.   

 Determining  when  monitoring  requires  individual's  consent,  notably  the 
consent of all the users concerned, and the permissible technical parameters 
to  ensure  that  the  inspection  technique  does  not  entail  processing  of  data 
that is not proportionate vis-à-vis its intended purposes.      

 Furthermore in the three cases above, guidance may be needed regarding the 
application  of the necessary data protection safeguards  (purpose limitation, 
security, etc).   

83. Given  that  the  competences  in  this  field  are  both  national  and  EU,  the  EDPS 
considers  that  sharing  views  and  experiences  in  order  to  find  harmonised 
approaches  to  the  above  is  essential.  To  achieve  that,  the  EDPS  suggest  the 
creation  of  a  platform  or  an  expert  group  which  should  gather  together 
representatives of national regulatory authorities, the Article 29 Working Party, the 
EDPS and BEREC. The first goal of this platform would be to develop guidance, 
at  least  on  the  items  identified  above,  in  order  to  ensure  solid  and  harmonised 
approaches  and  the  same  playing  field.  The  EDPS  calls  upon  the  Commission  to 
organise this initiative.   

84. Last  but  not  least,  both  national  authorities  as  well  as  their  EU  counterparts, 
including  BEREC  and  the  EU  Commission  must  pay  close  attention  to  market 
developments  in  this  field.  From  a  data  protection  and  privacy  perspective,  the 
scenario  where  ISPs  engage  on  a  routine  basis  in  traffic  management  policies 
offering subscriptions based on filtering access to content and applications, would 
be highly problematic. If this were ever to happen, legislation would need to be put 
in place to address this situation.   

19

82

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VII. CONCLUSIONS  

85.  ISPs'  increasing  reliance  on  monitoring  and  inspection  techniques  impinges  upon 
the neutrality of the Internet and the confidentiality of communications. This raises 
serious issues relating to the protection of users’ privacy and personal data. 

86.  While the Commission’s Communication on the open internet and net neutrality in 
Europe briefly touches on these issues, the EDPS feels that more should be done 
in order to come to a satisfactory policy on the way forward. In this Opinion he has 
therefore contributed to the ongoing policy debate on net neutrality, particularly on 
aspects related to data protection and privacy.  

87.  The  EDPS  considers  that  there  is  a  need  for  national  authorities  and  BEREC  to 
monitor  the  market  situation.  This  monitoring  should  result  in  a  clear  picture 
describing whether the market is evolving towards massive, real-time inspection of 
communications and issues related to complying with the legal framework. 

88.  Monitoring  of  the  market  should  not  go  without  further  analysis  of  the  effects  of 
new  practices  in  relation  to  data  protection  and  privacy  on  the  Internet.  This 
Opinion  outlines  some  areas  that  would  benefit  from  clarification.  While  EU 
agencies and bodies such as BEREC, the Article 29 Working Party and the EDPS 
may be in a good position to clarify the conditions of application of the framework, 
the  EDPS  considers  that  the  Commission  has  a  duty  to  coordinate  and  steer  the 
debate. Therefore, he calls upon the Commission to take an initiative involving all 
those  stakeholders  in  a  platform  or  a  working  group,  with  this  goal.  Among  the 
issues needing further analysis, the following points should be addressed: 

 Determining  the  inspection  practices  that  are  legitimate  to  ensure  the 
smooth flow of traffic and which can be carried out for security purposes;  

 Determining  when  monitoring  requires  individual's  consent,  notably  the 
consent of all the users concerned, and the permissible technical parameters 
to  ensure  that  the  inspection  technique  does  not  entail  processing  of  data 
that is not proportionate vis-à-vis its intended purpose.    



In the cases above, guidance may be needed regarding the application of the 
necessary data protection saf eguards (purpose limitation, security, etc.).   

89.  Depending on these findings, additional legislative measures may be necessary. In 
such  a  case,  the  Commission  should  put  forward  policy  measures  aiming  at 
strengthening  the  legal  framework  and  ensuring  legal  certainty.  New  measures 
should clarify the practical consequences of the net neutrality principle, as this has 
already been done in some Member States, and ensure that users can exercise a real 
choice, notably by forcing ISPs to offer non-monitored connections.  

Done in Brussels, 7 October 2011 

(signed) 

Peter HUSTINX 
European Data Protection Supervisor

20

83

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Opinion of the European Data Protection Supervisor

on the Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, 
the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions - "A 
comprehensive approach on personal data protection in the European Union"

1

85

 
 
Table of Content 

A. GENERAL PART 
1. Introduction 

1.1. A first and general assessment 
1.2. Aim of the opinion 
1.3. The building blocks of this opinion 

(§§ 1-12) 
(§§ 1-6) 
(§§ 7-8) 
(§§ 9-12) 
(§§ 13-17) 
(§§ 18-42) 
3.1. Data protection fosters trust and must support other (public) interests (§§ 18-24) 
(§§ 25-42) 
3.2. Consequences for the legal framework on data protection  

2. Context 
3. Main perspectives   

B. ELEMENTS OF A NEW FRAMEWORK  
4. Comprehensive approach   
5. Further harmonisation and simplification 
5.1. The need for harmonisation 
5.2. Reducing the margin of manoeuvre in the implementation 
5.3. Areas for further harmonisation   
5.4. Simplification of the notification system   
5.5. A Regulation, not a Directive 

6. Strengthening the rights of individuals  

6.1. The need for strengthening the rights 
6.2. Increasing transparency   
6.3. Support for an obligation to report security breaches  
6.4. Reinforcing consent 
6.5. Data portability and the right to be forgotten 
6.6. Processing of personal data related to children  
6.7. Collective redress mechanisms    

7. Strengthening the role of organisations/controllers  

7.1. General 
7.2. Reinforcing data controllers' accountability 
7.3. Privacy by design  
7.4. Certification services 

8. Globalisation and applicable law   

8.1. A clear need for more consistent protection
8.2. Investing in international rules 
8.3. Clarifying applicable law criteria 
8.4. Streamlining mechanisms for data flows  

9. The Area of police and justice  

9.1. The general framework    
9.2. Additional specific rules for police and justice 
9.3. Sector specific data protection regimes   

10. DPAs and the Cooperation between DPAs

(§§ 43-48) 
(§§ 49-67) 
(§§ 49-51) 
(§§ 52-53) 
(§§ 54-59) 
(§§ 60-63) 
(§§ 64-67) 
(§§ 68-98) 
(§§ 68-70) 
(§§ 71-74) 
(§§ 75-77) 
(§§ 78-82) 
(§§ 83-91) 
(§§ 92-94) 
(§§ 95-98) 
(§§ 99-117)
(§§ 99-100) 
          (§§ 101-107) 
          (§§ 108-115) 
          (§§ 116-117) 
          (§§ 118-127) 
                   (§ 118) 
          (§§ 119-121) 
          (§§ 122-125) 
          (§§ 126-127) 
          (§§ 128-136) 
          (§§ 128-130) 
          (§§ 131-133) 
          (§§ 134-136) 
          (§§ 137-160) 
          (§§ 137-140) 
          (§§ 141-144) 
          (§§ 145-146) 
          (§§ 147-151) 
          (§§ 152-155) 

10.1. Reinforcing the role of DPAs 
10.2. Strengthening the role of the Working Party  
10.3. The advisory role of the Working Party  
10.4. Coordinated enforcement by the Working Party 
10.5. Cooperation between the EDPS and the Working Party 
10.6. Cooperation between the EDPS and the DPAs in supervision on EU systems 

C. HOW TO IMPROVE APPLICATION OF PRESENT FRAMEWORK?  
11. The short term 
D. CONCLUSIONS 

          (§§ 161-166) 

          (§§ 156-160) 

2

86

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Opinion of the European Data Protection Supervisor

on the Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, 
the  Economic  and  Social  Committee  and  the  Committee  of  the  Regions  -  "A 
comprehensive approach on personal data protection in the European Union" 

THE EUROPEAN DATA PROTECTION SUPERVISOR, 

Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular its 
Article 16, 

Having regard to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, and in particular 
its Articles 7 and 8, 

Having  regard  to  Directive  95/46/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  24 
October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data 
and on the free movement of such data1, 

Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council 
of  18  December  2000  on  the  protection  of  individuals  with  regard  to  the  processing  of 
personal  data  by  the  Community  institutions  and  bodies  and  on  the  free  movement  of  such 
data2, and in particular its Article 41, 

HAS ADOPTED THE FOLLOWING OPINION 

A. GENERAL PART  

1. Introduction

1.1. A first and general assessment 

1. On  4  November  2010,  the  Commission  adopted  a  Communication  entitled  "A 
comprehensive  approach  on  personal  data  protection  in  the  European  Union"  (the 
"Communication")3.  The  Communication  was  sent  to  the  EDPS  for  consultation.  The 
EDPS  welcomes  the  fact  that  he  was  consulted  by  the  Commission  in  accordance  with 
Article  41  of  Regulation  (EC)  No.  45/2001.  Already  before  the  adoption  of  the 
Communication the EDPS was given the possibility to give informal comments. Some of 
these comments have been taken into account in the final version of the document. 

2. The Communication intends to lay down the Commission's approach for the review of the 
EU legal system for the protection of personal data in all areas of the Union’s activities, 

1  
2  
3     

OJ 1995, L 281/31. 
OJ 2001, L 8/1. 
COM (2010) 609 final.  

3

87

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
taking  account,  in  particular,  of  the  challenges  resulting  from  globalisation  and  new 
technologies.4 

3. The EDPS welcomes the Communication in general, as he is convinced that a review of 
the present legal framework for data protection in the EU is necessary, in order to ensure 
effective protection in a further developing information society. Already in his Opinion of 
25 July 2007 on the Implementation of the Data Protection Directive5 he concluded that in 
the longer term, changes of Directive 95/46/EC seem unavoidable.  

4. The Communication represents an important step towards such a legislative change which 
in turn would be the most important development in the area of EU data protection since 
the adoption of Directive 95/46/EC which is generally considered as the main cornerstone 
of data protection within the European Union (and wider within the European Economic 
Area).  

5. The Communication gives the right framework for a well targeted review, also because it 
identifies - generally spoken - the main issues and challenges. The EDPS shares the view 
of  the  Commission  that  a  strong  system  of  data  protection  will  still  be  needed  in  the 
future, based on the notion that existing general principles of data protection are still valid 
in  a  society  which  undergoes  fundamental  changes  due  to  rapid  technological 
developments  and  globalisation.  This 
legislative 
arrangements.  

reviewing  existing 

requires 

6. The Communication rightly emphasises that the challenges are enormous. The EDPS fully 
shares  this  statement  and  underlines  the  consequence  that  the  proposed  solutions  should 
be correspondingly ambitious and should enhance the effectiveness of the protection.  

1.2. Aim of the opinion 

7. This opinion assesses the proposed solutions in the Communication on the basis of these 
two criteria: ambition and effectiveness. Its perspective is positive in general. The EDPS 
supports the Communication, but is at the same time critical on aspects where in his view 
more ambition would lead to a more effective system.  

8. The  EDPS  aims  to  contribute  with  this  opinion  to  the  further  development  of  the  legal 
framework on data protection. He looks forward to the Proposal of the Commission which 
is expected by mid 2011 and hopes that his suggestions will be taken into account in the 
wording of this proposal. He also notes that the Communication seems to exclude certain 
areas, such as data processing by EU institutions and bodies, from the general instrument. 
If the Commission would indeed decide to leave out certain areas at this stage – which the 
EDPS  would  regret  -  he  urges  the  Commission  to  commit  itself  to  realise  a  fully 
comprehensive architecture within a short and specified timeframe. 

1.3. The building blocks of this opinion 

9. This opinion does not stand alone. It is based on earlier positions taken by the EDPS and 
by the European data protection authorities on various occasions. In particular, it must be 
underlined  that  in  the  already  mentioned  EDPS  Opinion  of  25  July  2007  some  main 

4     
5  

See p. 5 of the Communication, first paragraph.   
EDPS  Opinion  of  25  July  2007  on  the  Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the  European  Parliament  and  the 
Council on the follow-up of the Work Programme for better implementation of the Data Protection Directive, OJ C 
255, 27.10.2007, p. 1. 

4

88

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
elements for future change were identified and developed.6 It is also based on discussions 
with  other  stakeholders  in  the  areas  of  privacy  and  data  protection.  Their  contributions 
offered  a  very  useful  background  for  both  the  Communication  and  this  opinion.  In  this 
regard,  it  can  be  concluded  that  there  exists  a  level  of  synergy  on  how  to  improve 
effectiveness of data protection. 

10. Another  important  building  block  of  this  Opinion  is  the  document  called  'The  Future  of 
Privacy',  the  Joint  contribution  of  the  Article  29  Data  Protection  Working  Party  and  the 
Working Party on Police and Justice to the Consultation launched by the Commission in 
2009 (the "WP document on the Future of Privacy").7  

11. More  recently,  at  a  Press  Conference  on  15  November  2010,  the  EDPS  gave  his  first 
reactions on the present Communication. This opinion elaborates the more general views 
brought forward during this Press Conference.8  

12. Finally,  this  Opinion  profits  from  a  number  of  earlier  EDPS  Opinions,  as  well  as  from 
documents of the Article 29 Data Protection Working Party. References to those opinions 
and documents can be found in various places of this opinion, where relevant.  

2. Context 

13. The  review  of  data  protection  rules  occurs  at  a  crucial  historical  moment.  The 
Communication describes the context extensively and in a convincing way. Based on this 
description  the  EDPS  identifies  the  four  main  drivers  determining  the  environment  in 
which the review process takes place. 

14. The first driver is technological development. Today's technology is not the same as when 
Directive  95/46  was  conceived  and  adopted.  Technological  phenomena  like  cloud 
computing, behavioural advertising, social networks, road toll collecting and geo-location 
devices  profoundly  changed  the  way  in  which  data  are  processed  and  pose  enormous 
challenges  for  data  protection.  A  review  of  European  data  protection  rules  will  have  to 
address these challenges effectively. 

15. The  second  driver  is  globalisation.  The  progressive  abolition  of  trade  barriers  has  given 
businesses  an  increasing  worldwide  dimension.  Cross  border  data  processing  and 
international transfers have tremendously increased over the past years. Furthermore, data 
processing has become ubiquitous due to Information and Communication Technologies: 
internet and cloud computing allowed delocalised processing of large quantities of data on 
a worldwide scale. The last decade also witnessed an increase in international police and 
judicial  activities  to  fight  terrorism  and  other  forms  of  international  organised  crime, 
supported  by  an  enormous  exchange  of  information  for  law  enforcement  purposes.  All 
this  calls  for  a  serious  consideration  of  how  personal  data  protection  can  be  ensured 

6  

7  

8  

In  particular  (see  point  77  of  the  opinion):  no  need  to  change  existing  principles,  but  a  clear  need  for  other 
administrative arrangements; the wide scope of data protection law applicable to all use of personal data should not 
change; data protection law should allow a balanced approach in concrete cases and should also allow data protection 
authorities to set priorities; the system should fully apply to the use of personal data for law enforcement purposes, 
although appropriate additional measures may be necessary to deal with special problems in this area.   
Document WP 168 (http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/docs/wpdocs/2009/wp168_en.pdf). Its main message 
is that a legislative change is a good opportunity to clarify some key rules and principles (e.g. consent, transparency), 
introduce some new principles (e.g. privacy by design, accountability), strengthen the effectiveness by modernising 
the  arrangements  (e.g.  by limiting  existing  notification  requirements)  and  include  all  into  one  comprehensive  legal 
framework (incl. police and judicial cooperation).  
at: 
The  Speaking  Points 
http://www.edps.europa.eu/EDPSWEB/webdav/site/mySite/shared/Documents/EDPS/Publications/Speeches/2010/10
-11-15_Press_conf_speaking_points_PHBG_EN.pdf.   

the  Press  Conference 

the  EDPS  website, 

available 

are 

for 

on 

5

89

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
effectively  in  the  globalised  world  without  substantially  hampering  international 
processing activities. 

16. The third driver is the Lisbon Treaty. The entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty marks a 
new era for data protection. Article 16 TFEU not only contains an individual right of the 
data  subject,  but  also  provides  a  direct  legal  basis  for  a  strong  EU-wide  data  protection 
law. Furthermore, the abolition of the pillar structure obliges the European Parliament and 
Council to provide for data protection in all areas of EU law. In other words, it allows for 
a comprehensive legal framework for data protection applicable to the private sector, the 
public  sector  in  the  Member  States  and  the  EU  institutions  and  bodies.  The  Stockholm 
Programme9 consistently states in this regard that the Union must secure a comprehensive 
strategy to protect data within the EU and in its relations with other countries.  

17. The  fourth  driver  is  represented  by  parallel  developments  taking  place  in  the  context  of 
international  organisations.  There  are  various  ongoing  debates  focussing  on  the 
modernisation  of  the  current  legal  instruments  for  data  protection.  It  is  important  to 
mention in this respect the current reflections undertaken in relation to the future revision  
of  Convention  108  of  the  Council  of  Europe10  and  of  the  OECD  Privacy  Guidelines.11 
Another  important  development  regards  the  adoption  of  international  standards  on  the 
protection  of  personal  data  and  privacy,  which  might  possibly  lead  to  the  adoption  of  a 
binding  global  instrument  on  data  protection.  All  these  initiatives  deserve  full  support. 
Their  common  goal  should  be  ensuring  effective  and  consistent  protection  in  a 
technologically driven and globalised environment. 

3. Main perspectives

3.1. Data protection fosters trust and must support other (public) interests 

18. A  strong  framework  for  data  protection  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  the  importance 
given to data protection under the Lisbon Treaty, in particular in Article 8 of the Charter 
of the Fundamental Rights of the Union and Article 16 TFEU, as well as the strong link 
with Article 7 of the Charter.12  

19. However,  a  strong  framework  for  data  protection  also  serves  wider  public  and  private 
interests in an information society with ubiquitous data processing. Data protection fosters 
trust,  and  trust  is  an  essential  component  of  the  well  functioning  of  our  society.  It  is 
essential that arrangements for data protection are construed in a way that they - as much 
as possible - actively support rather than hamper other legitimate rights and interests.  

20. Important  examples  of  other  legitimate  interests  are  a  strong  European  economy,  the 

security of individuals, as well as the accountability of governments. 

21. Economic  development  in  the  EU  goes  hand  in  hand  with  the  introduction  and  the 
marketing of new technologies and services. In the information society the emergence and 
successful  deployment  of  information  and  communications  technologies  and  services 

9  

10  

11  

12  

The Stockholm Programme ─ An open and secure Europe serving and protecting citizens, OJ C115, 04/05/2010, p. 1-
38, at p. 10. 
Council of Europe Convention 108 for the protection of individuals with regard to automatic processing of personal 
data, ETS No 108, 28.1.1981. 
OECD  Guidelines  on  the  Protection  of  Privacy  and  Transborder  Flows  of  Personal  Data,  published  on 
www.oecd.org. 
This importance of data protection and the link with privacy in the Charter were underlined by the Court of Justice in 
its Judgment of 9 November 2010, Joint Cases C-92/09 and C-93/09, Schecke, not yet published in ECR.  

6

90

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
depends  on  trust.  If  people  do  not  trust  ICT,  these  technologies  are  likely  to  fail.13  And 
people will only trust ICT if their data are efficiently protected. Therefore, data protection 
should  be  an  integral  part  of  technologies  and  services.  A  strong  framework  for  data 
protection fosters the European economy, provided that this framework is not only strong 
but also tailored in the right way. Further harmonisation within the EU and minimisation 
of administrative burdens are in this perspective essential (see Chapter 5 of the opinion).  

22. Much  has  been  said  in  recent  years  about  the  need  for  balancing  privacy  and  security, 
especially in relation to instruments for data processing and exchange in the area of police 
and  judicial  cooperation.14  Data  protection  was  quite  often  wrongly  characterised  as  an 
obstacle  to  fully  protecting  the  physical  security  of  individuals15,  or  at  least  as  an 
unavoidable  condition  to  be  respected  by  law  enforcement  authorities.  However,  this  is 
not  the  whole  story.  A  strong  framework  of  data  protection  can  sharpen  and  strengthen 
security. On the basis of principles of data protection - when applied well - controllers are 
obliged to ensure that information is accurate and up to date, and that superfluous personal 
data that are not necessary for law enforcement are eliminated from the systems. One can 
equally  point  to  obligations  to  implement  technological  and  organisational  measures  to 
ensure the security of systems such as protecting systems against unauthorised disclosure 
or access, as developed in the field of data protection. 

23. Respecting  principles  of  data  protection  may  further  ensure  that  law  enforcement 
authorities  operate  under  the  rule  of  law  which  triggers  trust  in  their  behaviour  and 
therefore  fosters  in  a  wider  sense  trust  in  our  societies.  The  case  law  developed  under 
Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  of  Human  Rights  ensures  that  police  and  judicial 
authorities  can  process  all  data  relevant  for  their  work,  but  not  in  an  unlimited  manner. 
Data protection requires checks and balances (see on police and justice Chapter 9 of the 
opinion).  

24. In democratic societies governments are accountable for all their activities, including for 
their  use  of  personal  data  for  the  different  public  interests  they  serve.  This  varies  from 
publication  of  data  on  the  internet  for  reasons  of  transparency,  to  the  use  of  data  as  a 
support of policies in areas like public health, transport or taxation, or the surveillance of 
individuals  for  law  enforcement  purposes.  A  strong  data  protection  framework  allows 
governments  to  respect  their  responsibilities  and  to  be  accountable,  as  part  of  good 
governance.  

3.2. Consequences for the legal framework on data protection

3.2.1. Further harmonisation is needed 

25. The Communication rightly identified that one of the essential shortcomings of the current 
framework  is  that  it  leaves  too  much  discretion  to  the  Member  States  in  the 
implementation of the European provisions into national law. Lack of harmonisation has a 
number  of  negative  consequences  in  an  information  society  where  the  physical  borders 
between the Member States are less and less relevant (see Chapter 5 of the opinion).   

3.2.2. General principles of data protection still remain valid 

13  

14  

15  

See EDPS Opinion of 18 March 2010 on promoting trust in the Information Society by fostering data protection and 
privacy, OJ C 280, 16.10.2010, p. 1, para 113. 
See e.g. EDPS Opinion of 10 July 2009 on the Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and 
the Council on an Area of freedom, security and justice serving the citizen, OJ C 276, 17.09.2009, p. 8 
Security is a wider notion than physical security, but as an illustration of the arguments at stake it is here used in its 
more limited sense.  

7

91

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
26. A first and more formal reason why the general principles of data protection should and 
could  not  be  changed  is  of  a  legal  nature.  These  principles  are  laid  down  in  Council  of 
Europe  Convention  108  which  is  binding  on  all  the  Member  States.  This  Convention  is 
the  basis  of  data  protection  in  the  EU.  Moreover,  some  of  the  main  principles  are 
explicitly mentioned in Article 8 of the Charter of the Fundamental rights of the Union. 
Changing of these principles would thus require changing the Treaties.  

27. However,  this  is  not  the  full  story.  There  are  also  substantial  reasons  not  to  change  the 
general principles. The EDPS strongly believes that an information society can and should 
not function without an adequate protection of privacy and  personal data of individuals. 
When  more  information  is  being  processed,  also  better  protection  is  needed.  An 
information  society  where  abundant  amounts  of  information  about  everyone  are  being 
processed needs to be built on the concept of control by the individual, in order to allow 
him or her to act as an individual and to use his freedoms in a democratic society such as 
the freedoms of expression and speech. 

28. Furthermore,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  control  of  the  individual  without  obligations  on 
controllers to limit processing in accordance with principles of necessity, proportionality 
and  purpose  limitation.  It  is  equally  difficult  to  imagine  control  by  the  individual  in  the 
absence  of  recognised  data  subjects’  rights,  such  as  the  rights  of  access,  rectification, 
erasure or blocking of data. 

3.2.3. Fundamental rights perspective

29. The EDPS underlines that data protection is recognised as a fundamental right. This does 
not  mean  that  data  protection  should  always  prevail  over  other  important  rights  and 
interests in a democratic society, but it does have consequences for the nature and scope 
of  the  protection  that  must  be  given  under  an  EU  legal  framework,  so  as  to  ensure  that 
data protection requirements are always adequately taken into account.  

30. These main consequences can be defined as follows:  

 Protection must be effective. A legal framework must provide for instruments that 

make it feasible for individuals to exercise their rights in practice.   

 The framework must be stable over a long period.  
 Protection must be given under all circumstances and not depend on the political 

preferences in a certain timeframe.  

 Limitations  to  the  exercise  of  the  right  may  be  needed,  but  they  must  be 
exceptional,  duly  justified  and  never  affect  the  essential  elements  of  the  right 
itself.16 

The  EDPS  recommends  that  the  Commission  take  these  consequences  into  account 
when proposing legislative solutions.   

3.2.4. New legislative arrangements are needed

31. The  Communication  rightly  concentrates  on  the  need  for  strengthening  the  legislative 
arrangements for data protection. In this context, it makes sense to recall that in the WP 
document on the Future of Privacy17 the Data Protection Authorities emphasised the need 

16  

17  

See also the EDPS Opinion of 25 July 2007 on the Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament 
and the Council on the follow-up of the Work Programme for better implementation of the Data Protection Directive, 
para 17, which builds on the case law of the European Court of Human Rights and the Court of Justice.  
See footnote 7. 

8

92

 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
for stronger roles for the different actors in  the field of data protection, notably the data 
subjects, the data controllers and the supervisory authorities themselves. 

32. There  seems  to  be  a  wide  consensus  amongst  stakeholders  that  stronger  legislative 
arrangements - taking into account technological developments and globalisation - are the 
key  towards  ambitious  and  effective  data  protection  also  in  the  future.  As  already 
indicated in point 7, these are the criteria for the assessment of the EDPS of any proposed 
solutions.  

3.2.5. Comprehensiveness as a conditio sine qua non

33. As recalled in the Communication, Directive 95/46 applies to all personal data processing 
activities in Member States in both the public and the private sectors, with exception  of 
activities which fall outside the scope of former Community law18. Whilst this exception 
was needed under the former Treaty, this is no longer the case after the entry into force of 
the Lisbon Treaty. Moreover, the exception is contrary to - the text and in any event the 
spirit of - Article 16 TFEU. 

34. According  to  the  EDPS,  a  comprehensive  legal  instrument  for  data  protection  including 
police  and  judicial  cooperation  in  criminal  matters  must  be  seen  as  one  of  the  main 
improvements a new legal framework can bring. It is a conditio sine qua non for effective 
data protection in future.  

35. The EDPS highlights the following arguments in support of this statement: 

 The distinction between activities of the private sector and of the law enforcement 
sector  is  blurring.  Private  sector  entities  may  process  data  which  are  ultimately 
used for law enforcement purposes (example: PNR data19), whilst in other cases, 
they  are  required  to  keep  data  for  law  enforcement  purposes  (example:  Data 
Retention Directive20). 

 There  is  no  fundamental  difference  between  police  and  judicial  authorities  and 
other  authorities  delivering  law  enforcement  (taxation,  customs,  anti-fraud, 
immigration) subject to Directive 95/46. 

 As  accurately  described  in  the  Communication,  the  data  protection  legal 
instrument  currently  applicable  to  police  and  judicial  authorities  (Framework 
Decision 2008/97721) is inadequate. 

 Most  Member  States  have  implemented  Directive  95/46  and  Convention  108  in 
their national legislations, making them applicable also to their police and judicial 
authorities.  

36. Including  police  and  justice  in  the  general  legal  instrument  would  not  only  offer  more 
guarantees to citizens but also make the task of police authorities easier. Having to apply 
various sets of rules is cumbersome, needlessly time-consuming and stands in the way of 
international  cooperation  (see  further  Chapter  9  of  the  opinion).  This  also  argues  for 

18  

19  

20  

21  

This opinion will mainly focus on the former 3rd pillar (police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters), since the 
former 2nd pillar is not only a more complicated area of EU law (as also recognised by Article 16 TFEU and Article 
39 EU), but also to a lesser extent relevant for data processing.  
See e.g. Communication from the Commission on the global approach to transfers of Passenger Name Record (PNR) 
data to third countries, COM (2010) 492 final. 
Directive  2006/24/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  15  March  2006  on  the  retention  of  data 
generated or processed in connection with the provision of publicly available electronic communications services or 
of public communications networks and amending Directive 2002/58/EC (OJ 2006 L 105/ 54). 
Council  Framework  Decision  2008/977/JHA  of  27.11.2008  on  the  protection  of  personal  data  processed  in  the 
framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters (OJ 2008 L 350/60). 

9

93

 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
including the processing activities by national security services, in so far as this is possible 
under the current state of EU law.  

3.2.6. Technological neutrality

37. The  period  since  the  adoption  of  Directive  95/46  in  1995  can  be  characterised  as 
technologically turbulent. New technological developments and appliances are introduced 
on a frequent basis. In many cases this has led to fundamental changes in the way personal 
data  of  individuals  are  being  processed.  The  information  society  can  no  longer  be 
considered  as  a  parallel  environment  where  individuals  can  participate  on  a  voluntary 
basis, but has become an integrated part of our day to day lives. Just as an example, the 
concept of an Internet of things22 establishes links between physical  objects and on line 
information related to them.  

38. Technology will further develop. This has its consequences for the new legal framework. 
It must be effective for a greater number of years, and at the same time not hamper further 
technological developments. This requires that the legal arrangements are technologically 
neutral. However, the framework must also bring more legal certainty for companies and 
for individuals. They must understand what is expected from them and be able to exercise 
their rights. This requires that the legal arrangements are precise.  

39. According to the EDPS, a general legal instrument for data protection must be formulated 
in  a  technologically  neutral  way,  as  far  as  possible.  This  implies  that  the  rights  and 
obligations of the various actors are to be formulated in a general and neutral way so as to 
remain,  in  principle,  valid  and  enforceable  irrespective  of  the  technology  chosen  for 
processing  personal  data.  There  is  no  other  choice,  given  the  fast  pace  of  technology 
advancements  nowadays.  The  EDPS  suggests  introducing  new  'technologically  neutral' 
rights  on  top  of  the  existing  principles  of  data  protection  which  could  have  a  specific 
importance in the rapidly changing electronic environment (see mainly Chapters 6 and 7).  

3.2.7. Long term: Legal certainty for a longer period

40. Directive  95/46  has  been  the  central  piece  of  data  protection  in  the  EU  for  the  last  15 
years. It was implemented in the laws of the Member States and applied by the different 
actors.  Over  the  years  the  application  has  profited  from  practical  experiences  and  from 
further  guidance  given  by  the  Commission,  the  Data  Protection  Authorities  (on  the 
national  level  and  in  the  framework  of  the  Article  29  Working  Party)  and  national  and 
European Courts.  

41. It is good to emphasise that these developments need time and that - especially since we 
deal with a general framework giving effect to a fundamental right - this time is needed to 
create  legal  certainty  and  stability.  A  new  general  legal  instrument  needs  to  be  drafted 
with  the  ambition  that  it  will  be  able  to  create  legal  certainty  and  stability  for  a  longer 
period,  keeping  in  mind  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  predict  how  technology  and 
globalisation will further develop. In any event, the EDPS fully supports the aim to create 
legal  certainty  for  a  longer  period,  comparable  to  the  perspective  of  Directive  95/46.  In 
short, where technology develops at a fast pace, the law must be stable.  

3.2.8. Short term: Make better use of existing instruments

22  

As defined in 'Internet of things - An action plan for Europe', COM (2009) 278 Final.  

10

94

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
42. In  the  short  term,  it  is  essential  to  ensure  the  effectiveness  of  existing  legislative 
arrangements,  in  the  first  place  by  concentrating  on  enforcement,  at  national  and  at  EU 
level (see Chapter 11 of this opinion).  

B. ELEMENTS OF A NEW FRAMEWORK

4. Comprehensive approach 

43. The  EDPS  fully  supports  the  comprehensive  approach  on  data  protection  which  is  not 
only  the  title  but  also  the  point  of  departure  of  the  Communication  and  necessarily 
includes  the  extension  of  the  general  rules  on  data  protection  to  police  and  judicial 
cooperation in criminal matters.23 

44. However, he also notes that the Commission does not intend to include all data processing 
activities in this general legal instrument. In particular, data processing by EU institutions, 
bodies, offices and agencies will not be included. The Commission only states that it 'will 
assess  the  need  to  adapt  other  legal  instruments  to  the  new  general  data  protection 
framework'.  

45. The EDPS has a clear preference for including processing on the EU level in the general 
legal framework. He reminds that this was the original intention of the former Art 286 EC 
which mentioned data protection for the first time on the level of the Treaty. Article 286 
EC simply stated that legal instruments on the processing of personal data would apply to 
the institutions as well. More importantly, one legal text avoids the risk of discrepancies 
between provisions and would be most suitable for data exchange between the EU level 
and the public and private entities in the Member States. It would also avoid the risk that, 
after  modifying  Directive  95/46,  there  is  no  political  interest  any  more  in  amending 
Regulation 45/2001 or to give this modification sufficient priority to avoid discrepancies 
in dates of entry into force.  

46. The  EDPS  urges  the  Commission  -  in  case  it  would  conclude  that  the  inclusion  of 
processing  at  the  EU  level  in  the  general  legal  instrument  would  not  be  feasible  -  to 
commit  itself  to  propose  an  adaptation  of  Regulation  45/2001  (not  to  'assess  the  need') 
within the shortest possible timeframe and preferably by the end of 2011.   

47. It is equally important that the Commission ensures that other areas do not stay behind, in 

particular: 

 Data protection in the Common Foreign and Security Policy, on the basis of Article 

39 TEU.24 

 Sector specific data protection regimes for EU bodies such as Europol, Eurojust and 
for large scale information systems, in so far as they need to be adapted to the new 
legal instrument. 

 The ePrivacy Directive 2002/58, in so far as it needs to be adapted to the new legal 

instrument. 

48. Finally,  a  general  legal  instrument  for  data  protection  may  and  probably  must  be 
complemented by additional sectoral and specific regulations, for instance for police and 

23  
24  

See p. 14 of the Communication and Section 3.2.5 of this opinion.  
See  also  EDPS  Opinion  of  24  November  2010  on  the  Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the  European 
Parliament and the Council concerning the EU Counter-Terrorism Policy: main achievements and future challenges, 
point 31. 

11

95

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
judicial cooperation, but also in other areas.25 Where needed and in conformity with the 
principle  of  subsidiarity,  those  additional  regulations  should  be  adopted  at  EU  level. 
Member States may draw up additional rules, in specific areas where this is justified (see 
5.2).  

5: Further harmonisation and simplification 

5.1. The need for harmonisation 

49. Harmonisation 

is  of  paramount 

importance  for  EU  data  protection 

law.  The 
Communication  correctly  stressed  that  data  protection  has  a  strong  internal  market 
dimension, as it must ensure the free flow of personal data between Member States within 
the internal market. However, the level of harmonisation under the present Directive has 
been  judged  as  less  than  satisfactory.  The  Communication  recognises  that  this  is  one  of 
the main recurrent concerns of stakeholders. In particular, stakeholders stress the need to 
enhance legal certainty, reduce the administrative burden and ensure a level playing field 
for economic operators. As the Commission rightly notes, this is particularly the case for 
data  controllers  established  in  several  Member  States  and  obliged  to  comply  with  the 
(possibly diverging) requirements of national data protection laws.26  

50. Harmonisation  is  not  only  important  for  the  internal  market  but  also  with  a  view  to 
ensuring adequate data protection. Article 16 of the TFEU provides that “everyone” has 
the right to the protection of personal data concerning them. In order for this right to be 
effectively respected, an equivalent level of protection must be guaranteed throughout the 
EU.  The  WP  document  on  the  Future  of  Privacy  highlighted  that  several  provisions 
relating to data subjects' positions have not been implemented or interpreted uniformly in 
all  Member  States27.  In  a  globalised  and  interconnected  world,  these  divergences  could 
undermine or limit the protection of individuals.  

51. The EDPS believes that further and better harmonisation is one of the principal objectives 
of  the  review  process.  The  EDPS  welcomes  the  Commission’s  commitment  to  examine 
the  means  to  achieve  further  harmonisation  of  data  protection  at  EU  level. However, he 
notes with some surprise that the Communication does not put forward at this stage any 
concrete options. He therefore indicates himself a few areas where greater convergence is 
most urgent (see 5.3). Further harmonisation in these areas should not only be achieved by 
reducing the  margin  of  manoeuvre  for  national  law,  but  also  preventing  incorrect 
implementation by Member States (see also Chapter 11) and ensuring more consistent and 
coordinated enforcement (see also Chapter 10). 

5.2. Reducing the margin of manoeuvre in the implementation of the Directive 

52. The  Directive  contains  a  number  of  provisions  that  are  broadly  formulated  and  that 
therefore leave significant room for diverging implementation. Recital 9 of the Directive 
explicitly confirms that Member States are given a certain margin of manoeuvre and that, 
within this margin, disparities could arise in the implementation of the Directive. Several 
provisions have been implemented differently by Member States, including some crucial 
provisions28. This situation is not satisfactory and greater convergence should be sought.  

25  
26  
27  

See also WP document on the Future of Privacy (footnote 7), points 18-21.  
Communication, p. 10. 
See  WP  document  on  the  Future  of  Privacy  (footnote  7),  point  70.  The  document  refers  in  particular  to  liability 
provisions and the possibility to claim immaterial damages. 
28        Some divergent approaches also exist with regard to manual data. 

12

96

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
53. This does not mean that diversity should be excluded outright. In certain areas flexibility 
might  be  needed  in  order  to  preserve  justified  specificities,  important  public  interests  or 
the  institutional  autonomy  of  the  Member  States.  According  to  the  EDPS,  room  for 
divergence  between  the  Member  States  should  be  limited  in  particular  to  the  following 
specific situations:  

 Freedom  of  expression:  under  the  present  framework  (Article  9),  Member  States 
may provide for exemptions and derogations in relation to the processing of data 
carried  out  for  journalistic  purposes  or  for  the  purpose  of  artistic  or  literary 
expression. This flexibility appears well placed, subject of course to limits in the 
Charter and ECHR, given the different traditions and cultural differences that may 
exist in this field across Member States. However, this would not stand in the way 
of  a  possible  update  of  the  current  Article  9  in  the  light  of  developments  on  the 
Internet. 

 Specific public interests: under the present framework (Article 13), Member States 
may  adopt  legislative  measures  to  restrict  the  scope  of the  obligations  and  rights 
when  such  a  restriction  constitutes  a  necessary  measure  to  safeguard  important 
public  interest,  such  as  national  security,  defence,  public  security,  etc.  This 
competence  of  Member  States  remains  justified.  However,  where  possible,  the 
interpretation of the exceptions should be further harmonised (see Section 9.1). In 
addition, the current scope for exception to Article 6(1) appears unduly wide. 
 Legal  remedies,  sanctions  and  administrative  procedures:  a  European  framework 
should  determine  the  main  conditions,  but  under  the  current  state  of  EU  law  the 
determination of sanctions, legal remedies, procedural rules and the modalities of 
inspections as applicable at national level must be left to Member States. 

5.3. Areas for further harmonisation 

54. Definitions  (Article  2  of  Directive  95/46).  Definitions  are  the  cornerstone  of  the  legal 
system  and  should  be  uniformly  interpreted  in  all  Member  States,  with  no  margin  of 
implementation. Divergences have arisen under the present framework, like for example 
as to the notion of controller29. The EDPS suggests adding further items to the current list 
in  Article  2  in  order  to  provide  for  more  legal  certainty,  such  as  anonymous  data, 
pseudonymous data, judicial data, data transfer and data protection officer. 

55. Lawfulness  of  processing  (Article  5).  The  new  legal  instrument  should  be  as  precise  as 
possible with regard to the core elements determining the lawfulness of data processing. 
Article 5 of the Directive (as well as its Recital 9), mandating Member States to determine 
more precisely the conditions under which the processing is lawful, may thus be no longer 
needed in a future framework.  

56. Grounds  for  data  processing  (Article  7  and  8).  The  definition  of  the  conditions  for  data 
processing  is  an  essential  element  of  any  data  protection  legislation.  Member  States 
should  not  be  allowed  to  introduce  additional  or  modified  grounds  for  processing  or  to 
exclude  any.  The  possibility  of  derogations  should  be  excluded  or  limited  (particularly 
with regard to sensitive data30). In a new legal instrument the grounds for data processing 
should  be  clearly  formulated,  thereby  reducing  the  margin  of  appreciation  in  the 
implementation or enforcement. In particular, the notion of consent may need to be further 
specified (see Section 6.5). Moreover, the ground based on the legitimate interest of the 
data controller (Article 7, letter (f)), gives way to widely diverging interpretations, due to 

29  
30  

See WP 29 Opinion 1/2010 on the concepts of "controller" and "processor" (WP 169). 
Article  8(4)  and  (5)  currently  authorize  under  certain  conditions  Member  States  to  provide  for  further  derogations 
with regard to sensitive data. 

13

97

 
 
 
  
                                                 
 
its  flexible  nature.  Further  specification  is  needed.  Another  provision  that  possibly  must 
be specified is Article 8(2)(b), allowing the processing of sensitive data necessary for the 
purposes of carrying out the obligations and specific rights of the controller in the field of 
employment law31.  

57. Data subject rights (Articles 10-15). This is one of the areas in which not all elements of 
the Directive have been consistently implemented and interpreted by Member States. Data 
subjects' rights  are a central element for  an effective data protection. As a consequence, 
the room for manoeuvre should be substantially reduced. The EDPS recommends that the 
information provided to data subjects by the controller should be uniform across the EU.  

58. International transfers (Articles 25-26). This is an area which has given rise to widespread 
criticism  because  of  the  lack  of  a  uniform  practice  throughout  the  EU.  Stakeholders 
criticised that the Commission’s decisions on adequacy are interpreted and implemented 
very  differently  by  the  Member  States.  Binding  Corporate  Rules  (BCRs)  are  a  further 
element where the EDPS recommends further harmonisation (see Chapter 9). 

59. National  Data  Protection  Authorities  (Article  28).  National  DPAs  are  subject  to  widely 
diverging rules in the 27 Member States, particularly with regard to their status, resources 
and  powers.  Article  28  has  partly  contributed  to  this  divergence  because  of  its  lack  of 
precision32  and  should  be  further  specified,  in  conformity  with  the  Judgment  of  the 
European Court of Justice in Case C-518/0733 (see further Chapter 10).  

5.4. Simplification of the notification system 

60. Notification  requirements  (Article  18-21  of  Directive  95/46)  are  another  field  where 
Member States have so far been granted significant freedom. The Communication rightly 
recognises that a harmonised system would reduce costs as well as administrative burden 
for data controllers34.  

61. This is an area where simplification should be the main objective. The review of the data 
protection framework is a unique opportunity to further simplify and/or reduce the scope 
of  the  current  notification  requirements.  The  Communication  recognises  that  there  is  a 
general consensus amongst stakeholders that the current system of notifications is rather 
cumbersome and does not provide, in itself, added value for the protection of individuals' 
personal  data.35  The  EDPS  thus  welcomes  the  Commission’s  commitment  to  explore 
different possibilities for the simplification of the current notification system.  

62. In his view, the point of departure of this  simplification would be a shift from a system 
where notification is the rule, save as otherwise provided (i.e., "exemption system"), to a 
more  targeted  system.  The  exemption  system  proved  to  be  inefficient,  as  it  was 
implemented  in  an  inconsistent  way  across  Member  States.36  The  EDPS  suggests 
considering the following alternatives:  

31  

See,  in  this  regard,  the  Commission’s  First  Report  on  the  implementation  of  the  Data  Protection  Directive,  cited 
above, p. 14. 

32   WP document on the Future of Privacy, para 87. 
33  
34  
35  
36  

Case C-518/07, Commission v. Germany, not yet published in ECR.  
Communication, p. 10. 
Communication, p. 10 
Article  29  Working  Party  report  on  the  obligation  to  notify  the  national  supervisory  authorities,  the  best  use  of 
exceptions and simplifications and the role of the data protection officers in the European Union, WP 106, 2005, p. 7. 

14

98

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 Limit  the  obligation  to  notify  to  specific  kinds  of  processing  operations  entailing 
specific risks (these notifications could trigger further steps such as prior checking of 
the processing).  

 A  simple  registration  obligation  requiring  data  controllers  to  register  (as  opposed  to 

extensive registration of all data processing operations).  

In addition, a standard pan-European notification form could be introduced so as to ensure 
harmonised approaches with regard to the information requested.  

63. The  review  of  the  current  notification  system  should  be  without  prejudice  to  improving 
prior-checking  obligations  for  certain  processing  obligations  likely  to  present  specific 
risks (such as large scale information systems). The EDPS would favour the inclusion in 
the  new  legal  instrument  of  a  non-exhaustive  list  of  cases  where  such  prior-checking  is 
required.  Regulation  45/2001  on  the  protection  of  individuals  with  regard  to  the 
processing of personal data by EU institutions and bodies provides a useful model for this 
purpose37. 

5.5. A Regulation, not a Directive 

64. Finally, the EDPS believes that the review process is also an opportunity to reconsider the 
type  of  legal  instrument  for  data  protection.  A  Regulation,  a  single  instrument  which  is 
directly  applicable  in  the  Member  States,  is  the  most  effective  means  to  protect  the 
fundamental  right  to  data  protection  and  to  create  a  real  internal  market  where  personal 
data  can  move  freely  and  where  the  level  of  protection  is  equal  independently  of  the 
country or the sector where the data are processed.  

65. A  Regulation  would  reduce  room  for  contradictory  interpretations  and  for  unjustified 
differences in the implementation and the application of the law. It would also reduce the 
importance  of  determining  the  law  applicable  to  processing  operations  within  the  EU, 
which is one of the most controversial aspects of the present system (see Chapter 9).  

66. In the area of data protection a Regulation is all the more justified, since  

 Article 16 TFEU has upgraded the right to the protection of personal data  to  the 
Treaty level and envisages – or even mandates - a uniform level of protection of 
individual throughout the EU. 

 Data  processing  takes  place  in  an  electronic  environment  where  internal  borders 

between the Member States have become less relevant. 

67. The choice for a Regulation as a general instrument allows, where necessary, provisions 
directly addressed to Member States where flexibility is needed. It also does not influence 
the  competence  of  Member  States  to  adopt  additional  rules  for  data  protection,  where 
needed, in conformity with EU law.    

6. Strengthening the rights of individuals

6.1. The need for strengthening the rights 

68. The EDPS fully supports the Communication where it proposes strengthening individuals' 
rights, since existing legal instruments do not fully deliver the effective protection that is 
needed in an increasingly complex digitalized world.  

37  

See Article 27 of the Regulation, OJ 2001, L 8/1. 

15

99

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
69. On  the  one  hand,  the  development  of  a  digitalized  world  entails  a  sharp  growth  in  the 
collection,  use  and  further  transfer  of  personal  data  in  an  extremely  complex  and  non 
transparent way. Individuals are often not aware or do not understand how this happens, 
who collects their data, nor how to exercise control. An illustration of this phenomenon is 
the  monitoring  by  ad  network  providers  of  individuals'  web  browsing  activities,  using 
cookies or similar devices, for the purposes of targeted advertising. When users visit web 
sites, they do not expect that an out of sight third party logs such visits and creates users’ 
records, based on information revealing their life style, or what they like or dislike.  

70. On  the  other  hand,  the  development  stimulates  individuals  pro-actively  sharing  their 
personal information, for example on social networks. Increasingly young people are part 
of a social network and interact with their peers. It is doubtful whether (young) people, are 
aware of the breadth of their disclosure and of the long term effects of their actions.  

6.2. Increasing transparency

71. Transparency is of paramount importance in any data protection regime, not only because 
of  its  inherent  value  but  also  because  it  enables  other  data  protection  principles  to  be 
exercised.  Only  if  individuals  know  about  the  data  processing,  they  will  be  able  to 
exercise their rights.  

72. Several provisions in Directive 95/46 deal with transparency. Article 10 and 11 contain an 
obligation  to  give  information  to  individuals  about  the  collection  of  their  personal  data. 
Moreover, Article 12 recognizes the right to receive a copy of one's own personal data in 
an intelligible form (right of access). Article 15 recognises the right to have access to the 
logic on which automated decisions producing legal effects are made. Last but not least, 
Article 6.1(a) requiring the processing to be fair also entails a transparency requirement. 
Personal data cannot be processed for any hidden or secret reasons.  

73. The  Communication  suggests  adding  a  general  principle  of  transparency.  In  reaction  to 
this suggestion, the EDPS underlines that the notion of transparency is already an integral 
part of the present legal framework on data protection, albeit in an implicit way. This can 
be  deduced  from  the  various  provisions  dealing  with  transparency,  as  mentioned  in  the 
preceding  paragraph.  According  to  the  EDPS,  it  could  have  added  value  to  include  an 
explicit  principle  of  transparency,  either  or  not  linked  to  the  existing  provision  of  fair 
processing. This would increase legal certainty and also confirm that a controller should 
under all circumstances process personal data in a transparent way, not only on request or 
when a specific legal provision requires him to do so.  

74. However,  it  is  perhaps  more  important  to  reinforce  the  existing  provisions  dealing  with 
transparency, such as the existing Articles 10 and 11 of Directive 95/46. Those provisions 
specify  the  information  elements  that  must  be  provided,  but  are  not  precise  on  the 
modalities. More concretely, the EDPS suggests strengthening the existing provisions by:  
 A  requirement  for  a  controller  to  provide  information  on  data  processing  in  a 
manner which is easily accessible and easy  to understand, and in clear and plain 
language38.  The  information  should  be  clear,  conspicuous  and  prominent.  The 
provision could also encompass the obligation to ensure easy understanding of the 
information.  This  obligation  would  render  illegal  privacy  policies  which  are 
opaque or difficult to understand. 

38  

See Communication, p. 6. 

16

100

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 A requirement to render the information easily and directly to data subjects. The 
information should also be permanently accessible, and not after a very short time 
disappear  from  an  electronic  medium.  This  would  help  users  to  store  and 
reproduce information in the future, enabling further access.  

6.3. Support for an obligation to report security breaches

75. The EDPS supports the introduction of a provision on personal data breach notification in 
the  general  instrument,  which  extends  the  obligation  which  was  included  in  the  revised 
ePrivacy  Directive  for  certain  providers  to  all  data  controllers,  as  proposed  in  the 
Communication.  Under  the  revised  ePrivacy  Directive  the  obligation  only  applies  to 
providers of electronic communication services (providers of telephony (including VoIP) 
service and Internet access). Other data controllers are not covered by the obligation. The 
reasons  that  justify  the  obligation  fully  apply  to  data  controllers  other  than  providers  of 
electronic communication services.  

76. Security  breach  notification  serves  different  purposes  and  aims.  The  most  obvious  one, 
highlighted by the Communication, is to serve as an information tool to make individuals 
aware  of  the  risks  they  face  when  their  personal  data  are  compromised.  This  may  help 
them to take the necessary measures to mitigate such risks. For example, when alerted of 
breaches  affecting  their  financial  information,  individuals  will  be  able,  among  other 
things,  to  change  passwords  or  cancel  their  accounts.  In  addition,  security  breach 
notification contributes to the effective application of other principles and obligations in 
the  Directive.  For  example,  security  breach  notification  requirements  incentivize  data 
controllers to implement stronger security measures to prevent breaches. Security breach 
is also a tool to strengthen the responsibility of data controllers and, more in particular to 
enhance accountability (see Chapter 7). Finally, it serves as a tool for the enforcement by 
DPAs. The notification of a breach to DPAs may  lead to an investigation of  the  overall 
practices of a data controller. 

77. The  specific  rules  on  security  breach  in  the  amended  ePrivacy  Directive  were  broadly 
discussed  during  the  parliamentary  phase  of  the  legislative  framework  that  preceded  the 
adoption of the ePrivacy Directive. In this debate, the opinions of the Article 29 Working 
Party  and  EDPS  were  taken  into  consideration  together  with  the  views  of  other 
stakeholders.  The  rules  reflect  the  views  of  different  stakeholders.  They  represent  a 
balance of interests: while the criteria triggering the obligation to notify are, in principle, 
adequate  to  protect  individuals,  they  do  so  without  imposing  overly  cumbersome,  not 
useful requirements.

6.4. Reinforcing consent 

78. Article 7 of the Data Protection Directive lists six legal bases for processing personal data. 
Consent of the individual is one of them. A data controller is allowed to process personal 
data  to  the  extent  in  which  individuals  have  given  informed  consent  to  have  their  data 
collected and further processed.  

79. In  practice,  often  users  have  limited  control  in  relation  to  their  data,  particularly  in 
technological  environments.  One  of  the  methods  that  is  sometimes  used  is  implied 
consent, which is consent that has been inferred. It can be inferred from an action of the 
individual  (e.g.  the  action  consisting  in  using  a  web  site  is deemed  as  consenting  to  log 
user’s data for marketing purposes). It can also be inferred from silence or inaction (not 
un-clicking a ticked box is deemed to be consent).  

17

101

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
80. According to the Directive, for consent to be valid it must be informed, freely given and 
specific.  It  must  be  an  informed  indication  of  the  individuals’  wishes  by  which  he 
signifies  his  agreement  to  personal  data  relating  to  him  being  processed.  The  way  in 
which consent is given must be unambiguous.  

81. Consent that has been inferred by an action and more particularly by silence or inaction is 
often not an unambiguous consent. However, it is not always clear what constitutes true, 
unambiguous  consent.  Some  data  controllers  exploit  this  uncertainty  by  relying  on 
methods not suitable to deliver true, unambiguous consent.  

82. In light of the above, the EDPS supports the Commission on the need to clarify the limits 
of consent and to make sure that only consent that is construed in a solid way is taken as 
such. In this context, the EDPS suggests as follows39:  



It could be considered to broaden the situations where express consent is required, 
currently limited to sensitive data.  

 Adopt additional rules for consent in the on-line environment.  
 Adopt additional rules for consent to process data for secondary purposes (i.e., the 



processing is secondary to the main processing or not an obvious one).  
In  an  additional  legislative  instrument,  either  or  not  adopted  by  the  Commission 
under  Article  290  TFEU,  determine  the  type  of  consent  needed,  for  example,  to 
specify the level of consent on the processing of data from RFID tags on consumer 
products or on other specific techniques. 

6.5. Data portability and the right to be forgotten 

83. Data portability and the right to be forgotten are two connected concepts put forward by 
the  Communication  to  strengthen  data  subjects'  rights.  They  are  complementary  to  the 
principles already mentioned in the Directive, providing for a right for the data subject to 
object  to  the  further  processing  of  his/her  personal  data,  and  an  obligation  for  the  data 
controller to delete information as soon as it is no longer necessary for the purpose of the 
processing. 

84. These two new notions have mostly added value in an information society context, where 
more  and  more  data  are  automatically  stored  and  kept  for  indefinite  periods  of  time. 
Practice shows that, even if data are uploaded by the data subject himself, the degree of 
control he effectively has on his personal data is in practice very limited. This is all the 
more true in view of the gigantic memory the Internet represents today. Besides, from an 
economic  perspective,  it  is  more  costly  for  a  data  controller  to  delete  data  than  to  keep 
them stored. The exercise of the rights of the individual therefore goes against the natural 
economic trend. 

85. Both data portability and the right to be forgotten could contribute to shift the balance in 
favour of the data subject. The objective of data portability would be to give more control 
to the individual on his information, while the right to be forgotten would ensure that the 
information automatically disappears after a certain period of time, even if the data subject 
does not take action or is not even aware the data was ever stored.  

86. More specifically, data portability is understood as the users’ ability to change preference 
about  the  processing  of  their  data,  in  connection  in  particular  with  new  technology 

39  

The WP 29 is currently working on an opinion on 'consent'. This opinion might lead to additional suggestions.  

18

102

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
services.  Increasingly,  this  applies  to  services  that  entail  the  storage  of  information, 
including personal data, such as mobile telephony and, services that store pictures, emails, 
and other information, sometimes using cloud computing services.  

87. Individuals  must  easily  and  freely  be  able  to  change  the  provider  and  transfer  their 
personal  data  to  another  service  provider.  The  EDPS  considers  that  existing  rights  set 
forth in Directive 95/46 could be reinforced by including a portability right in particular in 
the context of information society services, to assist individuals in ensuring that providers 
and other relevant controllers give them access to their personal information while at the 
same time ensuring that the old providers or other controllers delete that information even 
if they would like to keep it for their own legitimate purposes.  

88. A newly codified "right to be forgotten" would ensure the deletion of personal data or the 
prohibition to further use them, without a necessary action of the data subject, but at the 
condition  that  this  data  has  been  already  stored  for  a  certain  amount  of  time.  The  data 
would in other words be attributed some sort of expiration date. This principle is already 
affirmed in national court cases or applied in specific sectors, for instance for police files, 
criminal  records  or  disciplinary  files:  under  some  national  laws,  information  about 
individuals is automatically deleted or not to be further used or disseminated, especially 
after a fixed period of time, without need for a prior analysis on a case by case basis. 

89. In  this  sense,  a  new  "right  to  be  forgotten"  should  be  connected  to  data  portability.  The 
added value it would bring is that it would not require efforts or insistence from the data 
subject to have his data deleted, as this should be done in an objective and automated way. 
Only in very specific circumstances, where a  specific need to keep data longer could be 
established,  could  a  data  controller  be  entitled  to  keep  the  data.  That  "right  to  be 
forgotten"  would  thus  reverse  the  burden  of  proof  from  the  individual  to  the  data 
controller and constitute a "privacy by default" setting for the processing of personal data.  

90. The  EDPS  considers  that  the  right  to  be  forgotten  could  prove  especially  useful  in  the 
context of information society services. An obligation to delete or not further disseminate 
information  after  a  fixed  period  of  time  makes  sense  especially  in  the  media  or  the 
internet,  and  notably  in  social  networks.  It  would  also  be  useful  as  far  as  terminal 
equipments  are  concerned:  data  stored  on  mobile  devices  or  computers  would  be 
automatically deleted or blocked after a fixed period of time, when they are no more in the 
possession of the individual. In that sense the right to be forgotten can be translated in a 
"privacy by design" obligation.  

91. In sum, the EDPS is of the opinion that data portability and the right to be forgotten are 
useful  concepts.  It  could  be  worthwhile  to  include  them  in  the  legal  instrument,  but 
probably limited to the electronic environment.  

6.6. Processing of personal data related to children 

92. Under Directive 95/46 there are no particular rules regarding the processing of children's 
personal  data.  This  does  not  recognise  the  need  for  a  specific  protection  of  children  in 
specific  circumstances,  because  of  their  vulnerability,  and  because  it  causes  legal 
uncertainty, particularly in the following areas:  





the  collection  of  children's  data  and  the  way  they  must  be  informed  about  the 
collection; 
the way children's consent is obtained. Because there are no specific rules on how 
to obtain children's consent and on the age under which children should be 

19

103

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considered as such, these subject are dealt with under national law, which differs 
from Member State to Member State40; 
the  way  and  conditions  under  which  children  or  their  legal  representatives  can 
exercise their rights under the Directive. 



93. The  EDPS  considers  that  children's  particular  interests  would  be  better  protected  if  the 
new  legal  instrument  contained  additional  provisions,  specifically  addressed  to  the 
collection  and  further  processing  of  children's  data.  Such  specific  provisions  would  also 
provide  legal  certainty  in  this  specific  area  and  they  would  be  to  the  benefit  of  data 
controllers who are currently exposed to different legal requirements.  

94. The EDPS suggests including the following provisions in the legal instrument: 

 A  requirement  for  information  to  be  adapted  to  children  insofar  as  this  would 
make it easier for children to understand what it means when data from them are 
collected.  

 Other  information  requirements  adapted  to  children,  on  the  manner  in  which  the 

information must be provided and possibly also on the content.  

 A specific provision protecting children against behavioural advertising. 
 The purpose limitation principle should be reinforced as far as children's data are 

concerned.  

 Some categories of data should never be collected from children.   
 An  age  threshold.  Below  such  threshold,  generally  speaking  information  from 
children should be collected only with explicit and verifiable parental consent.   
If parental consent is necessary, it would be necessary to establish rules on how to 
authenticate the age of the child, in other words, how to know that the child is a 
minor and how to verify parental consent. This is an area where the EU can draw 
inspiration from other countries such as the United States41. 



6.7. Collective redress mechanisms

95. Strengthening  the  substance  of  individuals'  rights  would  be  pointless,  in  the  absence  of 
effective  procedural  mechanisms  to  enforce  such  rights.  In  this  context,  the  EDPS 
recommends  the  introduction  in  the  EU  legislation  of  collective  redress  mechanisms  for 
breach of data protection rules. In particular, collective redress mechanisms empowering 
groups  of  citizens  to  combine  their  claims  in  a  single  action  might  constitute  a  very 
powerful tool to facilitate the enforcement of the data protection rules.42 This innovation 
is also supported by the Data Protection Authorities in the WP document on the Future of 
Privacy.  

96. In cases with smaller impact, it is unlikely that the victims of a breach of data protection 
rules  would  bring  individual  actions  against  the  controllers,  given  the  costs,  delays, 

40  

41  

42  

Consent  is  usually  linked  to  the  age  when  children  can  enter  into  contractual  obligations.  This  is  the  age  when 
children are supposed to have reached a certain level of maturity. For example, Spanish law requires parental consent 
to collect children data for children who are not yet 14 years old. Above this age, children will be deemed to be able 
to consent. In the United Kingdom, the Data protection Act does not refer to a particular age or threshold. However, 
the UK Data protection Authority has interpreted that children above 12 can provide consent. Conversely, children 
under 12 cannot provide consent and in order to obtain their personal data first it is necessary to obtain the permission 
of a parent or guardian.   
In  the  US,  COPPA  requires  operators  of  commercial  websites  or  online  services  directed  to  children  under  13  to 
obtain parental consent before collecting personal information and operators of commercial general audience websites 
to have actual knowledge that specific visitors are children.  
See also EDPS Opinion of 25 July 2007 on the Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament 
and the Council on the follow-up of the Work Programme for better implementation of the Data Protection Directive, 
OJ C 255, 27.10.2007, p. 10. 

20

104

  
 
 
 
                                                 
 
uncertainties,  risks  and  burdens  they  would  be  exposed  to.  These  difficulties  could  be 
overcome  or  substantially  alleviated  if  a  system  of  collective  redress  were  in  place, 
empowering the victims of breaches to bundle their individual claims in a single action. 
The  EDPS  would  also  favour  the  empowerment  of  qualified  entities,  such  as  consumer 
associations  or  public  bodies,  to  bring  actions  for  damages  on  behalf  of  victims  of  data 
protection breaches. These actions should be without prejudice to the right of data subject 
to bring individual actions. 

97. Not only are collective actions important for ensuring full compensation or other remedial 
action; they also perform indirectly a deterrence enhancing function. The risk of incurring 
expensive collective damages in such actions would multiply the controllers' incentives to 
effectively ensure compliance. In this regard, an enhanced private enforcement by means 
of collective redress mechanisms would complement public enforcement.  

98. The Communication does not take a position regarding this topic. The EDPS is aware of 
the ongoing debate at European level on the introduction of consumer collective redress. 
He is also conscious of the risk of excesses that these mechanisms may bring about on the 
basis of the experience in other legal systems. However, these factors do not constitute in 
his view sufficient arguments to reject or postpone their introduction in the data protection 
legislation, in light of the benefits that they would entail43. 

7. Strengthening the role of organisations/controllers 

7.1. General 

99. The EDPS is of the opinion that, in addition to reinforcing individuals' rights, a modern 
legal  instrument  for  data  protection  must  contain  the  necessary  tools  that  enhance  the 
responsibility  of  data  controllers.  More  particularly,  the  framework  must  contain 
incentives for data controllers in the private or public sector to pro-actively include data 
protection  measures  in  their  business  processes.  These  tools  would  in  the  first  place  be 
helpful because, as said before, technological developments resulted in a sharp growth in 
the collection, use and further transfer of personal data which heightens the risks for the 
privacy and protection of personal data of individuals which should be compensated in an 
effective way. In the second place, the current framework lacks - except in a few, well-
defined  provisions  (see  below)  -  such  tools  and  data  controllers  may  take  a  reactive 
approach  to  data  protection  and  privacy,  and  only  act  after  a  problem  has  arisen.  This 
approach is reflected in statistics that show poor compliance practices and data losses as 
recurring problems.  

100. According to the EDPS, the existing framework is not enough to protect personal data 
effectively under present and future conditions. The higher the risks, the higher the need 
to  implement  concrete  measures  that  protect  information  at  a  practical  level  and  deliver 
effective protection. Unless these pro-active measures are de facto implemented, mistakes, 
mishaps  and  negligence  are  likely  to  continue,  endangering  individuals'  privacy  in  this 
increasingly digital society. To achieve this, the EDPS proposes the following measures.  

7.2. Reinforcing data controllers' accountability

101.

The  EDPS  recommends  inserting  a  new  provision  in  the  legal  instrument  requiring 
data  controllers  to  implement  appropriate  and  effective  measures  to  put  into  effect  the 
principles and obligations of the legal instrument and demonstrate this on request. 

43  

Some national laws already provide for similar mechanisms. 

21

105

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
102.

This type of provision is not entirely new. Article 6 (2) of the Directive 95/46 refers to 
the  principles  relating  to  data  quality  and  mentions  that  “It  shall  be  for  the  controller  to 
ensure that paragraph 1 is complied with”. Equally, Article 17 (1) requires data controllers 
to  implement  measures,  of  both  a  technical  and  organisational  nature.  However,  these 
provisions  have  a  limited  scope.  Inserting  a  general  provision  on  accountability  would 
stimulate  controllers  to  put  into  place  proactive  measures  in  order  to  be  able  to  comply 
with all the elements of data protection law.  

103. A  provision  on  accountability  would  have  the  consequence  that  data  controllers  are 
required  to  put  in  place  internal  mechanisms  and  control  systems  ensuring  compliance 
with  the  principles  and  obligations  of  the  framework.  This  would  require,  for  example, 
involving  the  highest  management  in  data  protection  policies,  mapping  procedures  to 
ensure  proper  identification  of  all  data  processing  operations,  having  binding  data 
protection policies which should also be continually reviewed and updated to cover new 
data processing operations, complying with the principles of data quality, notice, security, 
access, etc. It would also require that controllers keep evidence to demonstrate compliance 
to  authorities  on  request.  Demonstrating  compliance  to  the  public  at  large  should,  in 
certain  cases,  also  be  made  mandatory.  This  could  be  done  for  instance,  by  requiring 
controllers  to  include  data  protection  in  public  (annual)  reports,  when  such  reports  are 
mandatory on other grounds.  

104. Obviously,  the  types  of  internal  and  external  measures  to  be  implemented  must  be 
appropriate and depend on the facts and circumstances of each particular case. It makes a 
difference  whether  a  controller  processes  a  few  hundred  customer  records  consisting 
merely of names and addresses or if he processes records of millions of patients, including 
their medical history. The same applies to the specific ways in which the effectiveness of 
the measures must be assessed. There is a need for scalability.  

105.

requirements  of  accountability  but  only 

The general comprehensive data protection legal  instrument should not lay down the 
its  essential  elements.  The 
specific 
Communication  foresees  certain  elements  to  reinforce  the  responsibility  of  data 
controllers, which are very welcome. More particularly, the EDPS fully supports making 
data  protection  officers  and  privacy  impact  assessments  mandatory,  under  certain 
threshold conditions.  

106. Additionally,  the  EDPS  recommends  delegating  powers  to  the  Commission  under 
Article  290  TFEU  to  supplement  the  basic  requirements  necessary  to  meet  the 
accountability  standard.  Using  these  powers  would  enhance  data  controllers'  legal 
certainty  and  harmonize  compliance  throughout  the  EU.  In  developing  such  specific 
instruments, the Article 29 Working Party and the EDPS should be consulted.  

107.

Finally,  the  concrete  accountability  measures  to  be  implemented  by  data  controllers 
could also  be imposed by data protection authorities in the context of  their enforcement 
powers. To do so, data protection authorities should be given new powers enabling them 
to  impose  remedial  measures  or  sanctions.  Examples  should  include  setting  up  internal 
compliance programs, to implement privacy by design in specific products and services, 
etc. Remedies should only be imposed in so far as they are appropriate, proportionate and 
effective to ensure compliance with applicable and enforceable legal standards.  

22

106

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.3. Privacy by design 

108.

Privacy by design refers to the integration of data protection and privacy from the very 
inception of new products, services and procedures that entail the processing of personal 
data.  According  to  the  EDPS  privacy  by  design  is  an  element  of  accountability. 
Accordingly,  data  controllers  would  also  be  required  to  demonstrate  that  they  had 
implemented  privacy  by  design,  where  appropriate.  Recently,  the  32nd  International 
Conference of Data Protection and Privacy Commissioners issued a resolution recognising 
privacy by design as an essential component of fundamental privacy protection.44  

109. Directive 95/46 contains some provisions encouraging  privacy  by design45,  but does 
not recognize such obligation explicitly. The EDPS is pleased with the Communication's 
endorsement  of  privacy  by  design  as  a  tool  towards  ensuring  compliance  with  the  data 
protection  rules.  He  suggests  including  a  binding  provision  setting  forth  a  "privacy  by 
design"  obligation,  which  could  build  on  the  wording  of  Recital  46  of  Directive  95/46. 
More  specifically,  the  provision  would  explicitly  require  data  controllers  to  implement 
technical  and  organization  measures,  both  at  the  time  of  the  design  of  the  processing 
system  and  at  the  time  of  the  processing  itself,  particularly  in  order  to  ensure  the 
protection of personal data and prevent any unauthorized processing.46    

110. On  the  basis  of  such  a  provision  data  controllers  would  be  required  -  inter  alia  -  to 
ensure  that  data  processing  systems  are  designed  to  process  as  little  personal  data  as 
possible,  to  implement  privacy  by  default  settings,  for  example  in  social  networks,  to 
keeping  individual's  profiles  private  from  others  by  default  and  to  implement  tools 
enabling users to better protect their personal data (e.g. access controls, encryption). 

111.

The advantages of a more explicit reference to privacy by design can be summarised 

as follows:  









It  would  highlight  the  importance  of  the  principle  per  se,  as  a  tool towards 
ensuring  that  processes,  products  and  services  are  designed  from  the  outset  with 
privacy in mind. 
It would reduce privacy abuses and it would minimize the unnecessary collection 
of data and empower individuals to exercise real choices as their personal data.  
It would avoid having to put "band aids" later on in an attempt to fix problems that 
may be difficult to repair if not impossible.  
it would also facilitate the effective application and enforcement of this principle 
by data protection authorities.  

112.

The combined effect of this obligation would result in a stronger demand for privacy 
by  design  products  and  services,  which  should  give  more  incentives  to  industry  to  meet 
such  demand.  It  should  be  considered,  on  top  of  that,  to  create  a  separate  obligation 
addressed to designers and manufacturers of new products and services with likely impact 

44  

45  

46  

Resolution  on  Privacy  by  Design,  adopted  by  the  32nd  International  Conference  of  Data  Protection  and  Privacy 
Commissioners, Jerusalem 27-29 October 2010. 
The Directive includes provisions which indirectly, in different situations, demand the implementation of privacy by 
design.  In  particular,  Article  17  requires  that  data  controllers  implement  appropriate  technical  and  organization 
measures  to  prevent  unlawful  data  processing.  The  ePrivacy  Directive  is  more  explicit.  Article  14.3  provides  that 
"Where  required,  measures  may  be  adopted  to  ensure  that  terminal  equipment  is  constructed  in  a  way  that  is 
compatible with the right of users to protect and control the use of their personal data, in accordance with Directive 
1999/5/EC  and  Council  Decision  87/95/EEC  of  22  December  1986  on  standardisation  in  the  field  of  information 
technology and communications)".  
Under the present framework, Recital 46 encourages controllers implementing such measures, but a recital does of 
course not have binding force.  

23

107

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
on data protection and privacy. The EDPS suggests including such a separate obligation 
which could further enable data controllers to comply with their own obligation.   

113.

The codification of privacy by design could be complemented by a provision setting 
forth  general  privacy  by  design  requirements  applicable  across  sectors,  products  and 
services,  such  as  for  example,  ensuring  user's  empowerment  measures,  to  be  adopted 
pursuant to the principle.  

114. Additionally,  the  EDPS  recommends  delegating  powers  to  the  Commission  under 
Article 290 TFEU to - where appropriate - supplement the basic requirements of privacy 
by  design  for  selected  products  and  services.  Using  these  powers  would  enhance  data 
controllers'  legal  certainty  and  harmonize  compliance  throughout  the  EU.  In  developing 
such  specific  instruments,  the  Article  29  Working  Party  and  the  EDPS  should  be 
consulted (see in the same way point 106 on accountability).  

115.

Finally, the data protection authorities should be given the power to impose remedial 
measures or sanctions, under similar restrictive conditions as already mentioned in point 
107, where controllers have clearly failed to take concrete steps in cases where this would 
be required. 

7.4. Certification services 

116.

The  Communication  recognizes  the  need  to  explore  the  creation  of  EU  certification 
schemes for privacy compliant products and  services. The EDPS fully supports this aim 
and suggests including a provision providing for their creation and possible effect across 
the EU, which may be further developed later on in additional legislation. The provision 
should complement the provisions on accountability and privacy by design

117. Voluntary  certification  schemes  would  enable  verification  that  a  data  controller  has 
put in place measures to comply with the legal instrument. Furthermore, data controllers - 
or even products or services - enjoying the benefit of a certification label are likely to gain 
a  competitive  advantage  over  others.  Such  schemes  would  also  help  data  protection 
authorities in their supervision and enforcement role.  

8. Globalisation and applicable law  

8.1. A clear need for more consistent protection 

118. As mentioned earlier in Chapter 2, the transfer of personal data beyond the EU borders 
has  exponentially  grown  as  a  consequence  of  the  development  of  new  technologies,  the 
role  of  multinational  companies  and  the  increased  influence  of  governments  in  the 
processing and sharing of personal data on an international scale. This is one of the main 
reasons justifying the revision of the current legal framework. Consequently, this is one of 
the areas where the EDPS asks for ambition and effectiveness, since there is a clear need 
for more consistent protection where data are processed outside the EU. 

8.2. Investing in international rules 

119. According to the EDPS more investment is needed in the development of international 
rules.  More  harmonisation  with  regard  to  the  level  of  protection  of  personal  data  across 
the world would considerably clarify the substance of the principles to be complied with, 
and the conditions for transfers of data. These global rules would need to reconcile the 

24

108

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 requirement  for  a  high  standard  of  data  protection  -  including  core  EU  data  protection 
elements - with regional specificities.  

120.

The  EDPS  supports  the  ambitious  work  done  so  far  in  the  framework  of  the 
International  Conference  of  Data  Protection  Commissioners  to  develop  and  disseminate 
the so called "Madrid standards", with a view to integrate them into a binding instrument 
and  possibly  initiate  an  intergovernmental  conference.47  He  calls  on  the  Commission  to 
take the necessary initiatives to facilitate the realisation of this objective.  

121.

In  the  view  of  the  EDPS  it  is  also  important  to  ensure  consistency  between  this 
initiative  for  international  standards,  the  current  review  of  the  EU  data  protection 
framework  and  other  developments  such  as  the  current  revision  of  the  OECD  Privacy 
Guidelines and of Convention 108 of the Council of Europe which is open to signature by 
third  countries  (see  also  point  17).  The  EDPS  considers  that  the  Commission  has  a 
specific  role  to  play  here,  in  specifying  how  it  will  promote  such  consistency  in  the 
negotiations in the OECD and the Council of Europe. 

8.3. Clarifying applicable law criteria 

122.

Since full consistency can not easily be achieved, there will - at least in the near future 
- remain some diversity between the laws within the EU and a fortiori beyond EU borders. 
The  EDPS  considers  that  a  new  legal  instrument  will  need  to  clarify  the  criteria 
determining applicable law, and to ensure streamlined mechanisms for data flows as well 
as accountability of actors involved in data flows. 

123.

In  the  first  place  the  legal  instrument  should  ensure  that  EU  law  is  applicable  when 
personal data are processed  outside the borders of the EU, but where there is a justified 
claim  of  applying  EU  law.  The  example  of  non  European  cloud  computing  services 
targeted  to  EU  residents  is  an  illustration  why  this  is  needed.  In  an  environment  where 
data are not physically stored and processed in a fixed location, where service providers 
and  users  located  in  different  countries  have  interfering  influence  on  data,  it  is  very 
difficult  to  identify  who  is  responsible  for  complying  with  which  data  protection 
principles. Guidance is being given, especially by data  protection authorities, on how  to 
interpret  and  apply  Directive  95/46  in  such  cases,  but  guidance  alone  is  not  enough  to 
ensure legal certainty in this new environment.  

124. Within the territory of the EU the need for more precision in the legal framework and 
a simplified criterion to determine the law applicable has been emphasised by the Article 
29 Working Party in a recent opinion.48  

125. According  to  the  EDPS,  the  preferred  option  would  be  to  lay  down  the  legal 
instrument in a Regulation which would lead to identical rules applicable in all Member 
States.  A  regulation  would  make  the  need  of  determining  applicable  law  less  important. 
This is one of the reasons why the EDPS strongly favours the adoption of a Regulation. 
However,  also  a  Regulation  could  allow  some  margin  of  manoeuvre  for  the  Member 
States. If some significant margin of manoeuvre is kept in the new instrument, the EDPS 
would  support  the  suggestion  from  the  Working  Party  for  a  shift  from  a  distributive 
application of different national laws to a centralised application of a single legislation in 
all  Member  States  where  a  controller  has  establishments.  He  also  pleads  for  more 

47      As  suggested  by  Resolution  on  International  Standards,  adopted  by  the  32nd  International  Conference  of  Data 

Protection and Privacy Commissioners, Jerusalem 27-29 October 2010. 
WP29 Opinion 8/2010 on applicable law, WP 179 

48  

25

109

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
cooperation  and  coordination  between  Data  Protection  Authorities  in  transnational  cases 
and complaints (see Chapter 10). 

8.4. Streamlining mechanisms for data flows 

126.

The need for consistency and for a high level benchmark must be taken into account 
not  only  with  a  view  to  global  data  protection  principles,  but  also  with  regard  to 
international  transfers.  The  EDPS  fully  supports  the  objective  of  the  Commission  to 
streamline current procedures for international data transfers and ensure a more uniform 
and coherent approach vis-à-vis third countries and international organisations.  

127.

The mechanism of data flows includes both private sector transfers, in particular via 
contractual  clauses  or  Binding  Corporate  Rules  (BCRs),  and  transfers  between  public 
authorities.  BCRs  are  one  of  the  elements  where  a  more  coherent  and  streamlined 
approach would be desirable. The EDPS recommends addressing conditions for BCRs in 
an explicit way in the new legal instrument49, by:   




recognizing explicitly BCRs as tools that provide adequate safeguards;  
providing for the main elements/ conditions for the adoption of BCRs; 
setting  forth  cooperation  procedures  for  the  adoption  of  BCRs, including criteria  for 
the selection of a leading supervisory authority (one stop shop).  

9. The Area of police and justice  

9.1. The general instrument  

128.

The  Commission  has  repeatedly  highlighted  the  importance  of  strengthening  data 
protection  in  the  context  of  law  enforcement  and  crime  prevention  where  the  exchange 
and  use  of  personal  information  has  significantly  intensified.  Also  the  Stockholm 
Programme, approved by the European Council, refers to a strong data protection regime 
as the main prerequisite for the EU Information Management Strategy in this area.50 

129.

The review of the general data protection framework is the perfect occasion to make 
progress  in  this  respect,  in  particular  since  the  Communication  rightly  describes 
Framework Decision 2008/977 as inadequate.51   

130.

The EDPS argued in section 3.2.5 of this Opinion why the area of police and judicial 
cooperation should be included in the general instrument. Inclusion of police and justice 
has a number of additional advantages. It means that the rules will no longer only apply to 
cross-border data exchanges52, but also to domestic processing. Adequate protection in the 
exchange of personal data with third countries will be better guaranteed, also with regard 
to  international  agreements.  Furthermore,  DPAs  will  have  the  same  extensive  and 
harmonised  powers  vis-à-vis  police  and  judicial  authorities  as  they  have  vis-à-vis  other 
data controllers. Finally, the current Article 13, providing for the Member States' power to 
adopt specific legislation to restrict obligations and rights under the general instrument for 
specific public interests, will have to be applied in the same restrictive way as it applies in 
other  areas.  In  particular,  the  specific  safeguards  provided  for  under  the  general 

49  
50  

51  
52  

On international transfers, see also Chapter 8 of the opinion. 
See  on  this  EDPS  Opinion  of  30  September  2010  on  the  Communication  from  the  Commission  to  the  European 
Parliament  and  the  Council  -  "Overview  of  information  management  in  the  area  of  freedom,  security  and  justice", 
paras 9-19.  
See Section 3.2.5 above. 
This is currently the limited scope of Framework Decision 2008/977.  

26

110

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
instrument in this field will have to be respected also in national legislation adopted in the 
area of police and judicial cooperation.  

9.2. Additional specific rules for police and justice 

131. However,  such  an  inclusion  does  not  exclude  special  rules  and  derogations,  which 
duly take account of the specificities of this sector, in line with Declaration 21 attached to 
the  Lisbon  Treaty.  Limitations  to  the  rights  of  data  subjects  may  be  foreseen,  but  they 
have to be necessary, proportionate and not alter the essential elements of the right itself. 
It  should  be  emphasized  in  this  context  that  Directive  95/46,  including  its  Article  13, 
currently  applies  to  law  enforcement  in  various  areas  (e.g.  taxation,  customs,  antifraud) 
that are not fundamentally different from many activities in the area of police and justice.  

132.

In addition, specific safeguards need also to be put in place, in order to compensate the 
data  subject  by  giving  him  additional  protection  in  an  area  where  the  processing  of 
personal data may be more intrusive. 

133.

In light of the above, the EDPS considers that the new  framework should include at 
least the following elements, in line with Convention 108 and Recommendation No R (87) 
15: 

 A  distinction  between  different  categories  of  data  and  files  in  accordance  with 
their  accuracy  and  reliability,  endorsing  the  principle  that  data  based  on  facts 
should be distinguished from data based on opinions or personal assessment.  
 A  distinction  between  various  categories  of  data  subjects  (criminal  suspects, 
victims,  witnesses,  etc.)  and  files  (temporary,  permanent  and  intelligence  files). 
Specific conditions and safeguards need to be foreseen for the processing of data 
of non-suspects. 

 Mechanisms to ensure periodic verification and rectification in order to safeguard 

the quality of the data being processed. 

 Specific  provisions  and/or  safeguards  may  be  devised  in  relation  to  the 
(increasingly relevant) processing of biometric and genetic data in the field of law 
enforcement.  Their  use  should  be  limited  only  to  cases  where  no  less  intrusive 
means are available which may ensure the same effect.53 

 Conditions for transfers of personal data to non competent authorities and private 
parties,  as  well  as  for  access  and  further  use  by  law  enforcement  authorities  of 
personal data collected by private parties. 

9.3. Sector specific data protection regimes 

134.

The Communication states that "the Framework Decision does not replace the various 
sector-specific  legislative  instruments  for  police  and  judicial  co-operation  in  criminal 
matters  adopted  at  EU  level,  in  particular  those  governing  the  functioning  of  Europol, 
Eurojust,  the  Schengen  Information  System  (SIS)  and  the  Customs  Information  System 
(CIS), which either contain particular data protection regimes, and/or which usually refer 
to the data protection instruments of the Council of Europe". 

135.

In the view of the EDPS, a new legal framework should be, as far as possible, clear, 
simple and consistent. When there is a proliferation of different regimes applying to for 
instance  Europol,  Eurojust,  SIS  and  Prüm,  compliance  with  the  rules  remains  or  even 

53  

In this direction, see WP document on the Future of Privacy, point 112. 

27

111

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
becomes  more  complicated.  That  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  the  EDPS  favours  a 
comprehensive legal instrument for all sectors.  

136. However, the EDPS understands that aligning the rules from the different systems will 
require considerable work, which has to be carried out carefully. The EDPS considers that 
a  gradual  approach  as  mentioned  in  the  Communication  makes  sense  as  long  as  the 
commitment to ensuring a high level of data protection in a consistent and effective way 
remains clear and visible. To be more concrete: 





In  a  first  stage,  the  general  legal  instrument  for  data  protection  should  be  made 
applicable  to  all  processing  in  the  area  of  police  and  judicial  cooperation, 
including the adjustments for police and justice (as meant in 9.2).  
In  a  second  stage,  the  sector  specific  data  protection  regimes  should  be  aligned 
with  this  general  instrument.  The  Commission  should  commit  itself  to  adopt 
proposals for this second stage, within a short and specified timeframe.  

10. DPAs and the Cooperation between DPAs 

10.1. Reinforcing the role of DPAs 

137.

The EDPS fully supports the objective of the Commission to address the issue of the 
status  of  data  protection  authorities  (DPAs),  and  more  explicitly  to  strengthen  their 
independence, resources and enforcement powers.  

138.

The EDPS also insists on the need to clarify in the new legal instrument the essential 
notion  of  independence  of  DPAs.  The  European  Court  of  Justice  has  recently  taken  a 
decision on this issue in Case C-518/0754, where it emphasised that independence means 
the  absence  of  any  external  influence.  A  DPA  may  seek  nor  take  instructions  from 
anybody. The EDPS suggests explicitly codifying these elements of independence in the 
law. 

139.

In order to exercise their tasks the DPAs must be given sufficient human and financial 
resources. The EDPS suggests including this requirement in the law.55 He finally stresses 
the  need  to  make  sure  that  authorities  have  fully  harmonised  powers  in  terms  of 
investigation  and  imposing  sufficiently  deterring  and  remedial  measures  and  sanctions. 
This would enhance legal certainty for data subjects and for data controllers. 

140.

Strengthening  the  independence,  resources  and  powers  of  DPAs  should  go  together 
with  reinforced  cooperation  at  multilateral  level,  especially  in  view  of  the  growing 
number of data protection issues on a European scale. The main infrastructure to be used 
for this cooperation is obviously the Article 29 Working Party. 

10.2. Strengthening the role of the Working Party

141. History shows that, from its start in 1997 until today, the functioning of the group has 
evolved.  It  has  grown  towards  more  independence  and  may  not  qualify  any  more,  in 
practice,  as  a  simple  advisory  working  party  to  the  Commission.  The  EDPS  suggests 
further  improvements  of  the  functioning  of  the  Working  Party,  including  of  its 
infrastructure and its independence. 

54  
55  

Case C-518/07, Commission v. Germany, not yet published in ECR. 
See, for example Article 43 (2) of Regulation 45/2001, which contains such requirement for the EDPS.  

28

112

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
142.

The  EDPS  believes  that  the  strength  of  the  group  is  intrinsically  linked  with  the 
independence and powers of its members. The autonomy of the Working Party should be 
ensured  in  the  new  legal  framework,  in  accordance  with  the  criteria  developed  for  a 
complete independence of DPAs by the European Court of Justice in case C-518/07. The 
EDPS considers that the Working Party should also be provided with sufficient resources 
and budget and a reinforced secretariat, to support its contributions. 

143. With regard to the secretariat of the Working Party, the EDPS values the fact that it is 
integrated in the Data Protection Unit of DG Justice, with the advantage that the Working 
Party itself can benefit from efficient and flexible contacts and up-to-date information on 
data  protection  developments.  On  the  other  hand,  he  questions  the  fact  that  the 
Commission (and more specifically the Unit) is at the same time member, secretariat and 
addressee of the Working Party's opinions. This would justify more independence of the 
secretariat. The EDPS encourages the Commission to assess - in close consultation with 
stakeholders - how this independence can best be ensured. 

144.

Finally,  reinforcing  the  powers  for  DPAs  also  requires  stronger  powers  for  the 
Working  Party,  with  a  structure  including  better  rules  and  safeguards  and  more 
transparency. This will be developed for the advisory role as well as for the enforcement 
role of the Working party.  

10.3. The advisory role of the Working Party 

145.

The positions of the Working Party must be effectively implemented when it comes to 
its  advisory  role  to  the  Commission,  especially  in  relation  to  the  interpretation  and 
application  of  the  principles  of  the  Directive  and  other  data  protection  instruments,  in 
other words to ensure the authoritative character of the Working Party positions. Further 
discussion is needed amongst DPAs in order to identify  how to include this in the legal 
instrument. 

146.

The EDPS recommends solutions which would make opinions of the Working Party 
more  authoritative  without  modifying  substantially  its  way  of  functioning.  The  EDPS 
suggests including an obligation for the DPAs and the Commission to take utmost account 
of  opinions  and  common  positions  adopted  by  the  Working  Party,  based  on  the  model 
adopted  for  the  positions  of  the  Body  of  European  Regulators  for  Electronic 
Communications  (BEREC)56.  Furthermore,  the  new  legal  instrument  could  give  the 
Working  Party  the  explicit  task  to  adopt  “interpretative  recommendations”.  These 
alternative  solutions would  give the positions of the Working  Party a stronger  role, also 
before the Courts.   

10.4. Coordinated enforcement by the Working Party 

147. Under  the present framework the enforcement of data protection law in the Member 
States  is  left  to  27  Data  Protection  Authorities  with  little  coordination  as  regards  the 
handling of specific cases. When it comes to cases involving more than one Member State 
or  having  clearly  a  global  dimension,  this  multiplies  costs  for  undertakings,  which  are 
forced to deal with different public authorities for the same activity, and it enhances the 
risk of inconsistent application: in exceptional cases, the same processing activities may 
be considered lawful by one DPA and prohibited by another.  

56  

Regulation (EC) No 1211/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 establishing the 
Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications (BEREC) and the Office, OJ L337, 9 18.12.200, p. 1. 

29

113

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
148.

Some  cases  have  a  strategic  dimension  which  should  be  addressed  in  a  centralised 
way.  The  Article  29  Working  Party  facilitates  coordination  and  enforcement  actions 
between DPAs57 in major data protection issues with such international implications. This 
was  the  case  with  social  networks  and  search  engines58,  as  well  as  with  regard  to 
coordinated inspections conducted in different Member States on telecommunication and 
health insurance issues.  

149.

There  are  however  limits  to  the  enforcement  actions  that  the  Working  Party  can 
undertake under the present framework. Common positions can be taken by the Working 
Party, but there is no instrument to ensure that these positions are effectively implemented 
in practice. 

150.

The EDPS suggests including in the legal instrument additional provisions that could 

support coordinated enforcement, in particular:  

 An  obligation  to  ensure  that  DPAs  and  the  Commission  take  utmost  account  of 

opinions and common positions adopted by WP 29.59   

 An  obligation  for  DPAs  to  faithfully  cooperate  with  each  other  and  with  the 
Commission and the WP 2960. As a practical illustration of a faithful cooperation, 
a  procedure  could  be  set  up  by  which  DPAs  inform  the  Commission  or  the 
Working  Party  in  case  of  national  enforcement  measures  with  a  cross  border 
element,  in  analogy  to  the  procedure  applicable  in  the  present  framework  with 
regard to national adequacy decisions. 

 Specifying the voting rules to increase the commitment of DPAs to implement the 
decisions  of  the  Working  Party.  It  could  be  provided  that  the  Working  Party 
envisages  deciding  on  the  basis  of  consensus  and  when  consensus  could  not  be 
reached  takes  enforcement  only  with  a  qualified  majority.  In  addition  to  this,  a 
recital could foresee that those DPAs casting a positive vote on a document have 
an obligation or policy commitment to implement it at national level.  

151.

The EDPS would put a caveat against introducing stronger measures, such as giving 
binding  force  to  WP29  positions.  This  would  undermine  the  independent  status  of 
individual DPAs, which has to be guaranteed by the Member States under national law. 
Would  the  Working  Party  decisions  have  a  direct  impact  on  third  parties  such  as  data 
controllers, new procedures should be foreseen including safeguards such as transparency 
and redress, including possibly appeal before the European Court of Justice. 

10.5. Cooperation between the EDPS and the Working Party 

152.

The  way  in  which  the  EDPS  and  the  Working  Party  cooperate  could  also  be  fine-
tuned. The EDPS is a member of the Working Party, and he contributes within the group 
to positions on the main strategic EU developments, while ensuring consistency with his 
own  positions.  The  EDPS  notes  the  increasing  number  of  privacy  issues,  both  in  the 
private as well as in the public sector, which have implications at national level in many 
Member States, and where there is a specific role for the Working Party to play.  

57  

58  

59  

60  

Beside the Article 29 Working Party, the European Conference of Data Protection Commissioners has created about 
ten years ago a permanent workshop aimed at addressing cross-border complaints in a coordinated way. Although this 
workshop presents undeniable added value in terms of exchange between DPAs' staffs and offers a reliable network 
of contact points, it can not be considered as a coordination mechanism for decision making.  
See the letters of WP 29 of 12.05.2010 and 26.05.2010, published on the WP29 website 
(http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/workinggroup/wpdocs/2010-others_en.htm). 
As mentioned above, a similar obligation is laid down in Regulation (EC) No 1211/2009 which specifies the role of 
the Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications (BEREC).. 
See, in this regard, Article 3 of Regulation (EC) No 1211/2009, cited above.  

30

114

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
153.

 The EDPS has a complementary task to advise on the developments in the context of 
the  EU,  which  should  be  maintained.  As  a  European  body,  he  exercises  this  advisory 
competence  towards  EU  Institutions  in  the  same  way  as  national  DPAs  advise  their 
governments.    

154.

The EDPS and the Working Party act from a different but complementary perspective. 
There is for these reasons a need to preserve and maybe improve coordination between the 
Working  Party  and  the  EDPS,  to  make  sure  that  they  work  together  on  the  main  data 
protection  issues,  for  instance  by  coordinating  agendas  on  a  regular  basis61,  and  by 
ensuring transparency on issues which have a more national or specific EU aspect. 

155. Coordination is not mentioned in the present Directive for the simple reason that the 
EDPS  did  not  exist  at  the  time  where  the  Directive  was  adopted,  but  after  six  years  of 
existence the complementarities of the EDPS and the Working Party are visible and could 
be formally recognised. The EDPS recalls that under Regulation 45/2001 he has the duty 
to  cooperate  with  the  national  DPAs  and  to  participate  in  the  activities  of  the  Working 
Party.  The  EDPS  recommends  to  explicitly  mention  cooperation  in  the  new  legal 
instrument, and to structure it where necessary, for instance by laying down a procedure 
for cooperation.  

10.6. Cooperation between the EDPS and the DPAs in supervision on EU systems 

156.

These  considerations  also  apply  to  areas  where  the  supervision  must  be  coordinated 
between  the  European  and  national  level.  This  is  the  case  for  EU  bodies  that  process 
significant amounts of data delivered by national authorities or for large scale information 
systems with a European and a national component.  

157.

The  existing  system  for  some  EU  bodies  and  large  scale  information  systems  -  for 
instance,  Europol,  Eurojust  and  the  first  generation  Schengen  Information  System  (SIS) 
have  Joint  Supervisory  Bodies  with  representatives  of  national  DPAs  -  is  a  remnant  of 
intergovernmental cooperation in the pre-Lisbon era and does not respect the institutional 
structure of the EU of which Europol and Eurojust are now an integral part, and in which 
the "Schengen acquis" has now also been integrated62. 

158.

The  Communication  announces  that  the  Commission  will  launch  in  2011  a 
consultation of stakeholders on the revision of these supervision systems. The EDPS urges 
the Commission to take as soon as possible (within a short and specified timeframe, see 
above) position in the ongoing discussion on supervision. He will take - in this discussion 
- the following viewpoint.   

159. As a point of departure, it should be guaranteed that all supervisory bodies fulfil the 
indispensable criteria of independence, resources and enforcement powers. Furthermore, it 
should be ensured that the perspectives and expertise that exists on the EU level is taken 
into account. That means that cooperation should take place not only between the national 
authorities  but  also  with  the  European  DPA  (currently  the  EDPS).  The  EDPS  finds  it 
necessary to follow a model that fulfils these requirements.63  

61  

62  
63  

E.g. on the basis of the Inventory of legislative activities published annually and updated regularly, which is available 
on the EDPS website. 
Under Regulation 45/2001, the EDPS has a duty to cooperate with these bodies. 
For Eurojust, a model should also take into account that the data protection supervision respects the independence of 
the judiciary, in so far as Eurojust process data in the context of criminal proceedings.  

31

115

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
160.

In recent years the model of "coordinated supervision" was developed. This model of 
supervision, as now operational in Eurodac and parts of the Customs Information System, 
will soon  be expanded to the Visa Information System (VIS) and the second generation 
Schengen  Information  System  (SIS  II).  This  model  has  three  layers:  (1)  supervision  at 
national level is ensured by DPAs; (2) supervision at EU level is ensured by the EDPS; (3) 
coordination is ensured by way of regular meetings convened by the EDPS acting as the 
secretariat  of  this  coordination  mechanism.  This  model  has  proven  to  be  successful  and 
effective and should be envisaged in the future for other information systems. 

C. HOW TO IMPROVE APPLICATION OF PRESENT FRAMEWORK?  

11. The short term 

161. Whilst  the  review  process  is  ongoing,  efforts  should  be  devoted  to  ensure  full  and 
effective implementation of the current rules. These rules will still be applicable until the 
future  framework  is  adopted  and  then  implemented  into  national  laws  of  the  Member 
States. In this direction, several lines of actions may be identified. 

162.

First,  the  Commission  should  continue  monitoring  Member  States  compliance  with 
Directive 95/46 and, where necessary, use its powers under Article 258 TFEU. Recently, 
infringement proceedings have been opened for a failure to correctly implement Article 28 
of  the  Directive  with  regard  to  the  requisite  of  independence  of  DPAs64.  Also  in  other 
areas  full  compliance  needs  to  be  monitored  and  enforced.65  The  EDPS  thus  welcomes 
and  fully  supports  the  Commission’s  commitment  in  the  Communication  to  pursue  an 
active infringement policy. The Commission should also continue the structural dialogue 
with Member States on implementation.66 

163.

Second,  enforcement  at  national  level  must  be  encouraged  so  as  to  ensure  practical 
application  of  data  protection  rules,  including  with  respect  to  new  technological 
phenomena  and  global  players.  DPAs  should  make  full  use  of  their  investigative  and 
sanctioning  powers.  It  is  also  important  that  the  existing  rights  of  data  subjects, 
particularly the rights of access, are fully implemented in practice.  

164.

Third, greater coordination in the enforcement seems necessary in the short term. The 
role of the WP29 and its interpretative documents in this regard is crucial, but also DPAs 
should  do  their  most  to  put  them  in  practice.  Diverging  outcomes  in  EU-wide  or  global 
cases need to be avoided and common approaches can and should be reached within the 
Working  Party.  EU-wide  coordinated  investigations  under  the  auspices  of  the  Working 
Party can also bring significant added value. 

165.

Fourth, data protection principles should be "built-in" proactively in new regulations 
which may have an impact, directly or indirectly, on data protection. At the EU level, the 
EDPS  makes  considerable  efforts  to  contribute  to  better  European  legislation  and  these 
efforts  must  be  undertaken  also  at  national  level.  Data  protection  authorities  should 
therefore make full use of their advisory powers to ensure such a proactive approach. Data 
protection  authorities,  including  the  EDPS,  can  also  play  a  proactive  role  in  monitoring 
technological  developments.  Monitoring  is  important  with  a  view  to  identifying  at  an 

64  
65  

66  

See Case C-518/07, cited above and Commission Press Release of 28 October 2010 (IP/10/1430). 
The  Commission  has  opened  an  infringement  proceeding  against  the  UK  for  an  alleged  breach  of  various  data 
protection  provisions,  including  the  requirement  of  confidentiality  of  electronic  communications  in  respect  of 
behavioural advertising. See Commission Press Release of 9 April 2009 (IP/09/570). 
See Commission’s First Report on the implementation of the Data Protection Directive, cited above, p. 22 et seq. 

32

116

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
early stage emerging trends, highlighting possible data protection implications, supporting 
data protection-friendly solutions and raising the awareness of stakeholders.  

166.

Finally, further cooperation between the various actors at international level needs to 
be actively pursued. It is therefore important to reinforce the international instruments of 
cooperation.  Initiatives  like  the  Madrid  standards  and  the  ongoing  work  within  the 
Council of Europe and the OECD deserve full support. In this context, it is very positive 
that  also  the  US  Federal  Trade  Commission  has  now  joined  the  family  of  Privacy  and 
Data Protection Commissioners in the framework of their International Conference. 

D. CONCLUSIONS 

General observations 

167.

The EDPS welcomes the Commission's Communication in general, as he is convinced 
that the review of the present legal framework for data protection is necessary, in order to 
ensure  effective  protection  in  an  increasingly  developing  and  globalised  information 
society.  

168.

The Communication identifies the main issues and challenges. The EDPS shares the 
view of the Commission that a strong system of data protection will still be needed in the 
future, based on the notion that existing general principles of data protection are still valid 
in a society which undergoes fundamental changes. The EDPS shares the statement in the 
Communication that the challenges are enormous and underlines the consequence that the 
proposed solutions should be correspondingly ambitious and enhance the effectiveness of 
the protection.  As a result he asks for a more ambitious approach on a number of points. 

169.

The EDPS fully supports the comprehensive approach to data protection. However, he 
regrets that the Communication excludes certain areas, such as the data processing by EU 
institutions  and  bodies,  from  the  general  legal  instrument.  If  the  Commission  were  to 
decide to leave out these areas, the EDPS urges the Commission to adopt a proposal for 
the EU level within the shortest possible timeframe, but preferably by the end of 2011. 

Main perspectives 

170.

The points of departure of the review process for the EDPS are as follows: 

 Arrangements for data protection must as far as possible actively support rather than 
hamper  other  legitimate  interests  (such  as  European  economy,  the  security  of 
individuals and accountability of governments). 

 The general principles of data protection should not and cannot be changed. 
 Further harmonisation should be one of the key objectives of the review. 
 The  fundamental  rights  perspective  should  lie  at  the  heart  of  the  review  process.  A 

fundamental right aims to protect citizens under all circumstances.  
 The new legal instrument must include the police and justice sector. 
 The  new  legal  instrument  must  be  formulated  in  a  technologically  neutral  way  as 

much as possible and must aim to create legal certainty over the longer term. 

Elements of a new framework 

Harmonisation and simplification 

33

117

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
171.

The EDPS welcomes the Commission’s commitment to examine the means to achieve 
further harmonisation of data protection at EU level. The EDPS determines areas where 
further and better harmonisation is urgent: definitions, grounds for data processing, data 
subjects' rights, international transfers and data protection authorities. 

172.

The  EDPS  suggests  considering  the  following  alternatives  to  simplify  and/or  reduce 

the scope of the notification requirements: 
 Limit  the  obligation  to  notify  to  specific  kinds  of  processing  operations  entailing 

specific risks.  

 A  simple  registration  obligation  requiring  data  controllers  to  register  (as  opposed  to 

extensive registration of all data processing operations). 

 The introduction of a standard pan-European notification form. 

173. According to the EDPS a Regulation, a single instrument which is directly applicable 
in the Member States, is the most effective means to protect the fundamental right to data 
protection and to achieve further convergence in the internal market. 

Strengthening the rights of individuals 

174.

The EDPS supports the Communication where  it proposes strengthening individuals' 

rights. He makes the following suggestions:  
 A  principle  of  transparency  could  be  included  in  the  law.  However,  it  is  more 
important  to  reinforce  the  existing  provisions  dealing  with  transparency  (such  as  the 
existing Articles 10 and 11 of Directive 95/46). 

 A  provision  on  personal  data  breach  notification,  which  extends  the  obligation 
included  in  the  revised  ePrivacy  Directive  from  certain  providers  to  all  data 
controllers, should be introduced in the general instrument. 

 The limits of consent should be clarified. Broadening the cases where express consent 
is  required  should  be  considered  as  well  as  adopting  additional  rules  for  the  online 
environment.  

 Additional  rights  should  be  introduced  such  as  data  portability  and  the  right  to  be 

forgotten, especially for information society services on the internet. 

 Children's interests should be better protected with a number of additional provisions, 
specifically addressed to the collection and further processing of children's data.   
 Collective  redress  mechanisms  for  breach  of  data  protection  rules  should  be 
introduced  in  the  EU  legislation,  in  order  to  empower  qualified  entities  to  bring 
actions on behalf of groups of individuals. 

Strengthening the obligations of organisations/controllers 

175.

The  new  framework  must  contain  incentives  for  data  controllers  to  pro-actively 
include  data  protection  measures  in  their  business  processes.  The  EDPS  proposes  the 
introduction of general provisions on accountability and "privacy by design". A provision 
on privacy certification schemes should also be introduced. 

Globalisation and applicable law 

176.

The  EDPS  supports  the  ambitious  work  in  the  framework  of  the  International 
Conference  of  Data  Protection  Commissioners  to  develop  the  so  called  "Madrid 
standards", with a view to integrate them into a binding instrument and possibly initiate an 
intergovernmental conference. The EDPS calls on the Commission to take concrete steps 
in this direction in close cooperation with the OECD and the Council of Europe.  

34

118

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
177.

 A new legal instrument must clarify the criteria determining applicable law. It should 
be ensured that  data that are processed outside the borders of the EU do not escape EU 
jurisdiction where there is a justified claim for applying EU law. If the legal framework 
would have the form of a Regulation there would be identical rules in all Member States 
and it would become less relevant to determine applicable law (within the EU). 

178.

The  EDPS  fully  supports  the  objective  to  ensure  a  more  uniform  and  coherent 
approach  vis-à-vis  third  countries  and  international  organisations.  Binding  Corporate 
Rules (BCRs) should be included in the legal instrument.  

The area of police and justice 

179. A comprehensive instrument including police and justice may allow for special rules 
which  duly  take  account  of  the  specificities  of  this  sector,  in  line  with  Declaration  21 
attached  to  the  Lisbon  Treaty.  Specific  safeguards  need  to  be  put  in  place,  in  order  to 
compensate  data  subjects  by  giving  them  additional  protection  in  an  area  where  the 
processing of personal data is by nature more intrusive. 

180.

The new legal framework should be, as far as possible, clear, simple and consistent. A 
proliferation  of  different  regimes  applying  to,  for  instance,  Europol,  Eurojust,  SIS  and 
Prüm, should be avoided. The EDPS understands that aligning the rules from the different 
systems will have to be carried out carefully and gradually. 

DPAs and the cooperation between DPAs 

181.

The EDPS fully supports the objective of the Commission to address the issue of the 
status  of  data  protection  authorities  (DPAs),  and  to  strengthen  their  independence, 
resources and enforcement powers. He recommends: 
 Codifying in the new legal instrument the essential notion of independence of DPAs, 

as specified by the ECJ. 

 Stating in the law that DPAs must be given sufficient resources. 
 Giving authorities harmonised investigation and sanctioning powers. 

182.

The  EDPS  suggests  further  improvements  of  the  functioning  of  the  Article  29 
Working Party, including its independence and infrastructure. The Working Party should 
also be provided with sufficient resources and a reinforced secretariat. 

183.

The EDPS suggests reinforcing the advisory role of the Working Party by introducing 
an obligation for DPAs and the Commission to take the utmost account of opinions and 
common  positions  adopted  by  the  Working  Party.  The  EDPS  is  not  in  favour  of  giving 
binding force to Working Party positions, particularly because of the independent status of 
individual  DPAs.  The  EDPS  recommends  that  the  Commission  introduce  specific 
provisions to enhance cooperation with the EDPS in the new legal instrument. 

184.

The EDPS urges the Commission to take a position as soon as possible on the issue of 
supervision  of  EU  bodies  and  large  scale  information  systems,  taking  into  consideration 
that  all  supervisory  bodies  should  fulfil  the  indispensable  criteria  of  independence, 
sufficient  resources  and  enforcement  powers  and  that  it  should  be  ensured  that  the  EU 
perspective  is  well  represented.  The  EDPS  supports  the  model  of 
'coordinated 
supervision'.  

35

119

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Improvements under the present system:

185.

The EDPS encourages the Commission to: 

 Continue  monitoring  Member  States'  compliance  with  Directive  95/46  and,  where 

necessary, using its enforcement powers under Article 258 TFEU. 

 Encourage enforcement at the national level and the coordination of enforcement. 
 Build data protection principles pro-actively into new regulations which may have an 

impact, directly or indirectly, on data protection. 

 Actively pursue further cooperation between the various actors at international level.  

Brussels, 14 January 2011 

(signed) 

Peter HUSTINX 
European Data Protection Supervisor 

36

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ethical aspects of information  
and communication technologies

Lee HIBBARD

Coordinator on the information society and  
Internet governance, Council of Europe

Lee Hibbard is the Head of the Information Society Unit 
at  the  Council  of  Europe  in  the  Directorate-General  of 
Human Rights and Rule of Law.

Over the last four years he has coordinated the work of 
the  Council  of  Europe  (http://www.coe.int)  in  various  
international forums dealing with the information society  
and Internet governance, in particular the European Dia - 
logue on Internet Governance (http://www.eurodig.org),  
the 
(IGF)  and  the 
Governmental  Advisory  Committee  of  the  Internet  
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN).

Internet  Governance  Forum 

At the substantive level, he has been heavily involved in the 
conception  and  development  of  several  pan-European 
policy documents concerning empowerment of children 
online, the public service value of the Internet, protecting 
the dignity, security and privacy of children on the Internet,  
freedom  of  expression  and  Internet  filters,  as  well  as  
human  rights  guidelines  for  ISPs  and  online  games 
providers.

As  a  consequence  of  his  skills  in  transversal  working  
methods,  Lee  is  also  involved  in  collaborative  work 
between  the  Council  of  Europe  and  external  partners, 
including HEC Montreal, on the future of management 
and communities of practice.

121

Lee HIBBARD

Ethics in the information society 
 Roundtable 

What society do we want? 

Brussels, 15 November 2011 

Lee Hibbard, 
Information Society Division, Council of 
Europe:lee.hibbard@coe.int 

•  Singing same song for freedom, and security provided it 

does not unduly threaten freedom 

•  HRs is the common core: shared, incumbent on us all to 

protect and respect, already ‘bought into’ 

•  We need to more: CoE-EC, Private Sector, Civil society, 

technical communities, IGOs, etc. 

•  CoE Strategy on IG 2012-2015 

122

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Ethics as a transmitter of human rights 

•  Ethics is the transmission of human rights and fundamental freedoms 

•  States protect, companies should respect, individuals responsible 

•  Access to info, knowledge and social interaction = coping 

•  Expected to appropriate skills, to self-determination, respect for others, to protect 

oneself 

•  Disengaged, disembodied? 

•  CoE: bridging top-down morals with bottom-up ethics (multi-stakeholder 

dialogue catalyst) 

• 

IG Principles patchwork – decentralised vs centralised 

CoE Origins & Facts 

• 

Inter-governmental organisation  

•  47 member state governments / 800 million  

• 

International law / legally binding / European Court of Human Rights 
- governments held in violation 

•  2001 Budapest Covention on Cybercrime 
•  1981 Convention 108 on data protection (modernised, privacy by 
deisgn) 

•  2008 HRs guidelines’ for ISPs and games providers 
•  CoE Strategy on IG 2012-2015 (partnership) 

123

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
State protecting and 
ensuring respect for  
human rights,  
rule of law, democracy  

(cid:3)High Contracting Parties shall secure to 
everyone within their jurisdiction the 
rights and freedoms defined in Section I of 
this Convention (…)(cid:4)  
Article 1, ECHR 

More freedom, more ethics 

 (cid:3)Everyone has the right to freedom of expression (…) 
freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart 
information and ideas without interference (…) and 
regardless of frontiers. 

(…) carries with it duties and *responsibilities (…)(cid:4) 

Article 10, ECHR / 500+ cases!  

*ICANN  

124

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Technology fast, law slow  
incumbent to be ethical when the 
Internet is a global public resource 

2 billion+ Internet users 

worldwide  

700 million Facebook 

billions of YouTube 
downloads (video/copyright) 

6 billion mobile registrations 
(mobile Internet 3G?) 

Infrastructure: new gTLDs 
(e.g. .xxx, .bank, .pharma
cy, etc) 

125

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ethics of states and intermediaries in the 
information society? 

France (Hadopi) 
Turkey (YouTube/defamation) 
Italy (Google/privacy) 

Protecting children’s ‘right 

to be forgotten’ 

Is privacy “no longer a 
contemporary concept” for 
people in the 21st 
century? 

Ethical interpretations and 
responsibilities of states 

•  Clinton keynotes 2010/2011 
•  Sweden Internet freedom / UN 

•  USG grant to BBC World Service (outsourcing, not regulating) 

•  G8 

•  London Cyberconference (Hague statements) 

•  CoE Vienna HRs on Internet conference  
•  NL (US) Ministerial conference  

126

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
IGO work on ethics  
WSIS Action Line C10 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

[values and principles] equality, solidarity, tolerance, 
*shared responsibility  

[responsibility] Awareness of ethical use of ICTs 

[protection] Protect privacy/personal data 

[protection] Combat abusive use of ICTs 

UNESCO IFAP 

[HRs] Public service of Internet to exercise HRs 

[HRs/FoE] Access to enable: produce, communicate,innovate …
info/knowledge/creativity/participation, linguistic, cultural, social, 
educational 

[HRs/right to assembly] Freedom of association – no monitoring or 
surveillance 

•  Trust: technical assurances (CiR security, reliability, stability) + 

literacy (technical and media) +  privacy & security 

127

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IG word cloud 
ethical implications for different stakeholder groups 

•  Trust 
•  Freedom 
•  Protection 
•  Responsibility 
•  Security 
•  Openness 
•  Privacy 
•  Public service value 
•  Transparency 
•  Accountability 

•  Need ethics for cloud, ‘Internet of Things’, etc 

•  CoE responses?  

shaping our ETHICAL understanding about the Internet/
ICTs 

128

 
 
 
 
  
CoE 2009 Ministerial Conference 
(Reykjavik, 2009 

What freedom to CONNECT, control and manage our 
IDENTITIES…to what extent should the onus be on the user? 

Who owns your data? 

Information, transparency  
& consent 

Where do you turn to for 
accurate and trusted 
information? (Public service 
media governance) 

Online right to reply and 
effective redress for 
individuals (control) 

Does (cid:3)delete(cid:4) really delete? 

Reliance, dependance, expectation… 

People’s significant reliance on the Internet as an 
essential tool for their everyday activities 
(communication, information, knowledge, commercial 
transactions, leisure) and the resulting legitimate 
expectation that a minimum level of core Internet 
services are accessible and affordable, secure, 
reliable and ongoing 

CoE Recommendation on public service value of the Internet, 
2007   

129

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ethical processes) Bottom-up multi-
stakeholder dialogue policy making 

“Users should have the greatest possible access to Internet-based content, 
applications and services of their choice, whether or not they are offered 
free of charge, using suitable devices of their choice (…)  

(...) exceptions to this principle should be considered with great 
circumspection and need to be justified by overriding public interests.  

“(…) able to gauge the impact of network management measures on the 
enjoyment of fundamental rights and freedoms (…). Those measures 
should be proportionate, appropriate and avoid unjustified 
discrimination… 

CoE Recommendation on Network Neutrality, 2010   

2011 CoE standards and guidelines  

New notion of media indicators: editorial 
control/oversight, purpose, intent, outreach, 
professional standards, third party expectation 

Critical Internet Resources: preparedness, 
avoiding disruption, (cid:3)do no (transboundary) 
harm(cid:4) 

130

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CoE Messages 

•  Maximising rights and services 
•  Minimising restrictions 

•  Ensuring level of security that users are 

entitled to expect 

CoE 2012 

•  search engine provider guidelines: transparency, pluralism & 

diversity of sources of information, consent 

•  social network provider guidelines: transparent info to users about 
DP management default settings, deleting profiles & content, anonymity-
pseudonymity, reporting, (cid:1)opt-in(cid:2) for wider access, easy controls to restrict 

* CoE Internet governance strategy 2012-2015 

•  users charter to complain, seek redress, recourse, right to reply, 

remedies 

•  ethics of ICT private sector - implementing of UN SRSG John 

Ruggie Report 

131

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mapping Ethical principles 
CoE IG Principles Declaration, Sep 2011 

1.  Human rights, democracy and the rule of law / all should uphold 
2.  Multi-stakeholder governance / full participation 
3. 

 Responsibilities of states / responsibility to refrain from harm and 
restricting rights 
 Empowerment of Internet users / participate 
 Universality of the Internet / should not misuse or interfere with traffic 
 Integrity of the Internet / security, stability, resilience 
 Decentralised management / private sector responsibility for day-to-day 
 Architectural principles / open, end-to-end, no barriers, no burdens 
 Open network / user access to choice in content, apps and services 

4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10.   Cultural and linguistic diversity / user freedom of expression 

Personal ethical learnings 
inclusiveness, rights, freedoms, values 

•  Ethics is much about protecting users rights and freedoms 

•  State protecting, private sector respecting, individuals respecting 

•  More individual freedom – more expectations – more (unrealistic?)  responsibilities 

• 

• 

Information, awareness (benefits/risks), literacy, tools = skills, competences, 
empowerment 

‘Best (individual) efforts’? and shared responsibilties to protect users as citizens and 
consumers (blurring of sectors) 

•  Multi-stakeholder ethics = a multiplicity of dialogues, joint signing-off of policies, 

deeper & wider consultation 

132

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thank you 

Lee Hibbard,Council of Europe, 
Information Society Division, Council of 
Europe: lee.hibbard@coe.int 

133

 
Ethical aspects of information  
and communication technologies

Michele BELLAVITE

Chairman of the Digital Society Working 
Group, European Telecommunications  
Network Operators’ Association (ETNO)

Michele Bellavite has worked since 2002 in the public 
and regulatory affairs division of Telecom Italia. Based 
in Brussels, he chairs the Digital Society Working Group 
of  ETNO,  and  is  also  an  alternate  board  member.  He 

holds a degree in political science from the University 
of  Pavia,  with  a  major  in  European  political  organisa-
tion, and has done postgraduate training at the College 
of Europe.

135

Digital society: an industrial perspective

Michele BELLAVITE

Roundtable on the Ethical Aspects 
of  Inf ormation and Communication Technologies

TITLE:

Digital Society: an industrial perspective

NAME:

Michele Bellavite 

ORGANISATION AND COUNTRY:

ETNO - Chairman of the Digital Society Working Group
Belgium

CONTENT OF THE PRESENTATION:

The  telecommunications  industry has  recently  been  confronted  with  some  new  policy  issues 
whereas  before,  the  policy  debate  was  largely  focused  on  liberalization  and  access  issues.  This 
policy shift is, in part, due to fixed and mobile broadband investments by industry that have brought 
high  speed  Internet  to  a  wider  range  of  users  and  it  is  also  due  to  the  growing  involvement  of 
stakeholders in Internet policy debates, such as civil rights groups, law enforcement representatives 
and Governments.

The  public  policy  debate  on  the  Internet  is  increasingly  centered  on  the  relationship  between  the 
end-user and the on-line world / provider and indeed on appropriate behavior online. Many argue 
for  the  same  level  of  protection  afforded  in  the  offline  world  to  be  applied  in  the online  world.
Telecom  players  are  already  committed  to  providing  transparent  and  meaningful  information
regarding  their  offers  and,  in  particular,  any  limitations  on  Internet  access  (eg  speed  throttling  at 
‘high peak’ times of the day), further strengthening consumer choice in this field. In addition, the 
telecoms  regulatory framework  offers  numerous  consumer  protection  safeguards,  such  as  the 
contractual rights set out in the Citizens’ Rights Directive. ETNO therefore believes that no further 
regulatory intervention is needed and that it is important to allow industry the freedom to innovate 
and adopt new business models and services in a fast moving technology environment. Indeed, it is 
the case that the telecoms sector is already over-burdened with sector-specific regulation that is not 
equally applied to other ICT players, such as over the top (OTT) players. As such, this regulatory 
asymmetry is damaging the telecoms sector and, at a broader level, it is damaging the competitive
position of the EU.

In  the  context  of  the  net  neutrality  debate,  ETNO  believes  that  existing  regulatory  provisions  set 
forth  in  the  Universal  Service  Directive  offer  adequate  protection  for  consumers,  while  allowing
telcos the ability to manage the huge growth in data traffic and make the Internet a more efficient
and orderly place. Anti-competitive industry practices are naturally prohibited.

ETNO members do not exercise control over the actual content transmitted over their networks and 
do  not  engage  in  any  form  of  censorship  or seek  to  limit  the  right  to  freedom  of  expression.    In 

136

order to maintain an open Internet environment, the EU should maintain its current policies towards 
the protection of Internet intermediaries and not put them in the position of judging or monitoring 
content or communications.

Finally, as regards governance of the Internet, ETNO fully supports a multi stakeholder approach 
with no  regulatory oversight  by any  one  Government  entity, considered  that    the  challenges  of
Internet  governance  and  principles  are mainly  around  its  global  reach  and  nature.  This 
collaborative, bottom up approach is fitting in view of the global nature of the Internet. The recent 
development  and  emergence  of  high  level  Internet  principles  (eg  OECD  Principles  on  Internet 
Economy, Aspen Principles for the Future of the Internet) is helpful in so far as setting forward best
practice  and  guidelines  for  the  online  world.  It  would  therefore  be  important  that  the  EU  start  a 
reflection  on  how  it  can  make  sure  that  European  values  and  human  rights  traditions  can  be 
safeguarded on a global level.

137

Ethical aspects of information  
and communication technologies

Bernd  
CARSTEN-STAHL

Professor of Critical Research in Technology 
and Director of the Centre for Computing and 
Social Responsibility, De Montfort University

Bernd Carsten-Stahl is Professor of Critical Research in 
Technology  and  Director  of  the  Centre  for  Computing  
and  Social  Responsibility  at  De  Montfort  University,  
Leicester, UK. His interests cover philosophical issues aris-
ing from the intersections of business, technology and 
information. This  includes  the  ethics  of  ICT  and  critical 
approaches to information systems. From 2009 to 2011 

he served as coordinator of the EU seventh framework 
programme  (FP7)  research  project  on ‘Ethical  issues  of 
emerging  ICT  applications’  (ETICA)  (http://www.etica-
project.eu) and from 2012 to 2015 he will be coordinator 
of the FP7 research project ‘Civil society organisations in 
designing research governance’ (Consider) (http://www.
consider-project.eu).

139

Ethics and future Internet

Bernd CARSTEN-STAHL

Emerging ICTs –  

Ethics and Governance 

Bernd Carsten Stahl 

The ETICA Project  

1.  Identify emerging ICTs 

2.  Identify ethical issues 

likely to be raised by those 
ICTs 

3.  Evaluate and rank these 

issues 

4.  Provide recommendations 
on appropriate governance 
structures to address these. 

140

SiS 2008; GA 230318;  
04/2009-05/2011 

2 

Emerging Technologies – Shared Features 

•  Natural interaction 

•  Invisibility   

•  Direct link 

•  Detailed understanding 

of the user   

•  Pervasiveness 

•  Autonomy 

•  Power over the user  

•  Market driven 

Ethical Issues 

141

3 

4 

Predictable Ethical Issues (examples) 

•  Privacy, but: 

–  New types of data 
–  New ways  of linking data 
–  New quantitities of data 

•  Security 

•  Trust 

•  Liability 

•  Digital divides  

(broadband is NOT the 
solution) 

Less Obvious Ethical Issues (examples) 

•  View of humans 

–  Therapy / enhancement 
–  Normality 
–  Mortality  
–  Identity  

•  Power relationships 

•  Environment 

•  Nature of society 

•  Changing cultures 

142

5 

6 

Governance Challenges 
–  Huge number of artefacts, application areas, 

interlinking systems 

–  Infinity of moral issues / diverging ethical 

evaluations 

–  Moral issues are context dependent 
–  Moral issues and preferences will change 

over time, are impossible to predict 
comprehensively 

–  Governance must be flexible and open to 

change and development 

–  Required: a combination of ethical 
procedure and moral guidance 

7 

8 

ETICA Recommendations to Policy Makers 

•  Provide regulatory 

framework which will 
support Ethical Impact 
Assessment for ICTs 

•  Establish an ICT 

Ethics Observatory 

•  Establish a forum for 

stakeholder 
involvement 

143

ETICA Recommendations for Industry and 
Researchers and CSOs 

• Incorporate ethics into 

ICT research and 
development 

• Facilitate ethical 

reflexivity in ICT projects 
and practice 

9 

10 

The EGE Opinion on the Ethics of ICTs 

•  ICTs are more than just the 

Internet 

•  Ethics is more than just privacy 

•  The EGE Opinion needs to 
open debate, not close it 

•  EGE should aim to facilitate the 

art of governance 

144

Ethical aspects of information  
and communication technologies

Guido VAN STEENDAM

Professor of the Philosophy of Technology,  
KU Leuven, and Director, International Forum 
for Biophilosophy

Guido Van Steendam is Professor of the Philosophy of 
Technology at the Higher Institute of Philosophy of the 
KU Leuven — University of Leuven (Belgium) and director 
of research at the International Forum for Biophilosophy.

His research interests include the philosophy and ethics 
of  biomedical  developments  (such  as  genetics,  bio-
technology, reproductive technologies, euthanasia and 
critical care medicine) as well as information and com-
munication technologies (such as ambient intelli gence, 
camera  surveillance,  social  media)  and  converging 

technologies.  His  research  has  two  major  components. 
An  operational  component  is  intended  to  clarify  the 
work  of  engineers  and  politicians  and  others  who  are 
designing,  analysing  and  regulating  technology  and  is 
organised in close interaction with the actors involved. 
A methodological component reflects on the theoretical 
and  institutional  possibilities  and  limits  to  monitoring 
the development of science and technology.

Guido  has  an  academic  background  in  natural  and  
human sciences, theology and philosophy.

145

Social determinants of ICT

Guido VAN STEENDAM

ROUNDTABLE on the Ethical Aspects  
Of Information and Communication 
Technologies 
Brussels – Berlaymont Building, room Schuman 
Tuesday, 15th November, 2011        10.00-17.30 

Social determinants of ICT 
Focus: internet 

Guido Van Steendam 

	  	  Overview	  

Social determinants linked to: 

1.	  Informa+on	  

2.	  Communica+on	  

3.	  People	  

146

	  	  1.	  Informa+on	  

	  	  1.	  Informa+on	  

	  The	  abstract	  view	  

Page	  113	  

147

	  	  1.	  Informa+on	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Dealing	  with	  informa4on	  	  	  is	  not	  processing	  dead	  ma=er.	  	  

Informa4on	  is	  dealt	  with/	  (cid:1)interpreted(cid:2)	  in	  a	  lived	  context	  

	  including	  

	  …	  human	  bodies	  …	  infrastructures	  …	  
	  …	  ongoing	  prac4ces…	  

	  	  1.	  Informa+on	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

QUESTION.	  Can	  ICT-­‐technology	  deal	  with	  (cid:1)informa4on(cid:2)?	  
	  	  Not	  really.	  Apart	  from	  simple	  things	  

148

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  	  1.	  Informa+on	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

QUESTION.	  Can	  ICT-­‐technology	  deal	  with	  (cid:1)informa4on(cid:2)?	  
	  	  Not	  really	  !!!!!	  As	  long	  as	  a	  computer	  does	  not	  become	  
an	  embodied	  member	  of	  human	  society,	  sharing	  human	  
ambi4ons	  and	  limits	  

	  	  1.	  Informa+on	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

	   ARTIFICIAL	  INTELLIGENCE	  ?	  

1972	  

Hubert	  L.	  Dreyfus	  

149

	  	  1.	  Informa+on	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

	   ARTIFICIAL	  INTELLIGENCE	  ?	  

1972	  

1992	  

Hubert	  L.	  Dreyfus	  
2011	  

	  	  1.	  Informa+on	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

	   SELECTING	  RELEVANT	  WEBSITES?	  GOOGLE?	  

1999	  

Hubert	  L.	  Dreyfus	  
2011	  

150

	  	  1.	  Informa+on	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

	   SELECTING	  RELEVANT	  WEBSITES?	  GOOGLE?	  

1999	  

2009	  

Hubert	  L.	  Dreyfus	  
2011	  

	  	  1.	  Informa+on	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Intelligent	  soSware	  and	  internet	  	  

	  

	  does	  NOT	  proces	  informa4on	  as	  dead	  ma=er	  

	  

links	  its	  informa4on	  processing	  to	  human	  
embodied	  and	  embedded	  assessment	  

151

	  
	  
	  
	  	  2.	  Communica+on	  

	  	  2.	  Communica+on	  

	  The	  abstract	  view	  

Page	  113	  

152

	  	  2.	  Communica+on	  

	  The	  abstract	  view	  

Page	  113	  

	  	  2.	  Communica+on	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Informa+on	  ShiFing	  

Problema+c	  meaning	  

Communica4ng	  informa4on	  	  	  is	  not	  organizing	  ﬂow.	  	  

Communica4on	  is	  allowing	  other	  contexts	  to	  assimilate	  
some	  of	  the	  meaning	  of	  the	  informa4on	  

153

	  
	  
	  	  2.	  Communica+on	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Informa+on	  ShiFing	  

Problema+c	  meaning	  

	  	  2.	  Communica+on	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Informa+on	  ShiFing	  

Problema+c	  meaning	  

Thomas	  Hoepker,	  Williamsburg	  

154

	  	  2.	  Communica+on	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Informa+on	  ShiFing	  

Problema+c	  meaning	  

	  	  2.	  Communica+on	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Informa+on	  ShiFing	  

Problema+c	  meaning	  

155

	  	  2.	  Communica+on	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Informa+on	  ShiFing	  

Problema+c	  meaning	  

	  	  2.	  Communica+on	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Informa+on	  ShiFing	  

Problema+c	  ac+on	  

156

	  	  2.	  Communica+on	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Intelligent	  soSware	  and	  internet	  	  

	  

	  does	  NOT	  communicate	  informa4on	  as	  dead	  
ma=er	  

	  

is	  in	  permanent	  danger	  of	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  crea4ng	  misunderstandings	  of	  informa4on	  
	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  triggering	  inappropriate	  ac4on	  
	  

	   	  requires	  	  ac4ve	  transla4on	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  human	  assessment	  of	  	  

	  	  	  	  	  (cid:1)context	  integrity(cid:2)	  	  	  (	  >>	  

(cid:1)privacy(cid:2))	  

	  	  3.	  People	  

157

	  
	  
	  	  
	  
	  3.	  People	  

	  The	  abstract	  view	  

Page	  113	  

	  3.	  People	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

•  Society	  is	  not	  a	  merely	  homogeneous	  or	  

chao+c	  medium	  for	  informa+on	  

158

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

	  3.	  People	  

Compare	  

The	  internet	  

World	  Wide	  Web	  

New	  communica+on	  technologies	  

159

	  3.	  People	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Lászlo	  Barabási	  
Many	  other	  structural	  elements	  of	  
“random”	  society	  	  
are	  now	  understood	  
&	  integrated	  in	  opera4onal	  models.	  

e.g.	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  The	  six	  degrees	  

	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  The	  strength	  of	  (cid:1)weak(cid:1)	  4es	  

	  

160

	  
	  3.	  People	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Lászlo	  Barabási	  
The	  dynamics	  of	  network	  structures	  
is	  currently	  explored.	  

	  3.	  People	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Lászlo	  Barabási	  
The	  dynamics	  of	  network	  structures	  
is	  currently	  explored.	  

Preferen+al	  aPachment	  

Richs	  get	  richer	  

How	  to	  break	  in?	  

161

	  3.	  People	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Lászlo	  Barabási	  
The	  dynamics	  of	  network	  structures	  
is	  currently	  explored.	  

Total	  picture	  is	  complexity	  
but	  not	  randomnes	  and	  chaos	  

	  3.	  People	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Lászlo	  Barabási	  
Network	  structures	  ma=er	  

162

	  
	  3.	  People	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Lászlo	  Barabási	  
Network	  structures	  ma=er	  

Importance	  for	  medicine,	  
innova+on,	  …	  

Importance	  for	  understanding	  
networks	  of	  people	  

Importance	  for	  understanding	  
possibili+es	  of	  the	  www	  and	  the	  
inter-­‐net	  

	  3.	  People	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Lászlo	  Barabási	  
Network	  dynamics	  ma=er	  

Informa+on	  is	  disseminated	  

in	  chains	  of	  ac+on	  	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  and	  interpreta+on	  

163

	  	  Some	  key	  points	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

Informa4on	  is	  	  
always	  embedded	  

Communica4ng	  	  
is	  changing	  

ICT	  works	  for	  
networked	  people	  

	  Some	  key	  points	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

ICT	  is	  dealing	  with	  	  
embedded	  Informa4on	  &	  Communica4on	  for	  embedded	  people	  

164

	  Some	  key	  points	  

	  The	  embedded	  view	  

ICT	  s+ll	  too	  oFen	  assumes	  
it	  is	  dealing	  with	  dead	  	  maPer	  in	  an	  amorphous	  society	  

ICT	  is	  dealing	  with	  	  
embedded	  Informa4on	  &	  Communica4on	  for	  embedded	  people	  

165

Annex I

Participants

Ethical aspects of information and 
communication technologies

167

Members of the European Group on 
Ethics (EGE)

Julian KINDERLERER
President
Professor of Intellectual Property 
Law, University of Cape Town, South 
Africa; Professor of Biotechnology 
and Society, University of Technology, 
Delft, the Netherlands

Linda NIELSEN
Vice-President
Professor of Global Law and 
Governance, doctor jurist, University of 
Copenhagen, Denmark

Paula MARTINHO da SILVA
Lawyer, visiting Professor and Senior 
Investigator at the Bioethics Institute, 
Portuguese Catholic University, 
Portugal

Emmanuel AGIUS
Professor of Moral Philosophy and 
Moral Theology, Faculty of Theology
University of Malta, Malta

Inez de BEAUFORT
Professor of Health Care Ethics,
Erasmus Medical Centre,
Department of Medical Ethics
Rotterdam, the Netherlands

Hille HAKER
Richard McCormick S. J. Chair of 
Catholic Moral Theology, Loyola 
University, Chicago, USA (since 2010); 
Professor of Moral Theology and 
Social Ethics, University of Frankfurt, 
Germany (since 2005)

Pere PUIGDOMÈNECH ROSELL
Research Professor of CSIC,
Director of Plant Molecular Genetics
Laboratory, CSIC-IRIA 
Barcelona, Spain

Günter VIRT
Professor emeritus of Moral Theology, 
University of Vienna, Austria

Peter DABROCK
Chair of Systematic Theology (Ethics), 
University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, 
Germany

Andrzej GORSKI
Professor of Medicine, Medical 
University of Warsaw and Polish 
Academy of Sciences, Poland

Ritva HALILA
Head of Department, Hjelt Institute, 
University of Helsinki (2010–13) leave 
of absence; General Secretary, National 
Advisory Board on Social Welfare and 
Health Care Ethics (ETENE), Finland

Herman NYS
Lawyer, Professor of Medical Law, 
Faculties of Law and Medicine, KU 
Leuven, Belgium

Siobhán O’SULLIVAN
Chief Bioethics Officer, Department 
for Health and Children, Lecturer 
in Healthcare Ethics and Law, Royal 
College of Surgeons of Ireland

Laura PALAZZANI 
Full Professor of Philosophy of Law in 
Lumsa University, Rome, Italy

Marie-Jo THIEL
Professor, University of Strasbourg; 
Director of the European Centre  
for the Study and Teaching  
of Ethics (CEERE), University  
of Strasbourg, France

Secretariat of the EGE

Maurizio SALVI
European Commission 
BEPA
Head of the EGE Secretariat

Kim-Hoang LÊ
European Commission
BEPA

Lauren O’CONNOR
European Commission
BEPA

Adriana-Sorina OLTEAN
European Commission
BEPA

Speakers

Fabrizio SESTINI
European Commission
Directorate-General for the 
Information Society and Media

Chengetai MASANGO
Programme and Technology  
Manager,
United Nations Internet  
Governance Forum
Switzerland

168

Dixie HAWTIN
Research and Policy
Global Partners and Associates
United Kingdom

William ECHIKSON
External Relations,  
Communications and Public 
Affairs, Head of Free Expression EMEA 
at Google
Belgium

Peter HUSTINX
European Union
European Data Protection  
Supervisor
(the European guardian  
of personal data protection)
Belgium

Lee HIBBARD
Council of Europe’s coordinator  
on the information society and 
Internet governance
France

Michele BELLAVITE
ETNO — Chairman of the Digital 
Society Working Group
Belgium

Bernd CARSTEN-STAHL
De Montfort University
Professor of Critical Research in 
Technology and Director of the 
Centre for Computing and Social 
Responsibility
United Kingdom

Guido VAN STEENDAM
Professor of the Philosophy of 
Technology, KU Leuven;  
Director, International Forum  
for Biophilosophy 
Belgium

National instances

Pete MILLS
Nuffield Council on Bioethics
United Kingdom

Wenceslaus Leonard KILAMA
Pan African Bioethics Initiative
(PABIN)
Tanzania

Martina WEITSCH
Quaker Council for  
European Affairs
Belgium

Louise GUNNING-SCHEPERS
Heath Council of the Netherlands
The Netherlands

Constantin ZORBAS
Representation of Greece  
to the European Union
Belgium

Gabriela BODEA
TNO — The Netherlands  
Institute for Applied
Scientific Research
The Netherlands

Sonia ZDOROVTZOFF
European Juvenile Observatory
Belgium

Heidi HAVRANEK
Permanent Representation  
of Austria
Belgium

Octávia FROTA
Belgium

Academics

Ugo PAGALLO
University of Turin
Italy

Luiz COSTA
Facultés universitaires Notre-Dame
de la Paix (FUNDP)
Belgium

Emily LAIDLAW
University of East Anglia Law School
United Kingdom

Salim MOKADDEM
University of Sciences and Technics
of Languedoc-Roussillon,
University Montpellier 2
France

Mireille HILDEBRANDT
Vrije Universiteit Brussels
Radboud Universiteit Nijmegen
Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam
The Netherlands

André BEECKMANS DE 
WEST-MEERBEECK
Retired from the Belgian Nuclear
Research Centre
Belgium

Irma VAN DER PLOEG
Infonomics and New Media Research 
Centre,
Zuyd University
Maastricht, the Netherlands

David WEBBER
PA Europe  
Strategy Consulting and  
Public Affairs
Belgium

Charles de MARCILLY
Fondation Robert Schuman
Belgium

Jörg JANSSEN
European Movement International
Belgium

Quirine A. M. EIJKMAN
International Centre for Counter-
Terrorism (ICCT)
The Hague

John DOMINGUE
The Open University
United Kingdom

Joe McNAMEE
European Digital Rights
Belgium

Christopher HAYES
US Mission to the European Union
Belgium

Christian BORGGREEN
US Mission to the  
European Union
Belgium

Representatives of religion, 
churches and communities of 
conviction

Kostas ZORMPAS
Theologian sociologist
Belgium

Stefanie HEUER
Evangelische Kirche  
in Deutschland (EKD)
Belgium

Joseph P. DIMITROV
Continental Theological  
Seminary
Belgium

Marie des Neiges RUFFO
Université Paris-Sorbonne et
Facultés Universitaires Notre-Dame
De la Paix (FUNDP)
France

Christian DETWEILER
Delft University of Technology
The Netherlands

NGOs, agencies and associations

Caroline GANS COMBE
Reihoo
Versailles Saint Quentin en Yvelines 
University
France/Switzerland

Contance BOMMELAER
The Internet Society
Switzerland

Innocenzo GENNA
AIIP — Italian ISP Association
Belgium

Martin SCHMALZRIED
Coface (Confederation of Family 
Organisations in 
the EU)
Belgium 

169

Michael ROGERS
Belgium

Amélie COULET 
APCO Worldwide 
Belgium

Representatives of industry

Patricia WRUUCK
Google representative
Belgium

Cesare Marco PANCINI
Google representative
Belgium

Frederick DE BACKER
Telefonica SA
Belgium

Gilles DOWEK
INRIA Inventeurs du monde 
numérique
France

Jarka CHLOUPKOVA
Profi press
Belgium

European Parliament

Fabrizio PORRINO
European Parliament
Information Society  
and ICT Policies

Elina KAARTINEN
European Parliament
Committee on Industry,  
Research and Energy (ITRE)

Bendert Zevenbergen
European Parliament

Enterprise and Industry DG

Gordon BUHAGIAR
European Commission

Information Society  
and Media DG

BEPA (Bureau of European  
Policy Advisers)

Nicole DEWANDRE
European Commission

Jan-David BLAESE
European Commission

Research and  
Innovation DG

Giuseppe Giovanni DAQUINO
European Commission
Research Executive Agency to
the European Commission

Yves DUMONT
European Commission
Research and Innovation DG

Nicole ZWAANEVELD
European Commission

Loris PENSERINI
European Commission

Interpretation DG

Claude REPUSSARD
European Commission

Gaye COZORT
European Commission

Colin KOTZ
European Commission 

Maren RAUSSER
European Commission

Jean-Marc PFAU
European Commission

Astrid EISENHAUER
European Commission

Communication DG

Jennifer JACQUEMART
European Commission

Etienne ANSOTTE
European Commission

170

Annex II

Secretariat of the 
European Group 
on Ethics

Ethical aspects of information and 
communication technologies

171

Secretariat of the European 
Group on Ethics

Maurizio SALVI,  
MBA, MBS, PhD, D. Biotech. 
European Commission  
Head of the BEPA Ethics sector, 
Head of the EGE Secretariat, 

Berl 8/359, 1049 Brussels 
E-mail: Maurizio.Salvi@ec.europa.eu

Kim Hoang LÊ 
European Commission 
EGE Secretariat 

Berl 8/362, 1049 Brussels 
Tel. +32 2299-9228 
E-mail: Kim-Hoang.LE@ec.europa.eu

Adriana-Sorina OLTEAN
European Commission
EGE Secretariat

Berl 8/362, 1049 Brussels
Tel. +32 2299-3016
E-mail: Adriana-Sorina.Oltean@ec.europa.eu

172

Mail address

European Commission

Secretariat of the European Group on Ethics in Science  
and New Technologies

Berlaymont Building
BERL 8/362
Rue de la Loi/Wetstraat 200
1049 Bruxelles/Brussel
BELGIQUE/BELGÏE

Office

European Commission
Berlaymont Building
Rue de la Loi/Wetstraat 200
1049 Bruxelles/Brussel
BELGIQUE/BELGÏE

Website

http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm

173

European Commission

Ethical aspects of information and communication technologies — Proceedings of the round-table debate

Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union 

2012 — 173 pp. — 21 × 29.7 cm

ISBN 978-92-79-22327-3
doi:10.2796/13497

