N
J
-
3
0
-
1
2
-
8
7
1
-
E
N
-
C

T
h
e

E
u
r
o
p
e
a
n
G
r
o
u
p

o
n

E
t
h
i
c
s

i

n

S
c
i
e
n
c
e

a
n
d
N
e
w
T
e
c
h
n
o
o
g
e
s

l

i

The European Group on Ethics 
in Science and New Technologies: 
Round table 
on the energy mix in Europe

Brussels, 18 September 2012

doi:10.2796/18654

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HOW TO OBTAIN EU PUBLICATIONS

Free publications:

• 

• 

via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu);

 at the European Union’s representations or delegations. You can obtain their
contact details on the Internet (http://ec.europa.eu) or by sending a fax
to +352 2929-42758.

Priced publications:

• 

via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu).

Priced subscriptions (e.g. annual series of the Official Journal  of the European Union 
and reports of cases before the Court of Justice of the European Union):

• 

 via one of the sales agents of the Publications Office of the European Union
(http://publications.europa.eu/others/agents/index_en.htm).

European Group
on Ethics in Science
and New Technologies
to the European Commission

The European Group 
on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies: 
Round table on the 
energy mix in Europe

Brussels, 18 September 2012

Maurizio SALVI
Chief Editor
Head of the EGE Secretariat

Europe Direct is a service to help you fi nd answers 
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers 
or these calls may be billed.

More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu).

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication.

Luxembourg: Publications Offi  ce of the European Union, 2012

ISBN 978-92-79-26538-9
doi:10.2796/18654

© European Union, 2012
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Photo © Julien Eichinger

Printed in Belgium

PRINTED ON WHITE CHLORINE-FREE PAPER

Contents

INTRODUCTION
The European Group on Ethics 

ROUND-TABLE REPORT 

PROGRAMME FOR 18 SEPTEMBER 2012 

WELCOME SPEECH 
Julian KINDERLERER 

GUEST SPEAKERS 
Richard ADAMS 

Christian HEY 

AbuBakr S. BAHAJ 

Anita RØNNE 

Pier VELLINGA 

ANNEX I
Participants 

ANNEX II
Secretariat of the European Group on Ethics 

5

7

17

19
21

23
25

41

51

61

75

91

95

EGE round table 
on the energy mix in Europe

Introduction
The European Group on Ethics

The  European  Group  on  Ethics  (EGE)  is  an  independ-
ent,  pluralist  and  multidisciplinary  body  which  advises 
the European Commission on ethical aspects of science 
and new technologies in connection with the prepara-
tion  and  implementation  of  European  Union  policies 
and ultimately legislation. The EGE advises the Commis-
sion  on  ethical  questions  relating  to  sciences  and  new 
technologies,  either  at  the  request  of  the  Commission 
or  on  its  own  initiative  (1).  The  current  EGE  mandate 
was  adopted  by  a  Commission  decision  on  23  Decem-
ber 2009 (2010/1/EU).

In order to promote a responsible, socially inclusive and 
ethically sound implementation of the European Union 
energy policy, on 19 December 2011 the President of the 
European  Commission  requested  the  European  Group 
on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New  Technologies  (EGE)  to 
‘contribute  to  the  debate  on  a  sustainable  energy  mix 
in  Europe  by  studying  the  ethical  impact  of  research 
on  diff erent  energy  sources  on  human  wellbeing’.  The 
EGE accepted this request and decided to focus on the 
ethical  aspects  of  the  use  of  diff erent  energy  sources 
in  Europe,  as  foreseen  in  the  EGE  remit  (2).  The  group 
decided to address the following issues:

• 

• 

identify  the  ethical  criteria  on  the  manner  in  which 
decisions concerning research on sources of energy 
are to be taken on an informed basis and the implica-
tions arising from the use of energy in diff erent areas;

contextualise  the  ethical  issues  arising  from  energy 
use within the EU energy agenda, the mix of energy, 
consequences for the future, energy policy and regu-

lation (including environmental considerations), the 
precautionary principle, public perception and inter-
generational justice;

•  propose an ethical framework to be used on a case-
by-case basis in relation to the diff erent uses or pro-
duction methods of energy.

Following  the  adoption  of  its  opinion  on  the  ethical 
implications  of  information  communication  technol-
ogy  (22  February  2011),  on  20  and  21  March  2012  the 
EGE  started  work  on  its  new  opinion on the ethics of 
the energy mix in Europe requested by President Bar-
roso. The EGE worked on the opinion on 17 and 18 April, 
15  and  16  May,  18  June,  18  and  19  September,  4  and 
5  October, 20 and 21 November, and 11 and 12 Decem-
ber. The opinion should be adopted in December 2012.

When  preparing  its  opinions,  the  EGE  engages  in  a 
broad  consultation,  involving  individual  experts,  rep-
resentatives  of  European  institutions,  of  other  interna-
tional institutions and of civil society, and the chairs of 
the national ethics councils in the European Union Mem-
ber States. A round table was organised by the European 
Group on Ethics on 18 September 2012 in order to pro-
mote a transparent dialogue between parties represent-
ing many diff erent interests. This report gives a summary 
of the presentations and discussions which took place in 
Brussels.

Maurizio Salvi

Head of the EGE Secretariat

(1) 
(2) 

The Parliament and the Council may draw the Commission’s attention to questions which they consider to be of major ethical importance.
The role of the EGE is to provide the Commission with high quality and independent advice on ethical aspects of science and new technolo-
gies in connection with the preparation and implementation of European Union legislation or policies.

5

EGE round table 
on the energy mix in Europe

Round-Table Report

18 September 2012 in Brussels

Present EGE members: Emmanuel Agius, Inez de Beau-
fort,  Hille  Haker,  Julian  Kinderlerer,  Herman  Nys,  Pere 
Puigdomènech Rosell, Marie-Jo Thiel, Günter Virt, Siob-
han O’Sullivan, Paula Martinho da Silva, Laura Palazzani, 
Ritva Halila, Linda Nielsen

Absent EGE members: Andrzej Gorski, Peter Dabrock

EGE Secretariat: Maurizio Salvi, Kim Hoang Le, Adriana-
Sorina Oltean

Morning session:

The  President  of  the  group  opened  the  round  table. 
He underlined that the EGE round tables are conceived 
as a tool to guarantee transparency and open dialogue 
with relevant stakeholders in the fi elds covered by the 
EGE  opinions  prior  to  their  adoption.  The  President 
underlined that the EGE is working to defi ne an ethical 

and sustainable approach to the EU energy mix policy. 
This  eff ort  requires  the  EGE  to  address  scientifi c,  legal 
and social implications of the pan-European debate on 
energy,  having  in  mind  that  decisions  in  this  sensitive 
policy  sector  must  refer  to  both  the  EU  and  Member 
State (MS) levels. He underlined that the Lisbon Treaty 
allows  MS  to  autonomously  decide  on  the  energy  mix 
options to be implemented nationally, while the EU has 
fi xed  common  targets  in  the  fi elds  of  energy,  climate 
change  and  environment  protection.  In  this  complex 
fi eld, which is infl uenced by MS’ national autonomy and 
the  EU’s  common  energy  policy,  the  EGE  must  be  in  a 
position to issue its opinion, which should be pragmatic 
and  realistic  in  its  analysis  and  results.  The  President 
then invited participants to the round table to express 
views and indicate the main arguments to consider for a 
proper assessment of this complex policy issue.

Following  the  EGE  President’s  introductory  remarks, 
Dr  Richard  Adams  (Economic  and  Social  Committee) 
made a fi rst presentation to the group. He began by not-
ing  that  if  an  ethical  debate  on  energy  (fossil  fuel)  use 

7

had been held at the start of the industrial revolution, it 
would have had to balance material advantages against 
millions of deaths from production and pollution. Cata-
strophic  climate  change  was  a  real  threat  and,  though 
other  energy  options  are  now  available,  the  ethical 
debate is still in its infancy. The need to develop a practi-
cal ethics of energy arises because, for the fi rst time in 
human history, the whole earth is in human hands. He 
argued that our energy mix has to be adequate, aff ord-
able  and  accessible  to  all;  any  solution  also  has  to  be 
based on pragmatic assessments of current and future 
political,  technological  and  fi nancial  constraints.  We 
need to act urgently as the problems and costs of miti-
gation or adaptation are constantly increasing.

Dr  Adams  noted  that  90  %  of  the  growth  in  energy 
demand in the next 25 years will come from non-OECD 
countries  and  it  is  forecasted  that,  even  then,  75  %  of 
our primary energy will come from fossil fuels. We must 
have the technology to capture and store carbon emis-
sions  at  source  but  we  still  have  no  large-scale  carbon 
capture and storage (CCS), so increased eff orts are vital. 
Renewable energy technologies off er a 70 to 90 % lower 
carbon output than fossil fuels, but his assessment was 
that it was unlikely that, even with massive growth, they 
would  exceed  a  20  %  total  energy  contribution  in  the 
next  25  years.  Nuclear  fi ssion,  although  controversial, 
cannot be excluded from the future energy mix because 
of  the  uncertainties  of  other  low-carbon  technologies. 
He  argued  that  there  are  no  agreed  and  enforceable 
global or European energy policies which will deliver a 
low-carbon energy mix establishing a European energy 
community  —  a  forum  where  a  dynamic  conversation 
between  confl icting  ethical  positions  and  the  practical 
and strategic ethics of energy research, production and 
use can take place.

Following  Dr  Adams’  presentation,  Dr  Christian  Hey 
(Secretary-General  of  the  German  Advisory  Council 
of  the  Environment)  delivered  a  speech  on  the  report 
on  100  %  electricity  by  renewable  sources,  which  was 
adopted  by  the  German  Advisory  Council  of  the  Envi-
ronment in 2011. He explained that for the abovemen-
tioned (independent and multidisciplinary) council, the 
overall  framework  for  the  energy  choice  is  strong  sus-
tainability, with specifi c references to preserving natural 
life-supporting systems. The main goal of the report was 
to show that a conversion of the power sector to 100 % 
renewable sources is technically feasible and achievable 
at  low  cost,  while  ensuring  security  of  supply.  His  key 
argument is that a technologically neutral approach to 
a sustainable energy mix is not realistic. Political choices 
on the energy mix are unavoidable.

He  stressed  that  the  energy  power  sector  needs  to 
promote  decarbonisation.  Further  criteria  for  the  tech-
nology  choice  (fossil  fuel,  nuclear,  fossil  fuel  with  CCS, 
renewable  energy)  are  risk  and  other  environmental 
criteria.  He  claimed  that  diff erent  low-carbon  systems 
cannot work in parallel if they are not compatible with 
each  other.  Conventional  baseload-oriented  powers, 
such  as  nuclear  energy  and  renewable  electricity,  are 
systemically  not  compatible.  He  also  explained  that 
the  price  of  conventional  energy  sources  is  increasing 
while  the  opposite  is  happening  for  renewable  energy 
sources (including the cost of infrastructures). In light of 
this,  the  German  council  concluded  that  conventional 
sources  need  to  be  substituted  by  renewable  sources, 
otherwise the following targets will not be met: climate 
change, environment sustainability, etc. He also stressed 
that bioenergy potentials are minimal and cannot play 
a proper role in a transition to a sustainable renewable 
energy production.

8

Dr Hey also underlined that no consensus on the energy 
mix  exists  in  the  EU  so  far  (think  of  nuclear),  that  the 
energy  mix  per  se  is  a  national  competence  and  that 
the  EU  only  benefi ts  from  an  indirect  competence  in 
this  policy  domain  (internal  market,  energy  effi  ciency, 
climate  policies,  etc.).  He  stated  that  a  full  European 
competence in energy domains is unrealistic in the fore-
seeable  future  together  with  attempts  to  develop  full 
EU harmonisation. He favoured the existing governance 
models,  where  both  energy  effi  ciency  and  overall  sus-
tainability targets are valorised at EU level, while Mem-
ber States have some freedom in the design of market 
support  for  renewables.  In  that  sense  he  suggested  to 
assess  climate,  effi  ciency  and  renewables  targets  for 

2030, similar to the ‘triple 20’ targets for 2020, e.g. a tri-
ple 40 or 50 target.

Following Dr Hey’s presentation, Prof. AbuBakr S. Bahaj 
(Professor  of  Sustainable  Energy  at  the  University  of 
Southampton)  gave  a  speech  on  possible  options  for 
a sustainable energy mix in the EU. He advocated that 
a  debate  on  energy  mix  should  refer  to  the  genera-
tion,  distribution  and  consumption  of  various  energy 
sources. He stressed the need to carry out this analysis 
having  in  mind  the  (local)  energy  vectors  (resources, 
proximity,  economic  viability,  etc.)  and  needs  in  diff er-
ent  geographical  regions  of  the  EU.  He  stressed  that  a 
debate on the decarbonisation of energy use in the EU is 

9

challenged with many ethical concerns such as the use 
of fossil fuels, the needs of future generations (including 
climate change), nuclear energy and its risk assessment, 
the use of nuclear waste material for military purposes, 
etc. He stressed that ecological implications cannot be 
denied (renewables imply impacts on the environment, 
on  visual  aspects  and  on  local  stakeholders)  and  that 
the price of energy is a key element to address (such as 
electricity/gas  prices  and  fuel  poverty)  together  with 
socioeconomic implications. He underlined that energy 
infrastructures  are  expensive  and  their  reorganisation 
(in  adapting  to  decarbonisation  options,  smart  grids, 
etc.) cannot avoid addressing costs for society and con-
sumers.  Considerations  on  community  and  stakehold-
ers’  needs  are  therefore  vital  to  designing  an  energy 
mix which is both responsible and societally acceptable. 
He stated that renewable energy is highly supported in 
the UK, the EU and the US, but this requires large invest-
ments. For instance, around GBP 200 billion is the esti-
mated amount that will be invested in the UK to achieve 
the 15 % EU reduction target by 2020.

He  explained  that  small-scale  and  micro-generation 
technologies  are  starting  to  be  employed  to  optimise 
energy  household  use  across  the  EU  MS.  He  further 
explained that given the estimation that around 70 % of 
the world population will be living in cities by 2050, we 
need  to  establish  low-carbon  cities,  which  will  reduce 
the  stress  on  energy  supply  by  being  more  effi  cient  in 
consumption as well as reducing pollution. But he also 
stressed  that  low-carbon  communities  require  accept-
ance  and  planning  issues,  including  community  share 
of  the  reward  vs  utility  profi ts.  He  stated  that,  in  this 
respect,  the  role  of  new  technologies  is  of  paramount 
importance together with the decarbonisation of trans-
port.

He  also  stressed  that,  globally,  more  than  1.4  billion 
people have no access to electricity today, and that UN 
millennium development goals and other developmen-
tal targets are yet to be fulfi lled in the energy domain. 
He  therefore  stressed  that  equity  in  consumption  and 
sustainability  aspirations  are  needed  in  geopolitical 
negotiations  on  CO2  emissions,  energy  sustainability, 
urbanisation,  demographic  growth,  and  the  economic 

and fi nancial crisis. He called for a holistic approach to 
the energy debate; we need to be inquisitive and real-
istic in our aspirations for a new paradigm in our energy 
mix that is geared to being less polluting, equitable and 
more akin to sustainable development. 

Following  the  above  speeches  a  debate  started.  Issues 
discussed included:

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

the  systemic  incompatibility  between  conventional 
and renewable energy systems;

the need to use coal or nuclear power to compensate 
the energy needs in a transition phase to renewable 
energy;

the role the precautionary principle plays in risk assess-
ments of conventional energy sources (including regu-
latory provisions and environment protection);

the  role  of  the  international  thermonuclear  experi-
mental  reactor  (ITER)  in  the  energy  research  sector 
and considerations on the resources allocated to its 
maintenance;

link  between  governmental  and 

the 
individual 
responsibility towards energy consumption policies;

•  governance 

issues  (centralised  vs  decentralised 
approaches) in the energy domain and the role the 
EGE opinions play in this debate;

•  access to multiple energy sources by consumers;

• 

the role biomass plays in the energy mix debate.

Responses by speakers included:

Dr Adams: the precautionary principle is mentioned in 
many policy papers of the EU, but this was not applied 
to the development of the fossil fuel economy (millions 
of people dying from CO2 emissions). The precautionary 
principle seems to be applied to new technologies more 
than all uses of technology. For example, the use of fossil 
fuels in shipping has caused around 27 000 deaths per 

10

year in the EU and, had this been analysed through the 
precautionary principle perspective, it might have been 
possible to consider diff erent energy policy options. Pre-
caution should be applied to all uses of energy.

Fusion and ITER is a promising technology. It may pro-
vide energy for all, but the fact that it is not yet deliver-
ing results does not imply that this global research plat-
form should be decreased in size and scope.

Citizens  are  hardly  informed  about  the  energy  debate 
and governments decide on grounds which do not rely 
on public debates. Public debates are needed if a demo-
cratic process on energy mix is to be established.

Living low-energy lifestyles would radically help the sus-
tainable use of energy; this requires actions by citizens.

Dr  Hey:  the  incompatibility  of  energy  systems  is  long 
term  as  intermitting  sources  such  as  wind  and  solar 
become relevant in the energy mix. The share of renew-
able-based electricity will increase from 4 % in 2000, to 
over 25 % in 2012, to close to 50 % in 2020. This is only 
possible  with  fl exible  conventional  sources;  nuclear 
power  energy  production  is  too  infl exible.  A  priority-
setting process in the energy mix debate requires that a 
decision on whether to go for conventional rather than 
renewable energy is taken. Actions are required to com-
plement energy needs not covered by renewable energy, 
for example smart grid and storage technologies.

The precautionary principle requires that in the absence 
of  evidence,  it  is  possible  to  implement  alternative 
options  based  on  precaution,  when  relevant  risk  fac-
tors  have  been  identifi ed.  The  precautionary  principle 
applied in Germany to take a position on nuclear power 
has  considered  categorical  and  non-categorical  argu-
ments. The German ethics commission argued that non-
categorical arguments also justify the nuclear phase-out 
decision, as safe and low-cost alternatives are available.

Individual behaviour by citizens is value-driven only by 
10 % of the population. In order to obtain a critical mass, 
opportunistic options — which attract decisions on life-

styles on the basis of clear utilities — need to be off ered 
and provided.

Centralised  and  decentralised  energy  policy  options 
have to coexist because they refl ect the energy needs of 
the place where the energy mix is applied.

Bioenergy is a scarce resource; the available land cannot 
sustain this without paying high consequences for envi-
ronment protection, food security and soil sustainability.

Dr  Bahaj:  the  use  of  biomass  may  also  be  optimised 
with  a  lower  impact  for  land  and  food  sustainability.  It 
is  important  to  not  only  consider  government  as  the 
actor to empower decisions for energy. Citizens’ energy 
uses are of paramount importance for the consumption 
of energy on a community scale. Public engagement is 
needed together with an increased transparency of the 
energy  sector  (e.g.  think  of  the  lack  of  transparency  in 
payment processes of electricity bills by energy provid-
ers).

Additional questions included:

• 

• 

the link between common goods and market goals 
(allocation and production);

the European Parliament study on bioenergy options 
and food security;

•  biofuels  and  public  debate  as  well  as  the  ability  to 

implement EU CO2 emission targets;

• 

shale gas and CO2 emission targets;

•  optimisation of the production/use of energy;

• 

• 

• 

industrial energy policy in the EU;

storage capacity in the energy domain;

future generations and energy sustainability;

•  dual use implications of nuclear research.

11

Responses by speakers included:

Dr Adams: the argument stating that with new storage 
solutions,  renewables  will  cover  all  needs  of  modern 
society may equally be applied to nuclear. Low-carbon 
targets  are  more  relevant  than  renewable  energy  tar-
gets. It is important to avoid adopting rigid target sys-
tems  with  no  consideration  of  the  specifi c  features  of 
the country where they should be applied (adoption of 
unrealistic scenarios).

Dr  Hey:  The  review  of  the  EU  biofuel  targets  is  to  be 
welcomed.  Renewable  targets  in  the  EU  renewables 
directive  allow  both  fl exibility  and  subsidiarity  accord-
ing  to  the  specifi c  national  conditions.  This  is  also  a 
good  model  for  2030  targets.  The  critical  energy  shift 
needed  to  achieve  the  low-carbon  economy  goals  will 
imply growing renewable shares as a no-regret element 
in  any  transition  strategy.  The  use  of  40–50  %  renew-
able energy by 2030 would be a realistic target. Gas is a 
transitional solution and is not compatible with the zero-
carbon power sector. Gas is also linked to sustainability 
constraints.

The EU industrial policy on energy exists and the Euro-
pean  technology  platforms  on  energy  as  well  as  the 
renewables  directive  are  also  motivated  by  industrial 
policy considerations.

Priority is to be given to energy storage technologies as 
energy storage capacities are currently limited. Political 
decisions are therefore needed and cannot be avoided.

Prof  Bahaj:  storage  technologies  are  the  Holy  Grail 
for  bridging  the  gap  of  intermittent  energy  supply 
resources. So a lot needs to be achieved in terms of tech-
nology  development  and  reliability  of  supply.  In  terms 
of  nuclear  energy,  we  need  to  undertake  detailed  risk 
analyses and we should not be afraid to put these for-
ward to our people. Risk policies require evidence-based 
approaches and public discourses, which will inevitably 
be impacted by market-driven forces.

In term of governance, accountability for accepting tar-
gets and not achieving them does not exist in legal sys-

tems and this often pushes politicians to adopt targets 
which  may  be  unrealistic  or  not  properly  followed  by 
actions to achieve them. In a constrained, election time 
frame, such targets are moveable and hence long-term 
planning  and  legislative  provisions  should  be  made 
more mandatory than the current practice. 

The  EGE  President  closed  the  morning  session  and 
stressed  that  considerations  on  ITER  are  similar  to  the 
ones  used  to  sustain/oppose  the  human  genome  pro-
ject,  an  ambitious  research  action  which  has  provided 
the expected results for potential developments in biol-
ogy and medicine.

Afternoon session:

The afternoon session was opened by a speech by Prof. 
Anita Rønne (Associate Professor in Energy Law, Uni-
versity  of  Copenhagen).  She  stressed  that  the  debate 
on  energy  refers  to  a  complex  fragmented  regulatory 
framework  in  the  EU.  She  explained  that  in  order  to 
properly  assess  the  energy  mix  debate,  a  number  of 
initial considerations have to be taken, namely: energy 
demand will grow worldwide and fossil resources will 
concentrate  in  fewer  states  (think  of  energy  security). 
She  referred  to  the  Rio+  20  concluding  document 
that emphasises sustainable development where eco-
nomic,  social  and  environmental  considerations  play 
an equal role. In the above document, it is recognised 
that energy plays a critical role in global development 
and that a sustainable access to an energy model needs 
to  be  identifi ed  and  implemented  across  the  globe 
where  more  than  1.4  billion  people  are  still  without 
electricity.  Traditional  and  renewable  resources  will 
therefore  coexist  in  the  short  and  medium  term  and 
she advocated that in order to realistically implement a 
paradigm shift in energy policy (renewable energy, effi  -
ciency  and  low-carbon  societies),  a  proper  debate  on 
energy sustainability, use and mix is needed. She also 
explained that 2012 is the UN ‘International year of sus-
tainable energy for all’, a clear goal indicated globally. 
She stated that this goal is linked to a specifi c strategy 
aiming to reduce CO2 emissions, open access to energy 
for all and redirect 2.5 billion energy users who are cur-

12

rently  using  only  traditional  biomass  for  energy  con-
sumption to more effi  cient and environmentally safer 
sources.

She  advocated  that  the  EU  imports  54  %  of  its  energy 
and an increasing degree is from unstable regions of the 
world (45 % from the Middle East), threatening security. 
Although Denmark is the only EU-27 Member State that 
covers its own energy demand, this country introduced 
radical reforms in the last 30 years with a current reduc-
tion in fossil fuel consumption by a factor of 20 % and 
the aspirational goal to be fossil fuel free by 2050. She 
explained  that  the  EU  energy  roadmap  2050  indicates 
some targets such as increasing renewable energy con-
sumption and optimising energy consumption without 
taking  a  position  on  nuclear  power  production.  She 
underlined  that  Germany,  Japan  and  Switzerland  have 
announced  their  intention  to  end  nuclear  power  pro-
duction, without releasing details on how to cover the 
energy  gaps  deriving  from  such  a  decision  and  with 
a  possible  unavoidable  increase  in  fossil  fuel  use  for 
energy purposes.

She explained that existing laws regulating the energy 
domain are fragmented at diff erent levels and between 
diff erent  sectors.  Disconnected  and  uncoordinated 
regulatory frameworks with indirect impacts on energy 
coexist  in  the  EU  today  (on  trade,  environment  and 
agriculture). She underlined that the principle of sover-
eignty  allows  national  decisions  in  the  fi eld  of  energy 
that  are  becoming  increasingly  transnational  in  their 
scope. At the same time, existing international law pro-
vides that the notion of common responsibility be incor-
porated in environmental law, where responsibilities for 
future generations and damages to the environment of 
other states are regulated. The principle of sovereignty 
is therefore coming under pressure internationally. She 

then stressed that law has already prepared legal tools 
for  common  EU  actions  in  the  energy  sector  and  for 
environmental  protection.  However,  when  legislation 
on  energy  is  prepared,  the  sovereignty  of  MS  towards 
their  natural  resources  is  advocated  to  claim  subsidi-
arity  while  Article  194  of  the  Treaty  on  the  Function-
ing  of  the  European  Union  (TFEU)  as  amended  by  the 
Lisbon  Treaty  also  advocates  solidarity  in  the  fi elds  of 
energy and Article 191 a prudent utilisation of natural 
resources. Finally, some of the regulatory measures for 
achieving  the  EU  targets  on  greening  the  community 
were highlighted together with some of the challenges 
and  dilemmas  for  science,  policy,  economy,  law  and 
ethics — paradigm shifts, long-term horizons, globalisa-
tion and the schism between the developed and devel-
oping world.

Following  Prof.  Rønne’s  presentation,  Dr  Pier  Vellinga 
(Wageningen  University  and  Vrij  Universiteit  Amster-
dam,  Chairman  of  the  national  research  programme 
‘Knowledge  for  climate’)  made  a  presentation  on  the 
debate on climate change. He underlined that a proper 
debate on climate change needs to face the fact that the 
EU heavily imports energy from countries not respecting 
the minimal human rights standards. He then advocated 
that  climate  change  data  show  an  increase  in  global 
temperature  of  0.1–0.2  °C  each  decade.  He  explained 
that paleoclimate research results reveal the sensitivity 
of the climate to CO2 variations, with foreseeable rapid 
changes in climate determining, inter alia, decreases in 
the  polar  surface  (240  000  hectares  in  2012).  He  advo-
cated that the political debate on measures to fi ght cli-
mate changes is deep and many countries try to create 
doubts on the same credibility of climate change scien-
tifi c  data.  He  stressed  that  by  2030,  the  EU  will  import 
70 % of its energy needs and it will spend 3 % of its GDP 
on energy.

13

He  stressed  that  ethical  considerations  should  induce 
ending  imports  of  energy  from  countries  that  do  not 
respect human rights and that energy policy should be 
linked to socio-political stability (south–north). He advo-
cated that more investment should be made in progres-
sive emission standards, by reducing national subsidies 
for fossil fuel energy production and investing in trans-
boundary electricity grids. He concluded by stating that 
European emission trading should be reinforced, market 
failures should be faced and allocation of funds should 
be diminished.

Following  the  above  speeches  a  debate  started.  Issues 
discussed included:

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

the  coexistence  of  multiple  soft-law  instruments  in 
the energy domain;

the usability of the precautionary principle in regula-
tory eff orts in energy;

the possible role the EU may play with regard to the 
global governance of energy;

the role of social science in promoting public debate 
on energy;

the  role  shale  gas  plays  in  both  the  sustainable 
energy debate and the CO2 emissions debate;

the role risk, climate change and sustainability play in 
decision-making on EU energy mix polices;

the  energy  poverty  option  and  its  possible  use  to 
advocate the need for conventional energy sources;

the economic consequences of national subsidies to 
energy actors.

Responses by speakers included:

Dr Rønne: lack of implementation and use of soft laws 
is now being changed with the adoption of legally bind-
ing  requirements  in  climate  change  and  environment 
protection.  The  involvement  of  the  public  is  a  cen-
tral  element.  In  Denmark,  the  public  support  for  wind 
electricity  helped  the  establishment  of  this  renewable 
energy  source.  Now  that  the  principle  of  solidarity  has 
been  introduced  in  the  Treaty  for  the  energy  sector,  it 
should play a role in particular concerning energy secu-
rity  issues  at  the  EU  level.  The  EU  will  focus  more  and 
more on common approaches and subsidiarity will pay 
the price of this. Shale gas is debated now, but environ-
mental risks are present and some implications for the 
development of new renewables are already present. As 
a  general  principle,  in  order  to  achieve  positive  results 
in decarbonisation, it is important that new options also 
off er business opportunities.

Dr  Vellinga:  the  EU  global  leadership  started  with  an 
international  debate  on  climate  change  and  CO2  emis-
sions reduction. Some lifestyle changes emerge also in 
energy  consumption,  and  competitiveness  is  now  the 
driving force in the energy debate. If the use of alterna-
tive energy opens job opportunities, then the additional 
costs will be accepted (value for tax money in terms of 
social  utility).  Renewables  must  get  a  bigger  share  in 
research funds since this is a way to implement the EU 
targets.

Dr Hey: EU integration has always made progress under 
the condition of strong consensus, sometimes in exter-
nal  shock  situations  such  as  the  present  fi nancial  cri-
sis.  Such  conditions  also  applied  to  decisions  on  the 
energy  mix,  but  with  a  specifi c  limit:  no  EU  consensus 
is possible on nuclear. 2020 energy targets, as decided 
in 2008, had a pan-European consensus and this was a 

14

historic step in helping the defi nition of the EU energy 
targets for climate change protection purposes. Renew-
able sources were identifi ed as factors to be promoted, 
despite  national  subsidiarity,  in  view  of  the  following: 
(1)  enhancing  energy  security  and  reducing  import 
dependency on other regions of the world, (2) industrial 
policy and (3) climate change.

• 

Prof.  Bahaj:  photovoltaic  also  obtained  national  sub-
sidies.  The  EU  is  focusing  on  the  supply  side  but  the 
demand  side  is  neglected  (both  industry  and  consum-
ers); this last factor is behaviour driven. Research is often 
spread out and would need more targets. The EU should 
focus its attention on small consortia providing evidence 
of results.

Additional questions included:

• 

the level of investment needed for an eff ective use of 
smart grids in the EU;

•  whether  the  EGE  should  provide  pragmatic  recom-
mendations  or  limit  its  work  to  a  narrative  analysis 
of  the  ethics  framework  to  use  in  the  energy  mix 
debate;

• 

• 

resources to be allocated to smart grids and the role 
inter-generational responsibility plays in this;

• 

consequences  of  the  liberalisation  of  the  energy 
market with regard to the increase in energy prices 
for EU citizens.

The  debate  amongst  speakers  and  round-table  partici-
pants also included the following.

•  EUR 400 billion up to 2020 was considered as a mini-
mal  investment  for  a  proper  establishment  of  the 
EU smart grids, out of which EUR 10 billion is to be 
provided  by  the  EU  and  the  remaining  amount  by 
MS and the private sector. Storage and grids are fun-
damental factors to consider for a better energy sys-
tem in the EU. The Belgian electricity grid regulator 
estimated that the cost of bringing energy (off shore 
wind) to the continent would be EUR 70 billion. The 

15

European  network  of  system  operators  should  pro-
vide data.

If  the  interest  of  current  or  future  generations  of 
consumers  is  considered,  then  decisions  have  an 
ethical nature and translate into resource allocation. 
Balancing  the  interests  of  current  and  future  gen-
erations  is  therefore  a  major  factor  to  consider  in 
issuing an opinion on energy. The energy mix issue 
is not easily addressable with unique solutions, but 
there are a number of options; it is important not to 
identify renewable energy as good per se and con-
ventional energy as bad per se. The debate is com-
plex and needs to face the complexity of the topic. 
Practical  outcomes  are  to  be  perceived  as  obliga-
tions for proposing/adopting energy policy options. 
The short-term deliverables cannot be denied in the 
name  of  potential  results  to  be  achieved  in  20  or 
30 years.

•  The  EU  liberalisation  of  the  energy  market  has  not 
resulted in improvement or reduction of prices. Pub-
lic  trust  is  important  and  dialogue  platforms  with 
multiple stakeholders should be established and sus-
tained in the EU.

In  Denmark,  a  9  %  premium  for  private  investors 
is  proposed  for  investment  in  energy  smart  grids. 
Now  the  responsibilities  of  the  national  grid  plan 
are attributed to citizens. This is a public-based grid 
design approach meant to increase public responsi-
bility. International grid development is now needed 
in the EU and the EUR 10 billion from the EU is not 
suffi  cient.

•  Ethical  issues  should  be  addressed  together  with 
climate change, security of supply and the needs of 
diff erent  EU  countries  (emission  standards  should 
better  be  provided).  In  addition,  grids  should  be 
fi nanced and jobs created in the EU for workers in the 
energy sector, rather than importing energy.

Following the above debate, the President of the EGE 
presented  several  concluding  remarks,  he  indicated 
topics  debated  at  the  meeting,  such  as  energy  grids, 

energy  generation,  costs  of  energy  transport,  metal 
needed  for  pylons  and  wind  wiles,  raw  material  uses, 
etc. He advocated that the micro-generation of electric-
ity  and  consumers’  concerns  are  relevant.  He  stressed 
that  systems  to  guarantee  access  to  energy  are  to  be 
established against the current situation in which 18 % 
of the people use 80 % of the existing energy resources 

in  the  world.  He  stressed  that  comparing  diff erent 
mechanisms to produce and use energy is imperative, 
having in mind the entire lifecycle of energy use. Crite-
ria to assess these elements will be provided in the EGE 
opinion.

The round table ended at 17.30.

16

EGE round table 
on the energy mix in Europe

Programme 
for 18 September 2012

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies: Round table on the energy mix in Europe

Brussels — Berlaymont Building, room WHALL
Tuesday, 18 September 2012
10.00–17.30

AGENDA

09.30 

Registration — coff  ee

Afternoon session

10.00–10.10 

 Welcome address to the EGE Roundtable 
by Julian Kinderlerer
President of the EGE

14.30–14.50 

 Towards a sustainable energy mix — 
new horizons and pitfalls 
for the legal regime

10.10–10.30  The energy mix: an ethical imperative

 Richard Adams (European Economic and
Social Committee)
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

10.30–10.50  EU governance for a sustainable energy mix

 Anita Rønne (Associate Professor 
in Energy Law, University Copenhagen)
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

14.50–15.10 

 Climate change and the ethical aspects 
of fossil fuel

 Christian Hey (Secretary-General 
of the German Advisory Council 
of the Environment)
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

 Pier Vellinga (Wageningen University 
and Vrij Universiteit Amsterdam,
Chairman of the national research 
programme ‘Knowledge for Climate’)
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

10.50–11.10 

 Ethical issues in the energy supply mix — 
an engineer’s view

15.10–16.00  Questions to speakers and the EGE

 AbuBakr S. Bahaj (Professor 
of Sustainable Energy at the University 
of Southampton)
Followed by discussion (10 minutes)

16.00–16.30  Coff  ee break

16.30–17.20 

 Discussion and contributions from 
participants 

11.10–11.30  Coff  ee break

17.20–17.30  Closing remarks from the EGE President

11.30–12.00  Questions to speakers and the EGE

12.00–13.00 

 Discussion and contributions 
from participants

13.00 

Lunch (Hall Berlaymont 1st Floor)

17.30 

End of the round table

The round-table video is available on: 
http://scic.ec.europa.eu/streaming/index.php?es=2&sessionno=a9b4ec2eb4ab7b1b9c3392bb5388119d

17

 
 
 
 
 
Welcome speech

EGE round table 
on the energy mix in Europe

19

EGE round table 
on the energy mix in Europe

Julian KINDERLERER

President of the EGE 

Julian  Kinderlerer  is  a  biochemist  who  moved  from 
research interests in theoretical aspects of enzymology 
and enzyme kinetics to looking at law, ethics, risk assess-
ment  and  risk  analysis  in  biotechnology,  and  then  to 
leading a group at UCT on intellectual property law and 
policy.

He is President of the European Group on Ethics in Sci-
ence  and  New  Technologies  (EGE)  that  reports  to  the 
European Parliament and to the President and Council 
of the European Union.

During  2000  he  was  seconded  to  work  in  Nairobi  for 
the  United  Nations  Environment  Programme,  and  he 
prepared  a  project  funded  by  the  Global  Environment 
Facility (GEF) to assist in the provision of biosafety frame-
works in 119 developing countries. He was also one of 
the  prime  authors  of  the  initial  strategy  for  biosafety 
agreed by the GEF. He remained involved as the primary 
‘consultant’ for the project and works with and in many 
of the 124 countries involved in the development phase 
of the project. He was the specialist adviser to a House of 
Lords Select Committee investigation into modern bio-
technology  with  particular  reference  to  European  law 
as it impacts on agriculture and food during 1998. This 
was  a  major  report  on  the  manner  in  which  European 
legislation in relation to genetically modifi ed organisms 
should be handled.

He was a member of the Advisory Committee for Genetic 
Modifi cation  (ACGM)  from  1984  to  2003,  a  member  of 
the  independent  technical  subcommittee  of  ACGM 
until  2003  and  a  member  of  the  Advisory  Committee 
for Releases into the Environment (ACRE) since releases 
were fi rst considered in the UK until 1999.

Julian  has  contributed  to  the  drafting  of  legislation  or 
guidelines  for  the  safe  use  of  the  products  of  biotech-

nology in many countries throughout the world, includ-
ing the Baltic States, Brazil, Bulgaria, the Czech Repub-
lic, Malaysia, Mexico, Namibia, Russia, South Africa and 
Thailand.

In February 2009 he was the legal adviser for the South 
African  delegation  that  was  involved  in  negotiating 
the  Nagoya–Kuala  Lumpur  supplementary  protocol  on 
liability and redress in the event of harm caused by liv-
ing modifi ed organisms. He has also advised the South 
African government on a wide range of issues including:

1.  a code of conduct when working with nano-science 

in South Africa;

2.  a  database  policy  for  the  collection  and  storage  of 
information  relating  to  traditional  and  indigenous 
knowledge in South Africa.

Globally he has attended an interagency group involv-
ing the UN organisations, WTO and the European Union 
looking at the ethical issues of intellectual property pro-
tection and has advised and worked with the European 
Patent Offi  ce (EPO) in relation to biotechnology patents. 
Julian  was  invited  to  be  a  speaker  (twice)  at  a  major 
conference  organised  by  the  European  Patent  Offi  ce 
in November 2007 in Brussels in relation to intellectual 
property and genetics/biotechnology, while celebrating 
its 30th anniversary. This meeting was entitled ‘Scenar-
ios for the future: how might IP regimes evolve by 2025? 
What  global  legitimacy  might  such  regimes  have?’  It 
was an important meeting, for it raised the many issues 
that  both  lawyers  and  scientists  have  been  discussing 
— can the IP system as it is currently formulated meet 
the needs of inventors and society? During June 2009 he 
was  invited  to  work  with  the  directors  of  the  EPO  bio-
technology teams at a retreat looking at patents in this 
important area.

21

Opening comments 
at the energy round table by 
Prof. Julian KINDERLERER

This is an unusual occasion for the European Group on 
Ethics  in  Science  and  New  Technologies  (EGE).  In  gen-
eral we have addressed issues related to bioethics, the 
ethical  issues  concerned  with  research,  development 
and  use  of  biology  or  impacts  on  humans,  animals  or 
the environment. Suddenly, within this mandate of the 
group we have been asked to address the ethical issues 
related  to  science  in  fi elds  not  directly  related  to  bio-
ethics, however widely defi ned. In the fi rst instance, we 
were asked to look at the ethics of information and com-
munication  technologies.  Given  the  perspective  of  the 
group, we stressed issues related to privacy and identity 
above  all  others  (Opinion  26  was  published  in  Febru-
ary  2012).  While  we  were  working  on  the  issues  raised 
by  the  enormous  growth  in  computer  capabilities  that 
we have witnessed over the last few years, we received 
a  request  from  President  Barroso  to  examine  some-
thing crucial to our daily lives, and possibly even a new 
human right — access to energy. On 28 June 2011, the 
Competitiveness Council reached a political agreement 
on the Commission proposal for a nuclear research and 
training programme for 2012–13. The Council believed 
that a broad discourse on ethical issues and sustainable 
energy mix in Europe should take place. In this context, 
the Commission announced its intention to ask the EGE 
to contribute to the debate on a sustainable energy mix 
in Europe by studying the ethical impact of research on 
diff erent energy sources on human wellbeing. President 
Barroso wrote to us to ask that the opinion should (inter 
alia) contribute to:

1.  the  interinstitutional  debate  on  the  ‘Horizon  2020’ 

EU programme;

2.  an interdisciplinary study on the benefi ts and limita-
tions of nuclear fi ssion for a low-carbon economy to 
be issued by the Commission in 2012; and

3.  an  interdisciplinary  symposium  on  energy  sources 

that the Commission will organise in 2013.

We have agreed to the request of the Commission, but 
want to look at all sources of energy. Hence, we will try 
to  address  the  ethical  issues  in  relation  to  availability, 
use  and  research  into  energy  production.  Any  assess-
ment  of  ethical  issues  raised  by  the  production  or  use 
of energy sources requires a full ‘lifetime’ assessment for 
each  source  so  that  a  comparative  assessment  can  be 
made. This requires assessing the manner in which the 
products  are  sourced  or  made,  the  materials  used,  the 
energy  and  manpower  used,  impacts  on  the  environ-
ment in sourcing the materials, and impacts on human 
health  and  on  social  structures  if  this  source  were  to 
be  continued  or  discontinued.  Amongst  other  issues, 
the  assessment  should  examine  all  stages  of  the  pro-
duction,  use,  storage  and  disposal  of  energy  materials, 
including mining or drilling, materials used, equipment 
used, pollution of air and environment, impact on social 
structures and needs and on economic health. If there is 
an environmental impact or human health impact from 
mechanisms  for  storing  or  handling  energy  (batter-
ies, pumped up water supplies, oil tanks and pipelines, 
nuclear isotope storage and production, safe storage of 
hydrogen or liquid and solid fuels, etc.), this should be 
addressed.  Finally,  the  lifecycle  analysis  should  look  at 
handling of waste materials from the same standpoints. 
We should even be looking at the impact of distribution 
systems  on  social  systems  (e.g.  pylon  and  high  energy 
cables, coal carrying trains, oil pipelines, etc.).

The  diff erentiation  between  static  energy  require-
ments  —  electricity,  gas,  coal-fi red  heating,  oil  —  and 
the mobile energy systems such as power for transport 
including  public  transport  and  private  transport  which 
could use electricity cables, batteries, petrol, gas or die-
sel engines should also be explicit.

We are obviously on a steep learning curve. Today’s dis-
cussion will help us to understand the many topics we 
need to take into account. Thank you for giving us the 
opportunity to listen.

22

Guest speakers

EGE round table 
on the energy mix in Europe

23

24

EGE round table 
on the energy mix in Europe

Richard ADAMS

European Economic and Social Committee

Richard  Adams  is  a  founder  of  several  successful  UK 
social enterprises that allow people to express ethical val-
ues through their work, spending or saving. The majority 
have been focussed on fair trade, the problems of social 
exclusion,  fuel  poverty,  international  development  and 
sustainability.  He  has  also  founded  a  corporate  social 
responsibility  research  group  and  the  UK’s  fi rst  ethical 
supermarket chain. He has degrees in sociology, theology 

and business and has a number of honorary doctorates 
and visiting fellowships from British universities. He is cur-
rently a co-chair of the European Nuclear Energy Forum 
and President of the EESC’s permanent study group on a 
European  energy  community.  Recent  EESC  opinions  for 
which he was rapporteur include the topics of the energy 
and low-carbon roadmaps 2050, nuclear safety coopera-
tion outside the EU and radioactive waste management.

25

Presentation to the European Group 

on Ethics in Science and New Technologies:

Richard Adams, 18 September 2012

Round table on the ethical aspects of energy mix
The energy mix: an ethical imperative 

I  work  mainly  on  energy  issues  in  the  Economic  and 
Social Committee — my practical experience is develop-
ing a large scheme in the UK to combat fuel poverty. But 
I would like to start with some interesting news.

it  richer, 

There is a new form of energy we can exploit. It is widely 
available,  it  is  cheap  and  it  will  transform  our  society, 
making 
longer-living  and  technologically 
advanced.  Oh,  but  there  are  some  side  eff ects!  In  the 
next 250 years it will result in the death of tens, perhaps 
hundreds  of  millions  of  people,  either  through  its  pro-
duction or from the health eff ects of its use. Now, should 
we use it? If you are still uncertain let me add that unless 
we stop using it at the end of 250 years we might cause 
catastrophic change to our planet resulting in death and 
displacement  for  billions  of  people. You  will  have  real-
ised that I am talking about the ethical debate we didn’t 
have  about  coal,  and  the  same  could  apply  to  a  lesser 
extent about oil and then gas (3).

I think the reason that we are talking about energy and 
ethics is because it is hard to exaggerate the importance 
of this topic for the future of our world. Ten per cent of 
global GDP is spent on energy and how we produce it 
has  brought  us  to  the  edge  of  a  climate  change  preci-
pice. But energy is a technically straightforward thing — 
it’s the ethics that are the problem (4).

We  now  know  that  most  forms  of  the  energy  we  use 
derive from our sun, and the one that doesn’t, nuclear 
energy,  derives  from  other  suns,  now  long  vanished. 
Energy  is  comparatively  straightforward,  but  when  we 

link it with ethics to determine a right or wrong course of 
practical action and behaviour, things become diffi  cult.

The diffi  culty is apparent in the shortage of studies and 
analyses on ethics and energy. Food, medicine, educa-
tion, business and many other aspects of living all have 
well-developed  ethical  analyses,  but  energy  has  been 
neglected, in spite of its links to these other areas, par-
ticularly health. Despite the current work on combining 
insights from traditional ethical theories such as deonto-
logical  ethics,  consequentialism,  virtue  ethics  and  con-
tractualism, there are no universally agreed solid philo-
sophical foundations on which an ethics of energy can 
be based. However, in the realm of practical ethics there 
are emerging agreements and the process in which we 
are now engaged will, I believe, make a major contribu-
tion.  This  drive  to  develop  a  practical  ethics  of  energy 
is  mainly  because,  for  the  fi rst  time  in  human  history, 
the  whole  earth  has  found  itself  in  human  hands.  This 
new ethical context presents us with new ethical choices 
whether we like it or not. Everything we do as a species 
and even the things which we choose not to do will have 
their impact.

But fi rst we have to establish what an ethical position on 
the energy mix might involve.

Our global pattern of life for the foreseeable future will 
be dependent on access to huge energy resources. Our 
modern life is based, to a very large extent, on fossil fuel 
deposits built up over hundreds of millions of years. At 
the present rate of consumption they will be exhausted 

(3) 

(4) 

This opening section raises the question as to why an ethical debate never took place 250 years ago, never, in fact, until quite recently. The 
answer must be a combination of factors. Because of the fundamental imperialistic dimensions of Enlightenment thought; because the con-
sequences were never calculated; because the immediate health eff ects e.g. deaths and injuries from mining, were ignored and other eff ects 
not realised; because the economic systems were deemed to be ‘natural’ and unavoidable, and so on. Therefore we might learn lessons for 
our situation from this moral failure in the past. Is the reason why we are failing to do the ethics now for the same bad reasons? Historians may 
well have a role to play.
Earlier reports which to some degree tackle this issue, e.g. Brundtland 1987, Unesco/COMEST 2001, see climate change as a smaller issue and 
put equal stress on the polluting eff ects of energy production such as health issues, smoke inhalation and the poisoning of the environment 
by acid rain, acidifi cation of oceans, lakes and rivers, as well as heavy-metal poisoning. These factors, naturally, remain of great importance.

26

within 200 years; some forms, such as oil (even allowing 
for unconventional sources), much sooner. But the ethi-
cal dilemma of the energy mix is with us now. Between 
60 and 70 % of greenhouse gas emissions come, directly 
or  indirectly,  from  fossil  fuels.  Global  climate  change, 
because of its impact on the entire biosphere and future 
generations,  itself  constitutes  an  ethical  challenge  to 
which there is no simple response — but it is clear that 
ethics needs to be part of any response.

Before elaborating I should add that I am not ignoring 
other  possible  ways  of  dealing  with  climate  change. 
Massive  bioengineering  or  geo-engineering  schemes 
have been proposed to either lock-in carbon or reduce 
the impact of solar radiation. But it seems to me that in 
both cases the ethical and the technical issues involved 
are  considerably  more  complex  and  uncertain  than  in 
dealing  with  the  problem  at  source  by  creating  a  sus-
tainable low-carbon energy mix (6).

Our  energy  mix  also  has  to  be  adequate,  aff ordable 
and accessible to all. In this way, we can reach a holis-
tic approach covering all the key aspects of sustainabil-
ity,  including  the  drive  to  reduce  poverty  and  inequal-
ity.  And  fi nally,  any  solution  we  propose  has  to  pass  a 
reality  test  and  be  based  on  pragmatic  assessments  of 
current and future political, technological and fi nancial 
constraints.

Energy  is  not  only  important  because  of  its  role  in  cli-
mate  change,  but  because  it  cuts  across  every  sec-
tor  of  life  and  is  integral  to  a  country’s  interests.  As  an 
energy minister of an EU state told me recently, ‘My job 
is to keep the lights on, whatever happens.’ The World 
Energy Council has suggested that we need to reconcile 
growing energy demand with energy security, environ-
mental protection and the fi ght against energy poverty 
(this is not dissimilar to the EU energy roadmap (‘Energy 
Roadmap  2050’  (COM(2011)885  fi nal  of  15  December 
2011)) and I would propose that the main strands of an 
ethical energy policy should enable us to do this.

If  we  follow  this  approach  I  suggest  that  we  need  to 
emphasise  public  education  and  awareness;  a  greater 
analysis  and  knowledge  of  comparative  risk  and  tech-
nological  constraints;  an  understanding  of  Europe’s 
role  in  the  global  setting;  the  requirement  for  greatly 
increased R & D; and an agreed and applied European, 
and preferably global, energy policy framework. We will 
also  have  to  evolve  further  fi nancial  investment  and 
support  mechanisms  supplementary  to  the  market. 
Only this will give us the basis for a low-carbon energy 
mix in the future (5).

So  what  are  our  options?  Because  we  are  one  interac-
tive global community we have to take the global per-
spective as our starting point. Many argue that the most 
obvious thing is to reduce our energy dependency, but 
even in mature and developed economies this is prov-
ing  exceptionally  diffi  cult.  Yes,  we  need  to  be  more 
energy  effi  cient,  we  need  to  make  a  ‘transition’  to  a 
lower  energy  way  of  global  living,  but  such  a  change 
is  not  widely  accepted,  or  practised,  at  present.  Can 
we  impose  energy  constraint  on  emerging  economies 
whose energy usage per person is a fraction of our own? 
Can we do this when we, in the developed economies, 
have the primary responsibility for establishing the use 
of  fossil  fuels?  Can  we  even  take  a  lead  in  Europe  by 
demonstrating a signifi cant reduction in energy usage? 
Can  democratic  governments  count  on  public  support 
for energy control and rationing if this doesn’t happen 
voluntarily?

Let  us  also  remember  that  the  International  Energy 
Agency (IEA) forecasts that over the next 25 years 90 % 
of  the  growth  in  energy  demand  will  come  from  non-
OECD countries. At the end of that period we will still be 
obtaining 75 % of our primary energy from fossil fuels. 
Even if we see a better than forecast reduction in CO2 by 
the  replacement  of  coal  with  unconventional  gas  and 
oil the implications are obvious. Unless we have in place 
the technology to capture and store carbon emissions at 
source from the majority of this primary energy produc-
tion we will signifi cantly exceed the so-called maximum 
‘safe’  level  of  450  ppm  in  the  atmosphere.  As  we  still 
have no large-scale CCS, this means increased eff orts in 
carbon storage and/or usage as well as R & D and pilot-

(5) 

(6) 

In spite of past failings and the risk of being thought hypocritical, Europe could and should take on the role of exemplar in the global com-
munity. For example, the Africa–EU energy partnership programme has ambitious practical aims, but also a truly partnership ethic built into 
it. There is a hint that Europe has special moral responsibility for Africa because of colonialism, but what is stressed is mutual advantage and 
partnership working. For example, if we could assist Africa in electricity production, we would greatly reduce pollution from wood burning 
which could play a major role in reducing climate change. Also, because Africa has lower electrical provision that any other region it would 
help more dramatically with the ‘accessibility for all’ criterion.
In this context it is worth mentioning ‘mitigation’ and ‘adaptation’. We need to mitigate the production of GHGs by reducing them, but we 
also need to adapt, e.g. by raising fl ood defences. These two aspects need separate treatment from an ethics point of view. There are World 
Bank studies on adaptation which have some ethical dimensions.

27

ing,  plus  a  commitment  that  all  major  new  fossil  fuel 
power  plants  worldwide  are  designed  and  built  to  use 
CO2 capture technology with accessible storage facilities 
identifi ed.  This  will  mean  signifi cant  research,  technol-
ogy  transfer  and  investment  support  (7).  I  leave  you  to 
judge whether all this is really likely to come about.

Next let us explore the wide range of renewable energy 
technologies  that,  for  the  most  part,  off er  energy  at  a 
70–90  %  lower  carbon  output  than  fossil  fuels.  At  one 
end  of  the  scale  are  the  scenarios  that  claim  we  could 
have all new global energy supplied by wind, water and 
solar power by 2030 and all energy from renewables by 
2050 (8); somewhere in the middle is the IEA forecast that 
renewables in total will comprise around 16 % of energy 
by  2035,  whilst  the  pessimists  point  to  the  growth  in 
unconventional  gas  and  oil  and  see  little  change  from 
fossil fuels providing their present 80 % contribution to 
the energy mix over the next 25 years.

My heart is with the optimists, my reason is with the IEA, 
but I have to admit that I fear the worst; there will be too 
little  mitigation  and  inadequate  adaptation.  We  have 
to  make  complex  choices.  The  volume  of  renewables 
required,  the  continuing  problem  of  intermittent  pro-
duction and storage, the lock-in of fossil fuels as energy 
sources  and  not  least  the  cost  and  investment  factors, 
technological  gaps  and  the  short-term  nature  of  pub-
lic and political suggest to me that renewables on their 
own cannot take more than 20 % of the global energy 
mix in the next 25 years.

The  remaining  major  low-carbon  energy  source  is 
nuclear  power.  Whether  nuclear  will  contribute  more 
than its present 400 GW (about 7 %) is in the balance due 
to concerns about risk, public acceptance and cost. Work 
on nuclear fusion continues — its promise of unlimited 
energy cannot be ignored — but it will not contribute 
in  the  lifetime  of  anyone  here.  Nuclear  fi ssion  is  espe-
cially  contentious  and  is  the  only  energy  source  that 
has been subject to a specifi c ethical review, as we have 
heard. The German ethics commission argued that as a 
nuclear accident might cause, and I quote, ‘the ultimate 
disaster’  its  use  should  be  categorically  rejected.  And 

here we come to one of the vital questions in the eth-
ics of determining the energy mix: is it valid to attempt 
to relativise the risk implicit in the success or failure of 
applied  technologies  and  systems  approaches  or  are 
there technologies whose use potentially contains such 
devastating  consequences  that  they  must  be  rejected, 
as the German view implies?

Risk  is  a  permanent  and  important  part  of  life  but  a 
systematic  approach  to  risk  governance  is  essential.  I 
believe  the  ‘relative  risk’  approach  should  be  one  ele-
ment of an ethical view. If we do so, with our current state 
of knowledge and experience, we can make an informed 
judgement, at a global as well as European level, that it is 
necessary to maintain as wide a platform of low-carbon 
sources  energy  for  energy  production  as  possible,  and 
this should include nuclear, both fi ssion and fusion. Not 
doing so substantially increases the risk of catastrophic 
climate change, a much more likely ‘ultimate disaster’. 

Most  of  what  I  have  outlined  so  far  has  been  from  the 
global and European perspective. The reality is that there 
are  no  agreed  and  enforceable  (9)  global  or  European 
energy  policies  which  will  deliver  a  low-carbon  energy 
mix. This is because states jealously guard their national 
competences in energy. Progress at present depends on 
fragmented cooperation based on mutual national eco-
nomic  and  security  interests.  A  European  energy  com-
munity with agreed policies in the purchase, production 
and use of energy would be a major advance, both prac-
tically and in setting a global model which takes account 
of sustainable development and poverty eradication. My 
own body, the European Economic and Social Commit-
tee,  takes  this  view  and  is  actively  pursuing  its  realisa-
tion.

Such  action  will  need  political  wisdom  and  courage, 
qualities  that  are  in  short  supply  but  which  could  be 
encouraged  and  supported  by  a  better-informed  civil 
society.  At  a  local  level  in  Europe  we  see  resistance 
building to the proposed infrastructure which is needed 
to support a low-carbon energy mix. This applies to the 
new  grid  investments,  the  biofuel  debate,  the  visual 
impact of wind turbines, environmental impacts of tidal 

(7) 

The UN ‘Sustainable energy for all’ programme has the aim ‘to make sustainable energy for all a reality by 2030.’ This is very ambitious but 
the report does give quite specifi c actions that it would be necessary to make for the vision come true. It suggests that these actions are 
achievable; it also argues that the long-term costs would be less than the consequences of doing nothing. What is needed is a sea-change of 
imagination as well as some hard economics.
Jacobson and Delucchi, 2010.

(8) 
(9)  Reports and action plans that imply that a constructive, sustainable vision for energy can be achieved by global agreement — a social contract 
type ethic — but the sad failure of such an approach means that both at European and at international levels we need to consider the ethics 
of sanctions within the framework of law.

28

barrages, and a growing concern about the high level of 
subsidy supporting renewables. Individuals are becom-
ing  more  energy-aware  but  most  people  have  yet  to 
realise the urgency and depth of the problem.

This is why it is vital that we have an urgent and dynamic 
conversation between confl icting ethical positions and 
the practical and strategic ethics of energy research, pro-
duction and use. The IEA identifi ed some keys issues in 
their  report  on  clean  energy  R  &  D.  There  has  been  an 
unprecedented  intervention  by  governments  in  devel-
oping policies that work with and infl uence energy and 
consumer  markets  and  a  signifi cant  expansion  in  the 
research,  development  and  demonstration  of  all  avail-
able low-carbon energy technologies, including nuclear. 
I  would  add  two  things:  the  Member  States  in  Europe 
must strongly commit to a collaborative energy policy, 

one that is also open to participation by its neighbours 
and, in its principles and structure, could also be a global 
paradigm.  Secondly,  a  well-structured  public  debate 
needs  to  underpin  our  energy  discussions,  something 
that we fi nd echoed in the current approach of the Euro-
pean Commission in the energy roadmap. Our target is 
a  low-carbon  energy  mix  based  on  fi rm  ethical  princi-
ples and which also seeks to deliver an adequate living 
standard  for  Europe’s  citizens  in  2050  without  unduly 
compromising  the  ability  of  the  planet’s  then  9  billion 
people to achieve their aspirations (10).

I  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  generous  help  pro-
vided by my colleague, Michael Williams, in developing 
this paper. His grasp of ethics is far better than mine! I 
have attached to this paper as an appendix some further 
thoughts on how the subject might be approached.

(10)  As well as the energy mix we have to consider the ethics of adaptive policies because it is inevitable that climate change will impact even if, 
in the longer term, it can be reversed or stabilised. It is argued in the World Bank study that major polluting nations ought to give assistance 
to other nations and communities that will suff er most, most of which are the poorest and who cannot aff ord to do anything themselves. This 
raises substantial ethical issues.

(11)  Parfi t, Derek, On What Matters, Oxford University Press, 2011

29

Richard ADAMS

(cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:70) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:72)

(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:76)(cid:91)(cid:29)
(cid:36)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)

(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:42)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)
(cid:54)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:49)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)
(cid:54)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:27)(cid:87)(cid:75) (cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)

30

(cid:53)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:86)
(cid:48)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:177) (cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:70) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:72)

(cid:135) (cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:177) (cid:40)(cid:40)(cid:54)(cid:38)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:42)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)
(cid:17) (cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)
(cid:135) (cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:16)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:49)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:41)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:3)
(cid:135) (cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:16)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:88)(cid:85) (cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:19)

(cid:36)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17)

31

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)

(cid:135) (cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:42)(cid:39)(cid:51)
(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)
(cid:135) (cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:91)

(cid:42)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:179)(cid:40)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)(cid:180)

(cid:135) (cid:48)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)
(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)
(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)
(cid:135) (cid:48)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)
(cid:135) (cid:54)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)
(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)

(cid:24)(cid:15)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:15)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)
(cid:20)(cid:15)(cid:24)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:15)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)
(cid:21)(cid:25)(cid:22)(cid:15)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)
(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:24)(cid:15)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)
(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:27)(cid:15)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)
(cid:22)(cid:23)(cid:15)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)

3232

(cid:42)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:32)(cid:3)(cid:42)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)

(cid:41)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:79) (cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:177) (cid:38)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:81)

3333

(cid:49)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17)

(cid:135) (cid:36)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:177) (cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:22)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:68)
(cid:135) (cid:36)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:177) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:72)
(cid:135) (cid:36)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:177) (cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)
(cid:135) (cid:36)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:177) (cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)

(cid:44)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17)

(cid:135) (cid:51)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)
(cid:135) (cid:36)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:78)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:3)

(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86)
(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:182)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)
(cid:135) (cid:42)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:9)(cid:39)
(cid:135) (cid:36)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:15)(cid:3)

(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)

(cid:135) (cid:54)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:16)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)

34

(cid:44)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:179)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:180) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:34)

(cid:135)(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:34)
(cid:135)(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:34)
(cid:135)(cid:54)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:181)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:182) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:92)(cid:34)
(cid:135)(cid:39)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:34)
(cid:135)(cid:44)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:34)

35

(cid:179)(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)

(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:91)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)
(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:29)(cid:3)
(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:16)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:77)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:16)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)
(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:16)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)
(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:30)(cid:3)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:16)
(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:180)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)
(cid:36)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:36)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:3)

(cid:54)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:34)

(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)
(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:19)(cid:34)
Jacobson and Delucchi, 2010

(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:22)(cid:24)(cid:34)
IEA 2011

(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:19)(cid:34)
IPCC 2011 (most pessimistic scenario)

36

(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:41)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:34)
(cid:135) (cid:56)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:34)
(cid:135) (cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:54)(cid:34)
(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:34)
(cid:135) (cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)
(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:16)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:34)

(cid:135) (cid:58)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:16)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)

(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:34)(cid:3)

(cid:181)(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:182) (cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:34)

(cid:135)(cid:40)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:16)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:3)
(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:54)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:34)

(cid:135)(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:12)(cid:3)
(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:34)

37

(cid:46)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:52)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:54)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:78) (cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)

(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:34)

(cid:135) (cid:38)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:12)(cid:3)

(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:34)(cid:3)

(cid:135) (cid:54)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)

(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)
(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:34)

(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:78)

(cid:49)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)
(cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)
(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:91)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:3)
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:56)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17)

(cid:135) (cid:36)(cid:69)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:15)(cid:3)
(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:92)

(cid:135) (cid:51)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)

(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:41)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:16)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)
(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)

38

(cid:42)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)

(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)

(cid:135) (cid:50)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)
(cid:135) (cid:37)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:16)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:18)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:18)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:54)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86)
(cid:135) (cid:57)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)
(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:9)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:92)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:82)
(cid:135) (cid:43)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)

(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)

(cid:36)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)
(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17)

(cid:135) (cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)
(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:86)
(cid:135) (cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:15)(cid:3)
(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)
(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)
(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:3)

(cid:135) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:80)

(cid:135) (cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)

39

(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:78)(cid:3)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:88)
(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:3)
(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)

EGE round table 
on the energy mix in Europe

Christian HEY

Secretary-General of the German Advisory 
Council of the Environment

Curriculum Vitae

Diploma  in  Public  Administration,  PhD  in  Political  Sci-
ences.

•  1989–97:  Project  Coordinator  in  the  Institute  for 
Regional  Studies  in  Europe  (EURES),  Freiburg;  pro-
jects and publications on environmental NGOs, Euro-
pean transport — energy and environment policies; 
PhD on ‘Sustainable mobility in Europe’.

•  1997–2001: EU Policy Director of the European Envi-

ronmental Bureau (EEB), Brussels.

•  Since  2001:  Secretary-General  of  the  German  Advi-

sory Council on the Environment (SRU).

•  2001–09:  Steering  Committee  Member  of  the  net-
work  of  European  Environment  and  Sustainable 
Development Advisory Councils (EEAC).

•  Since  2006:  Chair  of  the  network  of  European  Envi-
ronment  and  Sustainable  Development  Advisory 
Councils (EEAC) Energy Working Group.

41

Dr Christian Hey

Organisation and country: German Advisory Council on the Environment

Thank you for the invitation.

I come from an independent, interdisciplinary and scien-
tifi c council established by the federal German govern-
ment  to  give  advice  on  environmental  issues  —  espe-
cially on controversial ones.

We  published  a  special  report  on  a  sustainable  power 
sector,  based  upon  100  %  renewable  energy  sources 
(RES) in early 2011.

The  report  played  an  important  role  for  Germany’s 
energy transition and the strategic choice of the federal 
government in favour of renewable energy sources.

I would like to raise fi ve points. I begin with a series of 
economic arguments:
1.  I will be starting with strong sustainable development 

(SD) as the framework; then

2.  develop a critique to a market-based technology neu-

tral approach; and

3.  make  a  case  in  favour  of  RES  as  the  only  potentially 

sustainable source.

Then I will look into aspects of political governance:
4.  I  have  some  doubt  that  EU  consensus  is  achievable 

soon; and

5.  therefore suggest an incrementalist solution for that 

dilemma.

Strong sustainability means that the economy is part of 
wider ecosystem and can only prosper if life-supporting 
earth systems are not disrupted. Priority must be given 
to maintaining natural capital. This is the understanding 
of the German federal SD strategy — a similar frame at 
EU level is no longer alive. The energy policy triangle — 
achieving security of supply, aff ordability and sustaina-
bility — is subordinated to this overall frame. It is evident 
that  political  choices  on  a  sustainable  energy  mix  are 
needed and though effi  ciency and low carbon intensity 
are very important criteria they are not the only ones for 
the energy mix.

A minimum requirement for a sustainable energy mix is 
its contribution to a low-carbon economy (LCE). The offi  -
cial EU target is a GHG reduction of at least 80 % in view 
of  the  globally  agreed  target  to  prevent  temperature 
increases  beyond  2  degrees.  As  the  Commission  and 

many  others  have  calculated:  even  an  80  %  reduction 
by 2050 means complete decarbonisation of the power 
sector in order to leave some fl ex for the other sectors. 
Conventional wisdom tells us that a technology-neutral 
approach  to  decarbonisation  is  most  compatible  with 
the internal market.

I would like to make a very strong point here: technol-
ogy  neutrality  is  a  fi ction.  Implicit  or  explicit  systemic 
decisions are needed; this means political decisions on 
energy sources are unavoidable.

There are a few arguments: fi rst, each technology is asso-
ciated with diff erent types of externalities (risk, safe stor-
age, land use). If and how seriously you address them is 
a matter of political choices and strongly infl uences the 
competitive  position  of  the  sources  and  hence  energy 
mix. Just to give you one example: the design of insur-
ance for liability against nuclear accidents determines if 
nuclear energy is competitive or not compared to other 
sources. The range of the external cost of nuclear energy 
is  estimated  to  be  between  0.1  and  320  cents/kWh 
depending on the assumptions and the internalisation 
strategy.

Second, the diff erent low-carbon sources cannot grow all 
at the same time. They are technically and economically 
incompatible.  You  see,  here  there  is  a  misfi t  between 
the  least  cost  intermitting  sources  such  as  wind  and 
solar  and  infl exible  ones  such  as  nuclear.  Coexistence 
between  the  two  produces  at  least  tremendous  ineffi  -
ciencies whenever one of the two has to be switched off -
grid  or  it  requires  extraordinary  investment  in  interna-
tional storage and grid. Systemic incompatibility was a 
key winning argument for the strategic decision against 
nuclear energy in Germany.

Third,  one  property  of  most  RES  is  the  learning  cost 
curve; they become cheaper over time as market pene-
tration increases. Conventional sources tend to become 
more  expensive.  Markets  with  their  static  effi  ciency 
hence discriminate against a source, which is expensive 
now, but becomes the cheapest in the future. Therefore 
some active market diff  usion policy is necessary.

Last, but not least: infrastructure is only partially technol-
ogy neutral. There is a diff erent geography for the loca-
tion of renewable and conventional sources.

42

My council concludes that only renewables pass the sus-
tainability test. The key argument is: there is no source 
without  impact.  But  impacts  and  risks  of  conventional 
sources are technologically determined, some impacts are 
irreversible. The impacts of non-biogenic RES (wind, solar) 
are  site-specifi c  and  reversible:  land  use  confl icts  can  be 
minimised by choosing least confl icting sites. We have the 
freedom to choose, because the low-cost energy potential 
in Europe exceeds demand by a factor of eight at least.

This  calculation  is  derived  from  a  detailed  geographi-
cal information system for Europe and northern Africa, 
calculated  by  the  German  aerospace  centre  (DLR).  The 
interesting point here is: bioenergy does not play a sig-
nifi cant role, because the sustainable bioenergy poten-
tial is minimal!

So we face a dilemma: we have a case for a sustainable 
solution — energy from renewable sources — but politi-
cal  realities  in  the  EU  are  not  there.  The  energy  mix  is 
controversial among Member States, mainly on nuclear 
energy. Therefore the EU has limited competence on the 
energy mix. Nevertheless, the EU is powerful in policies 
with an indirect impact — most of them potentially in 
favour of RES, but not all. 

And  multiple  drivers  favour  the  growth  of  renewable 
energy  sources  despite  national  diff erences  on  the 
remaining  energy  mix.  RES  form  the  most  important 
new power generation capacity in the EU.

The strongest argument is: there is a no-regret case for 
RES. If you go for the LCE, RES shares have to grow, inde-
pendently of the preferences for the remaining shares.

As a conclusion: one has to be cautious as regards the 
feasibility of a full-fl edged energy competence and the 
calls for full harmonisation of the support scheme.

Several  Member  States  presently  are  in  a  mode  of 
experimentalist  governance.  They  are  reinventing  and 
fi ne-tuning market designs for RES support. But nobody 
knows the best market design. Experimentalist govern-
ance must be error friendly and hence limited in scale. 
Therefore, support policy is not a suitable issue for full 
EU harmonisation. The present compromise is better: EU 
target setting combined with national market design in 
the context of internal market objectives.

But  nevertheless,  a  proactive  EU  approach  is  needed: 
for  instance  a  climate  target  for  2030,  a  RES  target  for 
2030 and an effi  ciency target: should we talk about triple 
40 or triple 50 by 2030?!

Such an incrementalist, step-by-step approach strength-
ens  renewable  energy  sources.  As  market  shares  and 
employment  increase,  cost  decreases,  innovation  is 
boosted  and  political  support  improves:  so  a  virtuous 
cycle  of  dynamic  market  penetration,  innovation  and 
enhanced policy support can be created. Eventually we 
may achieve stronger integration of EU energy markets 
and policies.

I hope I could give you some food for thought!

Thank you very much for your attention.

43

Christian HEY

EGE
Brussels, 18.9.2012

EU Governance for a                

Sustainable Energy Mix  

Dr. Christian Hey

Advisory Council on the Environment, Berlin 

Overview

(cid:190) Strong sustainability as frame

(cid:190) Limitations of a market based, technology neutral approach

(cid:190) Some reasons in favour of RES   

(cid:190) European governance in the energy sector: challenges

(cid:190) Conclusion: Incrementalism and policy feed-back

44

2

Strong Sustainability – as the Guiding Frame

Climate Neutral Power Sector by 2050

... as the key target

3

Europäische Kommission, 2011

4

45

Technology neutrality is a fiction I 

How to internalize risk and environmental cost across sources?

Fossil 
without
CCS

Nuclear

Fossil with 
CCS

Renewable 
Energy

Missing climate 
targets

Risk
acceptance 
Final storage
costs

Storage-risk 
capacity
acceptance

Security of 
supply
land-use 
conflicts

Technology neutrality is a fiction II 

Systemic incompatibility between conventional and renewable electricity 

Nuclear power capacity: approx. 20 GW

Shutdown at approx. 10 GW

46

5

6

Technology neutrality is a fiction III 

Static efficiency undermines dynamic efficiency

Only potentially sustainable solution is renewable energy 

... if SD criteria apply for land-use and biodiversity

Coal 
without
CCS

X

Nuclear

Coal with 
CCS

Renewable 
Energy

X

X

Missing climate 
targets

Risk
acceptance 
final storage
costs

Storage-risk 
capacity
acceptance

Security of 
supply
land-use 
conflicts

47

7

8

Very big low cost potential of RES: factor 8 to demand

offers flexibility for site-specific selection 

Low cost potential

Forecast Demand

Present State of EU Governance 

(cid:190) No consensus among member states on energy mix 

(Nuclear as the most contentious issue)

(cid:190) Hence: limited EU competencies on energy policy –

choice of energy mix is national competence 

(cid:190) But: Indirect competencies (internal market, energy 

efficiency, climate and environment; infrastructure)

(cid:190) and multiple drivers for renewables policy (No Regret 
Element of any LCE; Security of supply, industrial 
policy)   

48

9

10

Suggestions for Smart EU Governance 

(cid:190) Full-fledged energy competence unrealistic for at least the next 

decade

(cid:190) Hence full harmonisation of renewables policy unrealistic

(cid:190) Leeway for experimental governance on market design in 

member states is necessary

(cid:190) Strong policies and targets where EU is strong: e.g. climate, 

energy efficiency, sustainability criteria for RES

(cid:190) No Regret targets for renewables for 2030: rely on policy 

feed back as sector grows

(cid:190) Learn from best practice for grid planning, incentives and public 

participation in member states 

11

Thank you for your attention

Dr. Christian Hey

Sachverständigenrat für Umweltfragen, Berlin 
www.umweltrat.de

49

Production, Storage and Import Costs of Electricity
in the Different Countries in 2050 in c/kWh

Scenario 3.a Production, storage and import costs in the different countries 

in 2050 in c/kWh

13

50

EGE round table 
on the energy mix in Europe

AbuBakr S. BAHAJ

Professor of Sustainable Energy 
at the University of Southampton

AbuBakr  S.  Bahaj  is  Professor  of  Sustainable  Energy 
at  the  University  of  Southampton.  After  completing 
his  PhD  he  was  employed  by  the  university,  progress-
ing from a researcher to Personnel Chair of Sustainable 
Energy.  Over  the  last  20  years,  Prof.  Bahaj  established 
the energy theme within the university and directed the 
Sustainable Energy Research Group (SERG, http://www.
energy.soton.ac.uk), which is now considered to be one 
of  the  UK’s  leading  university-based  research  groups 
in  renewable  energy  and  energy  in  buildings.  He  initi-
ated and manages research in ocean energy conversion 
(resources,  technologies  and  impacts),  photovoltaics, 
microgeneration,  energy  in  buildings  and  impacts  of 
climate change on the built environment in the univer-
sity. This work has resulted in over 230 articles published 
in academic refereed journals and conference series of 
international standing. Prof. Bahaj is also the head of the 
40-strong  Energy  and  Climate  Change  Division  (ECCD) 
within the highly rated Academic Unit of Civil Engineer-
ing  and  the  Environment  (http://webserver.civil.soton.
ac.uk) (second in the UK research assessment exercise in 
2008, with 80 % of the unit’s research judged to be either 
‘world leading’ or ‘internationally excellent’). The aims of 
the ECCD and SERG are to promote and execute funda-
mental  and  applied  research  and  pre-industrial  devel-
opment in the areas of energy resources, technologies, 
energy effi  ciency and the impact of climate change. His 
work  encompasses  the  study  of  urban  energy  systems 
(including  demand  reduction,  microgeneration  and 
utilising  ICT  in  monitoring  building  performance  and 
feedback  to  users)  and  the  built  environment  working 
at  the  city,  village  and  building  scales.  Prof.  Bahaj  has 
undertaken consulting work for various local authorities 
looking  at  sustainable  development  of  the  urban  built 
environment  including  urban  regeneration,  combined 
heat and power regimes and carbon footprint reduction 
at local community and city levels.

Prof.  Bahaj  is  an  experienced  research  team  director 
and has many internationally focused research projects 
including  collaborative  projects  in  China,  the  EU,  the 
Middle  East  and  Africa.  He  was  also  the  coordinator  of 
the  UK’s  Engineering  and  Physical  Sciences  Research 
Council (EPSRC) eco-region research networks aimed at 
developing research themes and projects to study eco-

city  development  encompassing  resource  assessment, 
technology pathways for the production and conserva-
tion of energy, planning, and social and economic stud-
ies  required  in  establishing  eco-regions  in  China  and 
elsewhere (www.eco-network.org.uk/). In relation to this 
and to build on his research in the built environment, in 
May 2012 a GBP 6.2 million EPSRC-funded programme 
grant  was  initiated  with  the  aim  of  transforming  the 
way cities are refurbished and built, as well as the way 
we  live  in  them.  The  outputs  will  provide  pathways  of 
novel engineering and social solutions that test accept-
ability and coherence for low-carbon living under vari-
ous CO2 reductions scenarios. Current work also extends 
to  programmes  in  Africa  on  ‘energy  for  development’, 
promoting  and  implementing  electrifi cation  projects 
for  impoverished  rural  villages  that  currently  have  no 
power  sources,  establishing  and  addressing  villag-
ers’  needs,  investigating  impacts  on  rural  poverty  and 
improving the health and wellbeing of the community. 
This  programme  also  assesses  and  develops  coher-
ent approaches to the commercial sustainability of the 
projects. This GBP 2.6 million programme is funded by 
the research councils and the UK Department for Inter-
national  Development  (DFID,  www.energyfordevelop-
ment.net).

Prof. Bahaj is an Associate Editor of the Renewable and 
Sustainable  Energy  Reviews  on  the  editorial  boards  of 
the  journal  Sustainable  Cities  and  Society  and  the  Inter-
national  Journal  of  Sustainable  Built  Environment,  the 
Renewable Energy  journal  (2005–11)  and  the  UK’s  Insti-
tute  of  Civil  Engineering  journal  Energy  (2006–09).  He 
was a member of the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change 
Research  Supervisory  Board  (2005–10),  a  member  of 
the  UK  government  technology  programmes  panels 
on water energy and solar energy (2001–07), and since 
2004  a  member  of  the  British  Standards  Institute  (BSI) 
Committee GEL/82 on photovoltaic energy systems. He 
is  a  member  of  various  international  conference  com-
mittees and has recently chaired the 9th European Wave 
and Tidal Energy Conference, held in Southampton from 
5 to 9 September 2011.

In  a  unique  partnership  between  Southampton  City 
Council and the University of Southampton, Prof. Bahaj 

51

has been appointed what is believed to be the fi rst local 
authority Chief Scientifi c Adviser (CSA) post in the UK. He 
is also a Fellow of the Institution of Civil Engineers (FICE), 
Fellow of the Royal Academy of Arts (FRSA) and Member 
of the Institute of Physics (MInstP, CPhy), as well as a visit-
ing Professor at the prestigious Angstrom Labs (Electrical 

Engineering), University of Uppsala, Sweden. To address 
training in the areas of energy and climate change, Prof. 
Bahaj has coordinated and developed a set of MSc pro-
grammes that address traditional ener gy generation and 
distribution,  energy  in  transport,  energy  resources  and 
climate change and energy in the built environment.

52

AbuBakr S. BAHAJ

www.energy.soton.ac.uk

Ethical Aspects of 
Energy Mix : An 
Engineer’s View 

Professor AbuBakr S Bahaj
Energy & Climate Change Division 
Faculty of Engineering and the Environment 
University of Southampton, 
Southampton, SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom

Ireland

UK

UK

France

Southampton

Prof A S Bahaj - Ethical Aspects of Energy Mix : An Engineer’s View 

Prof A S Bahaj – Sustainable Energy Research Group - www.energy.soton.ac.uk

France
France

Energy Mix

www.energy.soton.ac.uk

‘Energy mix’ refers to the distribution, within a given geographical area, of the 
consumption of various energy sources 

(www.planete-energies.com/en/the-energy-of-tomorrow/the-energy-mix/the-energy-mix-definition-256.html):

For each region / country, energy mix composition depends on the following:
(cid:131) The extent and nature of energy needs to be met.
(cid:131) The legislative targets set for supply mix. 
(cid:131) The availability of usable indigenous resources or the possibility of importing 

them.

(cid:131) The economic, social, environmental, and geopolitical context.
(cid:131) The political choices resulting from the above.

Prof A S Bahaj - Ethical Aspects of Energy Mix : An Engineer’s View 

Sustainable Energy Research Group - www.energy.soton.ac.uk

53

Decarbonising of Energy 
Plans to ‘decarbonise’ the energy mix encompass ethical aspects:

www.energy.soton.ac.uk

(cid:131) Fossil fuels - Depletion of finite resources –> impact on 

future generations and risk of future conflict, pollution (air 
and from accidents), climate change responsibility.

(cid:131) Nuclear energy: low carbon credential, but are high impact 

dangers worth the benefits despite a low accident 
probability? Lack of long term safe waste disposal, 
material for the creation of weapons.

(cid:131) Renewables: low carbon credential but environmental 
construction concerns. Is it fair to subsidise/expand 
renewables industry when there are many pressing socio-
economic issues that need to be dealt with? 

(cid:131) Price of energy (oil / electricity prices etc.) – Fuel poverty.
(cid:131) Lack of access to energy or unreliable supply.
(cid:131) Health effects from dirty fuels typically used by the poor.

Prof A S Bahaj - Ethical Aspects of Energy Mix : An Engineer’s View 

Sustainable Energy Research Group - www.energy.soton.ac.uk

Centralised

www.energy.soton.ac.uk

flickr.com ecker

y
g
r
e
n
e

(cid:131) Traditionally – large power fossil fuel driven production, assigned to highly 

optimised grid.

(cid:131) Isolated but with impacts on the environment (carbon / climate change) and on 

local communities in both negative and positive ways. 

(cid:131) Huge investments – locked-ins.
(cid:131) Re-configuration / enhancements needed in a new infrastructure. Who pays?

Prof A S Bahaj - Ethical Aspects of Energy Mix : An Engineer’s View 

Sustainable Energy Research Group - www.energy.soton.ac.uk

54

Renewables

www.energy.soton.ac.uk

y
g
r
e
n
e

(cid:131) New mixed approach with RE – large area footprint with localised impacts.
(cid:131) Supply chain normally at arm’s length from the generation footprint.
(cid:131) Community issues – who benefits?
(cid:131) Stakeholders’ needs and requirements. 
(cid:131) Social responsibilities.

Prof A S Bahaj - Ethical Aspects of Energy Mix : An Engineer’s View 

Sustainable Energy Research Group - www.energy.soton.ac.uk

Proximity of supply mix

www.energy.soton.ac.uk

Pentland Firth

Major urban centres

Need to bring this energy to these centres

Seabed electricity cable

www.dti.gov.uk

Prof A S Bahaj - Ethical Aspects of Energy Mix : An Engineer’s View 

Sustainable Energy Research Group - www.energy.soton.ac.uk

55

Micro-generation

www.energy.soton.ac.uk

y
g
r
e
n
e

(cid:131) Small scale and microgeneration.
(cid:131) Risk with the investor (home owner).
(cid:131) Small vs bulk power generation.
(cid:131) Rewards and benefits? 
(cid:131) Ever changing platform of support mechanisms.

Prof A S Bahaj - Ethical Aspects of Energy Mix : An Engineer’s View 

Sustainable Energy Research Group - www.energy.soton.ac.uk

Low carbon cities 
By 2020 ~70% of global population with reside in cities  -> buildings 

www.energy.soton.ac.uk

E
N
E
R
G
Y

Urban Design

WASTE

TRANSPORT

DENSITY

WATER

BUILDINGS

(cid:131) Refurbishment and new build
(cid:131) What are the implications for:
(cid:57) energy generation / supply?
(cid:57) housing, work, leisure, 

health?
(cid:57) Mobility?

Prof A S Bahaj - Ethical Aspects of Energy Mix : An Engineer’s View 

Sustainable Energy Research Group - www.energy.soton.ac.uk

56

Low carbon communities 

www.energy.soton.ac.uk

(cid:131) Acceptance and planning issues.
(cid:131) Community share of the reward vs

utility profits.

The role of new technologies : 
(cid:131) ICT – Smart Grids.
(cid:131) Buildings as generators. 
(cid:131) Decarbonisation of transport.

Prof A S Bahaj - Ethical Aspects of Energy Mix : An Engineer’s View 

Sustainable Energy Research Group - www.energy.soton.ac.uk

Energy for Development 

www.energy.soton.ac.uk

Globally, estimates indicate that around 1.6bn people are 
without electricity.
(cid:131) In rural Africa, < 5% of dwellings have access to 

electricity. 

(cid:131) There is currently a failure in establishing and 
implementing, easy to replicate, sustainable 
decentralised off-grid electricity specific to the 
promotion of both development and improves 
wellbeing in rural communities. 

(cid:131) Hence most of the UN Millennium Development 

Goals are not fulfilled!

(cid:131) What innovative mechanisms within our current and 

future energy supply mix can we establish and use to 
satisfy such a need?

Prof A S Bahaj - Ethical Aspects of Energy Mix : An Engineer’s View 

Sustainable Energy Research Group - www.energy.soton.ac.uk

57

Carbon perceptions

www.energy.soton.ac.uk

Energy mix is likely to be governed by issues such as the following ; 

(cid:131) Developed vs developing countries:
(cid:57) Who is responsible for historical 

emissions?

(cid:57) How to quantify emissions.
(cid:57) Displaced energy intensive 

industries.

(cid:131) Who pays for previous, current and 

future consumption (carbon)?

(cid:131) International negotiations plagued by 

geopolitics and political  
manoeuvring.

(cid:131) Price of carbon – country, regional or 

global.

China Daily 01/16/2010 page5)

Prof A S Bahaj - Ethical Aspects of Energy Mix : An Engineer’s View 

Sustainable Energy Research Group - www.energy.soton.ac.uk

www.energy.soton.ac.uk

Society …
Energy mix is likely to be governed by how we deal with sustainable development

?

3(cid:3)planet(cid:3)to(cid:3)1(cid:3)planet(cid:3)living

Sustainable(cid:3)
aspirations(cid:3)

Consumption(cid:3)
&(cid:3)Equity

58

?

…(cid:3)but(cid:3)how(cid:3)
to(cid:3)get(cid:3)there?(cid:3)

In summary

www.energy.soton.ac.uk

Some of the challenges for our strive to achieve a clean energy 
mix in today’s context:

(cid:131) Geopolitical – negotiations regarding emissions and 

resource availability.

(cid:131) Projected increase in world population coupled with 

depleted resources. 

(cid:131) Urbanisation – development of mega cities. 
(cid:131) The lack of adequate and equitable energy supply to 

the inhabitants of the less developed world.

(cid:131) The economic / financial crises.

(cid:190) There is a paucity of research to develop new thinking 
in our approach to the ethical questions of the energy 
supply mix.

Prof A S Bahaj - Ethical Aspects of Energy Mix : An Engineer’s View 

Sustainable Energy Research Group - www.energy.soton.ac.uk

www.energy.soton.ac.uk

Thank you !

Prof AbuBakr S. Bahaj 

Energy and Climate Change Division / Sustainable Energy Research Group
Faculty of Engineering and the Environment
University of Southampton, 
Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK

www.energy.soton.ac.uk

Prof A S Bahaj - Ethical Aspects of Energy Mix : An Engineer’s View 

Sustainable Energy Research Group - www.energy.soton.ac.uk

59

EGE round table 
on the energy mix in Europe

Anita RØNNE

Associate Professor in Energy Law, 
University of Copenhagen

Anita Rønne is Associate Professor in Energy Law in the 
Faculty of Law, University of Copenhagen. She has been 
appointed  by  the  minister  as  a  Member  of  the  Danish 
Energy  Regulatory  Authority,  as  Chair  of  the  Valua-
tion  Committee  under  the  Law  of  Renewables,  and  as 
an  expert  to  the  Danish  Safety  Technology  Authority. 
She  holds  the  chair  of  the  Danish  Energy  Law  Society 
and is a Member and former Chairman of the Interna-
tional Bar Association’s (IBA) Academic Advisory Group 
within  the  Section  on  Energy,  Environment,  Natural 
Resources  and  Infrastructure  Law  (SEERIL).  She  is  also 
a Member of the Committee on Climate Change of the 
International  Law  Association,  and  of  the  study  board 

of  the  North  Sea  Energy  Law  Programme  (Universities 
of Oslo, Aberdeen and Groningen, funded by the EU — 
L.L.L.P). She teaches within the areas of energy law and 
climate change law. She has administrative experience 
from the Danish Ministry of Energy and as a consultant 
under European Commission and World Bank second-
ment  (eastern  Europe,  South  Africa,  Malaysia).  She  is 
an author and co-editor of Energy law in Europe; Energy 
security; and Regulating energy and natural resources (all 
Oxford University Press), Legal systems and wind energy 
(Kluwer Law International and DJØF Publishing) and has 
drafted many book chapters and articles (in English and 
Danish).

61

Towards a sustainable energy mix — 

new horizons and pitfalls for the legal regime

Anita RØNNE

Associate Professor in Energy Law, Law Faculty, University of Copenhagen;
Member of the Danish Energy Regulatory Authority;
Chair of the Danish Energy Law Society.

In the course of the last decades, the necessity to weigh 
up  the  possibilities  of  economic  growth  against  the 
environmental consequences has been increasingly rec-
ognised politically — on a national as well as an interna-
tional level. The result has been a diff erent order of prior-
ity with environmental protection and the preservation 
of natural resources higher on the list. To properly assess 
the energy mix debate, a number of considerations have 
to  be  taken  including  that  energy  demand  will  grow 
worldwide  and  fossil  fuel  resources  will  concentrate  in 
fewer states with the consequential risk to energy secu-
rity.

The  1992  United  Nations  Conference  on  Environment 
and  Development  in  Rio  de  Janeiro  emphasised  that 
states  have  the  sovereign  right  to  exploit  their  own 
resources pursuant to their own environmental policies, 
ensuring that the activities do not cause damage to the 
environment  of  other  states  or  of  common  areas  and 
within  a  sustainable  development  framework.  Twenty 
years  later,  the  concluding  document  ‘The  future  we 
want’,  agreed  at  the  Rio+20,  likewise  acknowledges  a 
sustainable  development  where  economic,  social  and 
environmental considerations play an equal role. Energy 
is recognised as having a critical role in global develop-
ment  and  a  sustainable  access  energy  model  needs  to 
be identifi ed and implemented across the globe where 
more  than  1.4  billion  people  are  still  without  electric-
ity.  A  proper  debate  on  energy  sustainability  includes 
careful  consideration  of  the  appropriate  energy  mix 
and  implies  a  paradigm  shift  in  energy  policy  towards 
a higher emphasis on renewable energy, effi  ciency and 
low-carbon societies. Addressing global warming is very 
much a matter of addressing energy use, as the use of 
fossil  fuels  is  the  dominant  anthropogenic  cause  of 
global  warming.  Realistically,  however,  traditional  and 
renewable resources will have to coexist in the short and 
medium  term.  The  Rio+20  outcomes  go  hand-in-hand 
with  the  UN  nomination  of  2012  as  the  ‘International 
year of sustainable energy for all’ (SE4All). This challenge 
needs to be connected to the redirection of 2.5 billion 
energy  users,  who  are  currently  using  only  traditional 

biomass for energy consumption, to more effi  cient and 
environmentally safer sources.

The EU and other major world economies like the US and 
China are investing heavily in clean technologies. There 
are  diff erent  pathways  to  decarbonisation  and  in  each 
country  the  choice  of  means  to  be  deployed  depends 
on a combination of policy decisions, economic condi-
tions and resources, public acceptance, and extant legal 
and  regulatory  frameworks.  The  new  European  energy 
strategy seeks to answer how the triple challenges and 
core objectives of energy policy could be met: sustain-
able development, competitiveness and security of sup-
ply, at least refl ecting that the overall energy imports for 
this region is close to 55 % and increasingly comes from 
politically unstable parts of the world. Renewables play 
a signifi cant role in this context, and even in a country 
like Denmark which is the only EU-27 Member State that 
covers  its  own  energy  demand,  radical  reforms  have 
been  introduced  with  a  current  reduction  of  fossil  fuel 
consumption  by  a  factor  of  20  %  and  the  aspirational 
goal to be fossil fuel free by 2050.

The  EU  has,  as  part  of  its  action  on  climate  change, 
agreed  on  a  reduction  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions 
by 20 % in 2020 combined with an indicative target to 
improve energy effi  ciency by 20 % and a binding Europe-
wide 20 % target for renewable energy. Experience with 
voluntary  targets  for  renewables  confi rms  that  public 
regulation is also necessary. The new Directive 2009/28/
EC on renewables is also intended to remove unneces-
sary barriers to the growth of renewable energy — for 
example  by  simplifying  the  administrative  procedures. 
The  energy  roadmap  2050  (December  2011)  indicates 
some  targets  such  as  increasing  renewable  energy 
consumption,  optimising  energy  consumption,  and 
strengthening the external dimension of the EU energy 
market without taking a position on nuclear power pro-
duction. In this context, however, it should be mentio-
ned that some countries like Japan, Germany and Swit-
zerland have announced their intention to end nuclear 
power production, but without releasing details on how 

62

to cover the energy gaps deriving from such a decision 
and  with  a  possible  unavoidable  increase  in  fossil  fuel 
use for energy purposes.

The  debate  on  energy  needs  to  pay  due  considera-
tion  to  a  complex  regulatory  frame  where  existing 
laws  regulating  the  energy  domain  are  fragmented  at 
diff erent levels and between diff erent  sectors. Discon-
nected  and  uncoordinated  regulatory  frames  with  an 
indirect impact on energy coexist today, e.g. in the EU 
on  trade,  environment,  energy,  transport  and  agricul-
ture. It is also a challenge that the principle of soverei-
gnty allows national decisions in the fi eld of energy that 
are becoming increasingly transnational in their scope. 
Developments  within  international  environmental  law 
indicate  that  the  notion  of  common  responsibility  is 
being  incorporated  with  a  view  to  responsibilities  for 
future generations and protection against damages to 
the environment of other states. The principle of sove-
reignty  is  therefore  coming  under  pressure  internatio-
nally as well as regionally.

EU law has already prepared some legal tools for com-
mon  EU  actions  in  the  energy  sector  and  for  environ-
ment  protection.  The  new  Treaty  on  the  Functioning 

of  the  European  Union  (TFEU),  as  amended  by  the 
Lisbon  Treaty,  confi rms  the  increasing  priority  of  the 
energy sector by including a special title (XXI) devoted 
to energy. It follows-up on a course that was initially set 
by the Treaty on European Union (the 1992 Maastricht 
Treaty) which added energy measures to the list of the 
Community’s  activities.  TFEU’s  Article  194  includes  the 
objectives  of  the  EU  energy  policy  and  advocates  soli-
darity in the fi elds of energy and a prudent utilisation of 
natural resources pursuant to Article 191. Now that the 
principle of solidarity has been introduced in the Treaty 
for the energy sector, it must be expected to play a role 
in particular concerning energy security issues at the EU 
level.  Although  the  Member  States  have  retained  their 
sovereignty over primary energy sources and choice of 
energy  mix,  it  is  beyond  doubt  that  the  EU  will  focus 
more  and  more  on  common  approaches  and  national 
subsidiarity will pay the price of this.

Fundamental  changes  are  taking  place  in  government 
regulation of the energy sector globally. Challenges and 
dilemmas coexist for science, policy, economy, law and 
ethics including paradigm shifts that need to take into 
account  the  long-term  horizons,  globalisation  and  the 
schism between the developed and developing world.

63

Anita RØNNE

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:55)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:76)(cid:91)(cid:3)
(cid:16) (cid:49)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:43)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:93)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:86) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:72)

(cid:36)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:161)(cid:81)(cid:81)(cid:72)
(cid:36)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72) (cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:56)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)
(cid:48)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:92) (cid:36)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)
(cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:85) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:92)

(cid:53)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:76)(cid:91)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:178)(cid:20)(cid:27)(cid:18)(cid:28)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)
(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:42)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:49)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:20)

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:54)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)

(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)
(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:87)(cid:75) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)
(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:92)

(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:182)(cid:86) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)
(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79) (cid:69)(cid:72) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85)
(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86)

Gross energy consumption 1990-2035 divided on
countries and regions, IEA/OECD 2010

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:21)

Oil production growth 2009-2035 divided on
countries, IEA/OECD, 2010

Source: Danish Energy Agency

64

(cid:54)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)

(cid:135) (cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:78)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:22)

(cid:54)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)

(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)
(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79)
(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17)

(cid:135) (cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)

(cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:56)(cid:49)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)
(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:17)

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)
(cid:135) (cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:93)(cid:72) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)

(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:86) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:30)

(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:93)(cid:72) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)

(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)
(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:23)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)
(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87) (cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:30)

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:135) (cid:56)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:91) (cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:3)
(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)
(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:17) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)
(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:93)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:15)(cid:3)

(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)
(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:16)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:15)(cid:3)
(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:3)

(cid:135) (cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:40)(cid:23)(cid:36)(cid:79)(cid:79) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)

(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:72) (cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)
(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:93)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)
(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:85) (cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)
(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)
(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:85) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:91)(cid:17)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:23)

65

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:54)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87) (cid:16) (cid:54)(cid:40)(cid:23)(cid:36)(cid:47)(cid:47)

(cid:56)(cid:49)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:16) (cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:60)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:79)(cid:79)

(cid:135) (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:40)(cid:23)(cid:36)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72) (cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:86) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72) (cid:22)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:77)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:29)

(cid:20)(cid:17) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)

(cid:135) (cid:97)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:22)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:23)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87) (cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)

(cid:21)(cid:17) (cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)

(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:92)

(cid:22)(cid:17) (cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)

(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:91)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:24)

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:87) (cid:82)(cid:73) (cid:54)(cid:40)(cid:23)(cid:36)(cid:47)(cid:47)

(cid:135) (cid:54)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:86) (cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)

(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)

(cid:135)

(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:93)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:82) (cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:78)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:92) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)
(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:92) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:86) (cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)
(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:17)

(cid:135) (cid:50)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:24)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81) (cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)

(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92) (cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:86) (cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:78)(cid:72) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:78)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:17)

(cid:135) (cid:43)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:86) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:85) (cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:92) (cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:71) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79)

(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:75) (cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71) (cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:17)(cid:3)

(cid:135) (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:10)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:10)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)

(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72) (cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:87) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:75) (cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81) (cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:81) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:82) (cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:92) (cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:3)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:25)

66

(cid:36)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)

(cid:20)(cid:12) (cid:54)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)

(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)

(cid:16)(cid:33)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)

(cid:21)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:3)

(cid:38)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)
(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:38)

(cid:22)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:41)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:16)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:26)

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

1) Europe imports 54% 
of its energy
In 2030 = 70%
Denmark only EU27 MS 
that has self-sufficiency

Oil: 45% from the Midde
East, 
Gas: 40% from Russia, 
30% from Algeria, 

2) Global goal of keeping 
global temperature 
increase below 2(cid:131)(cid:131)(cid:131)(cid:131)
3) Oil price fluctuations: 
1988-2003  15-30  USD/bl
2007                 55     -
2008 – mid     140     -
2008 – late       40     -
2009 – Oct    > 70     -
2012 -

~ 110 USD/bl

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:51)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86) (cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:86)
(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:91)

(cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:29)

(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:19)

(cid:135) (cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:21)(cid:3)
(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)
(cid:135) (cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)
(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:40)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:12)
(cid:135) (cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)
(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:40)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:27)

(cid:39)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:29)
(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:3)
(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:19)(cid:3)

(cid:37)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:29)
(cid:135) (cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:22)(cid:24)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:40)(cid:54)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:3)
(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)
(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:12)
(cid:190)(cid:24)(cid:19)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:40)(cid:54)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)
(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)
(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:24)(cid:8)(cid:12)
(cid:190)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:3)
(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)
(cid:190)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)
(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81) (cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:3)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)
(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:25)(cid:17)

67

(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:56)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:10)(cid:86) (cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:83) (cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:19)

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:90) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:42)(cid:43)(cid:42)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)

(cid:33)(cid:3)(cid:27)(cid:19)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81) (cid:69)(cid:72) (cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:71)

(cid:135) (cid:39)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:26)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:16) (cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:68)(cid:3)

(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:91)

(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:75) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86) (cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)

(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79) (cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)
(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:86) (cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79) (cid:69)(cid:72) (cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)
(cid:135) (cid:42)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79) (cid:69)(cid:72) (cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)

(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:86)(cid:92)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:3)

(cid:135) (cid:44)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:82)(cid:85) (cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)

(cid:54)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:71) (cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:28)

(cid:53)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:86) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)
(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:56)(cid:46)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:9)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:181)(cid:56)(cid:46)(cid:3)

(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:182)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:45)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:20)

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:135) (cid:49)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:17)(cid:24)(cid:3)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:49)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:182)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)

(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:182)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:50)(cid:40)(cid:51)(cid:16)(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:3)(cid:45)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:20)

(cid:135) (cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:36)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:50)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:16)(cid:37)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:181)(cid:49)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:182)(cid:15)(cid:3)
(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:27) (cid:9)(cid:3)(cid:181)(cid:37)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:41)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:182)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)
(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:20)

(cid:135) (cid:54)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:11)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:46)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:37)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:15)(cid:3)
(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83) (cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90) (cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:87)(cid:75) (cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:182)(cid:86) (cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:87) (cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:24)(cid:16)(cid:60)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:12)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:19)

68

(cid:43)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:70) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:87) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:45)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)

(cid:135) (cid:45)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72) (cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)

(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81) (cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:36)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72) (cid:42)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:93)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:15)(cid:3)
(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:75) (cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:82) (cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92) (cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:3)

(cid:135) (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:86) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)

(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:45)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:10)(cid:86) (cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:91)
(cid:177) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71) (cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:86) (cid:177) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:86) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)
(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:17)

(cid:135) (cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:80) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:72) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:75)
(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:92) (cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:17)

(cid:135) (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87) (cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:92) (cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:90) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)

(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72) (cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:87) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:71) (cid:69)(cid:72)
(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85) (cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:90) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:3)
(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79) (cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:17)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:20)

(cid:182)

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:41)(cid:88)(cid:78)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)
(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)
(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72) (cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:86)
(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:82) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)
(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)
(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)
(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)
(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)
(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:19)(cid:15)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86)

http://www.guardia
n.co.uk/world/2012
/sep/14/japan-end-
nuclear-power

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:92) (cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:41)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:90) (cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:86)

(cid:135)

(cid:135) (cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:30)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:56)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:30)(cid:3)(cid:49)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:90)
(cid:41)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:90) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:86)
(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)

(cid:135) (cid:55)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:72)

(cid:135) (cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:81)(cid:182)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:86)
(cid:135) (cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:92)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:70) (cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)

(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)

(cid:135) (cid:47)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:86)
(cid:135) (cid:41)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71) (cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:21)

69

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86) (cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:179)(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71) (cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:86) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:81)(cid:82) (cid:54)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72) (cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81) (cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72) (cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86) (cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)
(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:92) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:90) (cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78) (cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81) (cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:75) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)
(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:180)

(cid:11)(cid:36)(cid:17)(cid:57)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:26)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:50)(cid:56)(cid:51)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:12)

(cid:135) (cid:49)(cid:82) (cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:85) (cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:90)
(cid:135) (cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:29)(cid:3)

(cid:190) (cid:49)(cid:82)(cid:16)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72) (cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81) (cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:79) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72) (cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81) (cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86)

(cid:77)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)

(cid:190) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:22)

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:47)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:78)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:177) (cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:26)(cid:21)(cid:30)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:177) (cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:21)
(cid:135) (cid:57)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:81)(cid:68) (cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:50)(cid:93)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72) (cid:47)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:24)
(cid:135) (cid:56)(cid:49)(cid:3)(cid:41)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78) (cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:38)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72) (cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:21)
(cid:135) (cid:50)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86) (cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:93)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:86) (cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:15)(cid:3)

(cid:73)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72) (cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:87) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)
(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:75) (cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:79) (cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:82)(cid:85) (cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)

(cid:135) (cid:54)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:171) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:81) (cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:87) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:85) (cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)

(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:85) (cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79)
(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87) (cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:85)
(cid:77)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:82)(cid:85) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:79) (cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)
(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:54)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:82)(cid:85) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86) (cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:71) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:77)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)
(cid:135) (cid:180)(cid:54)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72) (cid:171) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:40)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:10)(cid:86) (cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:92)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:17) (cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:90) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)
(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:3)
(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)
(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:78)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:74)(cid:72) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:92) (cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85) (cid:171)(cid:17) (cid:180)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:23)

70

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86) (cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:90) (cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:86) (cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72) (cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:86)
(cid:135) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:75)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86) (cid:11)(cid:75)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:86) (cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:90)(cid:12)(cid:3)
(cid:135) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:86) (cid:11)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:12)

(cid:190) (cid:54)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)

(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:177) (cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:190) (cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:92) (cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)
(cid:190) (cid:54)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:182) (cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92) (cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)

(cid:153) (cid:54)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:29)
(cid:153) (cid:49)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)

(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:24)

(cid:40)(cid:56)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:41)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)

(cid:54)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:39)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)
(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:77)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:56)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86) (cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:17)

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:36)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:20)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:41)(cid:40)(cid:56)
(cid:40)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:75) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:77)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:56)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:29)(cid:3)
(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)
(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:15)(cid:3)
(cid:135) (cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:75)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:15)(cid:3)
(cid:135) (cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)
(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:93)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79)
(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)
(cid:135) (cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)
(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)
(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85) (cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)
(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)
(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)
(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)
(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:25)

(cid:36)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:29)

(cid:56)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:15)(cid:3)
(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:29)

(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:30)

(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:30)

(cid:135) (cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:3)
(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)
(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:30)

(cid:135) (cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)
(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:86)(cid:182) (cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:86) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)
(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:91)

71

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:40)(cid:56)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:177) (cid:55)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:12)
(cid:135) (cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:12)
(cid:135) (cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:71)

(cid:135) (cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)

(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)
(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)
(cid:54)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:17)

(cid:135) (cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)
(cid:135) (cid:55)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:16)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)
(cid:135) (cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:77)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:92) (cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:30)(cid:3)(cid:171)
(cid:135) (cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:92) (cid:69)(cid:72) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:71) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)

(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81) (cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:70) (cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:75) (cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:71) (cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:3)
(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:92) (cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87) (cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)
(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:92) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:26)

17

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:40)(cid:56)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85) (cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72) (cid:87)(cid:82)
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:91)

(cid:48)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:177) (cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:29)
(cid:135) (cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:40)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:54)(cid:92)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)
(cid:135) (cid:49)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85) (cid:54)(cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:92) (cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)
(cid:135) (cid:38)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72) (cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)
(cid:135) (cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:40)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)
(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:92) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:16)

(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)

(cid:135) (cid:49)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72) (cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:86)(cid:3)

(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:17)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:27)

72

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:28)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:27)(cid:18)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:29)

(cid:135) (cid:44)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:86) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:40)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:19)

(cid:135) (cid:50)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:56)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:12)

(cid:135) (cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:36)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:40)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)

(cid:135) (cid:53)(cid:40)(cid:54)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)

(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:92)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85)

(cid:135) (cid:54)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:9)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)

(cid:135) (cid:44)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72) (cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:44)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:182) (cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:71)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:28)

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:28)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:27)(cid:18)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:29)
(cid:54)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:86)
(cid:135) (cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:92) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:86) (cid:53)(cid:40)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:73) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:92) (cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:87) (cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81) (cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68)
(cid:135) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:92) (cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:79)

(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:42)(cid:43)(cid:42)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:16) (cid:11)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87) (cid:22)(cid:24)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:24)(cid:19)(cid:8)(cid:12)
(cid:135) (cid:36)(cid:89)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:71) (cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:79)(cid:92) (cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)
(cid:135) (cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75) (cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:16)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:78) (cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)

(cid:135) (cid:49)(cid:82) (cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:82)(cid:85) (cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:54)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)

(cid:135) (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92) (cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68) (cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:92) (cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:92) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)
(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)

(cid:135) (cid:58)(cid:55)(cid:50)(cid:3)

(cid:135) (cid:49)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:16)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)
(cid:135) (cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:92)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)

73

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:135) (cid:54)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:18)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:92) (cid:177) (cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:90) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80) (cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70) (cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)

(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:34)

(cid:135) (cid:51)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:18)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:92) (cid:177) (cid:51)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:80) (cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:87) (cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:87)(cid:75) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)

(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:87)(cid:75) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:92)

(cid:135) (cid:54)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:18)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80) (cid:177) (cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:90) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:72) (cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:12)(cid:3)

(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75) (cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:90) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:93)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:34)

(cid:135) (cid:47)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:18)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:177) (cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:90) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:180)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:180) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)
(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:93)(cid:72)(cid:81) (cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92) (cid:11)(cid:180)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71) (cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:93)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:180)(cid:12)(cid:34)

(cid:135) (cid:42)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87) (cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)
(cid:135) (cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:15)(cid:3)

(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:75) (cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:77)(cid:82)(cid:92) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86) (cid:82)(cid:73)

(cid:135) (cid:40)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:68)

(cid:135) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:180)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:180) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:71) (cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85) (cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:87)
(cid:135) (cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79) (cid:69)(cid:72) (cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)
(cid:135) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:20)

(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:87) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:38)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72) (cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:68)(cid:90)

(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:81)

(cid:135) (cid:180)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:16)
(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92) (cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85) (cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:180)
(cid:180)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:83) (cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:19)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:20)

(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:78) (cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:88) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)
(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:4)

(cid:36)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:161)(cid:81)(cid:81)(cid:72)
(cid:41)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:92) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:68)(cid:90)
(cid:56)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:15)(cid:3)
(cid:39)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:78)
(cid:40)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:29)(cid:3)
(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:35)(cid:77)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:17)(cid:78)(cid:88)(cid:17)(cid:71)(cid:78)

(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:21)

74

EGE round table 
on the energy mix in Europe

Pier VELLINGA

Wageningen University, Vrij Universiteit (VU) 
Amsterdam, Chairman of the national research 
programme ‘Knowledge for Climate’

Pier  Vellinga  is  Professor  in  Environmental  Sciences 
and  Climate  Change  at  Wageningen  University  and 
Research  Centre  and  VU  University  Amsterdam.  Origi-
nally he specialised in coastal engineering, contributing 
to the ‘Deltaplan’ in the Netherlands. In 1987 he became 
advisor to the Dutch Environment Minister for Climate 
Change. In that period he helped to shape international 
climate policies and he was one of the initiators and fi rst 
bureau  members  of  the  Intergovernmental  Panel  on 

Climate Change. In 1991 he joined the Vrije Universiteit 
as Professor in Environmental Sciences and as Director 
of  the  Institute  for  Environmental  Studies.  In  2007  he 
also  took  up  a  position  at  Wageningen  University  and 
Research  Centre  to  lead  the  national  climate  change 
research programme ‘Knowledge for climate’. Pier Vel-
linga  is  a  board  member  of  several  research  institutes 
and  environmental  organisations  in  the  Netherlands 
and abroad.

75

Pier VELLINGA

(cid:38)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:3)
(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)

(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:93)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:37)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:88)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)
(cid:51)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:71)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:37)(cid:40)(cid:51)(cid:36)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:42)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)
(cid:55)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:40)(cid:42)(cid:40)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:37)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:27)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)

(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:57)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:15)
(cid:58)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81) (cid:56)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)
(cid:57)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:77)(cid:72) (cid:56)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:87) (cid:36)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:15)
(cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:49)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:3)
(cid:46)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)

(cid:46)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)

• (cid:43)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:37)(cid:40)(cid:51)(cid:36)(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:3)
(cid:40)(cid:42)(cid:40)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:30)(cid:3)

•

•

•

•

(cid:38)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:30)

(cid:41)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:30)

(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)

(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:92)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)

(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:30)

(cid:54)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:56)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:17)

76

(cid:40)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)
(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:37)(cid:40)(cid:51)(cid:36)(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:42)(cid:40)

• (cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:30)

• (cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:37)(cid:40)(cid:51)(cid:36)(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:40)(cid:42)(cid:40)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:30)

• (cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:86)

(cid:54)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)

• (cid:40)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)

(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:43)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:61)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:89)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:56)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:73)(cid:87)(cid:30)

• (cid:36)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:3)

(cid:36)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:30)
• (cid:40)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:41)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:42)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:30)
• (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:58)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:182)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:56)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:72)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)

(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:72)(cid:88)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:30)

• (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:93)(cid:82) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:56)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:37)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)

(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:56)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)

• (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:82) (cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:56)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:73)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:30)
• (cid:40)(cid:56)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:24)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:86)(cid:30)
• (cid:36)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:43)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72) (cid:51)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:82) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:42)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)

(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:56)(cid:30)

77

(cid:38)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)

Ethical principle 1: Restricted liberty
Ethical principle 1: Restricted liberty
Ethical principle 1: Restricted liberty

(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:179)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:180)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:29)(cid:3)
(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:179)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:180)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:29)(cid:3)
(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:179)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:180)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:29)(cid:3)

• (cid:41)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:56)(cid:49)(cid:41)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:46)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)
(cid:40)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:18)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)
(cid:40)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:18)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)
(cid:40)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:18)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:17)
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:17)
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:17)

(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:34)
(cid:40)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:29)
(cid:40)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:29)
(cid:40)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:29)

(cid:40)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:40)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:40)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)
• (cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)
(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:10)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:17)
(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:10)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:17)
(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:10)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:17)

(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:28)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)
(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:28)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)

(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:28)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)

(cid:21)(cid:20)
(cid:21)(cid:20)

(cid:21)(cid:20)

(cid:38)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)

Ethical principle 1: Restricted liberty
Ethical principle 1: Restricted liberty
Ethical principle 1: Restricted liberty
I mplication of Ethical Principle 1: informed 
consent
(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:179)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:180)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:29)(cid:3)
(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:179)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:180)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:29)(cid:3)
(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:179)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:180)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:29)(cid:3)

• (cid:41)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:75)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:51)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:56)(cid:49)(cid:41)(cid:38)(cid:38)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:46)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)
(cid:40)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:18)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)
(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:77)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)
(cid:40)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:18)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)
(cid:40)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:18)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:17)
(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:32)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:17)
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:17)
(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:3)

(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:34)
(cid:40)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:29)
(cid:40)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:29)
(cid:40)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:29)
(cid:44)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)
(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:29)(cid:3)

(cid:40)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:40)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:40)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:10)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:17)
• (cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)
(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:10)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:17)
(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:10)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:17)

(cid:40)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:3)

(cid:50)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:77)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)have given their informed consent 
to the activity (cid:11)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:12)(cid:17)

(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:28)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)

(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:28)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)
(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:28)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)

(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:28)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)

(cid:21)(cid:20)

(cid:21)(cid:20)
(cid:21)(cid:20)

(cid:21)(cid:21)

78

Ethical principle 2: reciprocity

(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:29)

(cid:43)(cid:72)(cid:18)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)
(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:73)(cid:3)
(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)
(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)
(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)

(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:28)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)

(cid:21)(cid:22)

I mplication of Ethical principles 1 and 2: 
liability

(cid:44)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)
(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:78)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:3)
(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:17)

(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:28)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)

(cid:21)(cid:23)

79

(cid:38)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)

• (cid:42)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:3)
(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:77)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:24)(cid:3)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:30)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)

(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:30)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)

(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:75)(cid:92)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:82) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:30)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)

(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)

(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:12)(cid:30)

•

(cid:44)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:42)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:49)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)

(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:30)

• (cid:51)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:82) (cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:92)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:50)(cid:16)

(cid:21)(cid:3)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:30)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:30)

80

81

(cid:54)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)
(cid:54)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:3)(cid:24)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:30)

(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:15)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:84)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)
(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:78)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:26)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:49)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:17)

82

(cid:87)(cid:381)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:100)(cid:349)(cid:393)(cid:393)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:272)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:282)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)
(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:62)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:856)

(cid:18)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:296)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:3)(cid:395)(cid:437)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:3)

• (cid:116)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:410) (cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:395)(cid:437)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:455) (cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:336)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:346)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:336)(cid:258)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381) (cid:271)(cid:286) (cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:3)
(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:1007)(cid:1004)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:1005)(cid:1004)(cid:1004)(cid:3)(cid:455)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:400)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:437)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:455)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:346)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:346)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:282)(cid:400)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:410)(cid:853)(cid:3)
(cid:258)(cid:336)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:437)(cid:367)(cid:410)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:410)(cid:272)(cid:856)(cid:856)(cid:393)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:336)(cid:437)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:4)(cid:104)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:364)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:455)(cid:3)
(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:1008)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:1010)(cid:3)(cid:282)(cid:286)(cid:336)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:336)(cid:367)(cid:381)(cid:271)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:448)(cid:856)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:393)(cid:856)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:1006)(cid:1005)(cid:1004)(cid:1004)(cid:3)(cid:857)(cid:856)(cid:856)

• (cid:116)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:448)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:455)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:856)(cid:856)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:449)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:3)
(cid:448)(cid:258)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:367)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:282)(cid:400)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:349)(cid:396)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:367)(cid:437)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)
(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:271)(cid:400)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:271)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:75)(cid:882)(cid:1006)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:271)(cid:400)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:271)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:854)

• (cid:116)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:271)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:374)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:393)(cid:393)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:449)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:3)
(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:346)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:282)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:346)(cid:381)(cid:449)(cid:3)(cid:449)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:455)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:448)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:3)
(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:455)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:437)(cid:272)(cid:346)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:346)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:282)(cid:400)(cid:845)(cid:3)

83

(cid:116)(cid:346)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:336)(cid:367)(cid:381)(cid:271)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:272)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:845)(cid:3)

(cid:100)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:296)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:296)(cid:296)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:437)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:258)(cid:364)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:1007)(cid:1004)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)
(cid:1005)(cid:1004)(cid:1004)(cid:3)(cid:455)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:400)(cid:856)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:381)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:296)(cid:296)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:894)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:367)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:3)
(cid:258)(cid:271)(cid:381)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:1008)(cid:1004)(cid:3)(cid:282)(cid:286)(cid:336)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:367)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:437)(cid:282)(cid:286)(cid:895)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:373)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:258)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:271)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:454)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:1009)(cid:1004)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:1005)(cid:1004)(cid:1004)(cid:3)(cid:455)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:400)(cid:854)(cid:3)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:361)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:3)
(cid:282)(cid:258)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:364)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:272)(cid:272)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:373)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:367)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:437)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:364)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:396)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:271)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:856)

(cid:100)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:90)(cid:47)(cid:18)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:90)(cid:47)(cid:18)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:367)(cid:437)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:393)(cid:349)(cid:282)(cid:367)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:282)(cid:286)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:381)(cid:393)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:349)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:437)(cid:367)(cid:410)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:400)(cid:367)(cid:455)(cid:3)
(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:104)(cid:94)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:282)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:336)(cid:336)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:286)(cid:286)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:437)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:437)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:854)

(cid:4)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:393)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:361)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:449)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:410)(cid:449)(cid:286)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:3)
(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:410)(cid:449)(cid:286)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:393)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:854)(cid:3)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:437)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:349)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:449)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:3)
(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:400)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:854)

(cid:18)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:400)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:437)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:437)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:282)(cid:286)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:381)(cid:336)(cid:455)(cid:855)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:3)
(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:282)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:437)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:296)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:448)(cid:349)(cid:282)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:346)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:854)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:296)(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:437)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:3)
(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:449)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:367)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:296)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:449)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:349)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:393)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:364)(cid:286)(cid:410)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:437)(cid:374)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:3)
(cid:373)(cid:381)(cid:271)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:3)(cid:282)(cid:286)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:381)(cid:393)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:854)(cid:3)

(cid:87)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:367)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:282)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:271)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:336)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:282)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:272)(cid:367)(cid:437)(cid:282)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:361)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:3)
(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:410)(cid:258)(cid:272)(cid:364)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:87)(cid:18)(cid:18)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:349)(cid:448)(cid:349)(cid:282)(cid:437)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:296)(cid:296)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:104)(cid:94)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)
(cid:381)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:282)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:258)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:296)(cid:296)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:374)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:374)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:437)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:856)

•

•

•

•

•

(cid:47)(cid:373)(cid:393)(cid:258)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)
(cid:258)(cid:282)(cid:258)(cid:393)(cid:410)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)

• (cid:28)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:336)(cid:367)(cid:381)(cid:271)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:282)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:1005)(cid:1004)(cid:1004)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:3)

(cid:393)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:455)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:3)(cid:1006)(cid:1004)(cid:1006)(cid:1004)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:449)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:282)(cid:400)(cid:854)

•

(cid:47)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:258)(cid:104)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:855)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:455)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:1006)(cid:1004)(cid:1007)(cid:1004)(cid:876)(cid:1006)(cid:1004)(cid:1009)(cid:1004)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:393)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:853)(cid:3)
(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:296)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:282)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:336)(cid:346)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:3)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:3)
(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:364)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:258)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:346)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:282)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:894)(cid:349)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:374)(cid:381)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:895)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)
(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:364)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:396)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:271)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:296)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:854)

• (cid:18)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:393)(cid:258)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:454)(cid:393)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:876)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:271)(cid:437)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:876)(cid:3)

(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:374)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:296)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:258)(cid:437)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:296)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:437)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)
(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:437)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:437)(cid:271)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:395)(cid:437)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:282)(cid:258)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:3)
(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:437)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:367)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:282)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:271)(cid:437)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:272)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:374)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:854)(cid:3)

84

Net contribution to the 
emissions of greenhouse 
gasses in Gt Co-2 eq. per year

(cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)

(cid:40)(cid:56)(cid:3)(cid:178)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:92)(cid:3)

(cid:11)(cid:40)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:56)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:26)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:26)(cid:12)(cid:3)

Th E

i

i E

(cid:28)

85

86

(cid:1005)(cid:856)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:349)(cid:336)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:455)

• (cid:28)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:400)(cid:393)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:455)(cid:3)
(cid:282)(cid:286)(cid:393)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:336)(cid:381)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:374)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:282)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:374)(cid:381)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:393)(cid:367)(cid:455)(cid:3)
(cid:449)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:3)(cid:346)(cid:437)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:336)(cid:346)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:854)

• (cid:28)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:393)(cid:367)(cid:381)(cid:455)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:282)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:448)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:449)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)
(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:454)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:258)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:3)
(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:3)(cid:373)(cid:437)(cid:272)(cid:346)(cid:3)(cid:367)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:410)(cid:3)
(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:282)(cid:258)(cid:455)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:449)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:28)(cid:104)(cid:3)

• (cid:75)(cid:393)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:410)(cid:437)(cid:374)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:449)(cid:258)(cid:271)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:3)

(cid:69)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:296)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)

(cid:1006)(cid:856)(cid:3)(cid:28)(cid:374)(cid:448)(cid:349)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:3)
(cid:272)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:400)(cid:393)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:437)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:437)(cid:400)(cid:286)

• (cid:87)(cid:437)(cid:271)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:3)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:271)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:349)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:367)(cid:437)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)

(cid:272)(cid:258)(cid:437)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:437)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:437)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:346)(cid:437)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:854)

• (cid:100)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:258)(cid:271)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:367)(cid:258)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:364)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:336)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:282)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)

(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:374)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:296)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:336)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:3)
(cid:271)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:449)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:272)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:854)

87

(cid:104)(cid:396)(cid:271)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:410)(cid:282)(cid:381)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:349)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:367)(cid:437)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:364)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:367)(cid:400)(cid:3)
(cid:258)(cid:271)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:1011)(cid:1004)(cid:856)(cid:1004)(cid:1004)(cid:1004)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:286)(cid:381)(cid:393)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:455)(cid:3)
(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:28)(cid:104)

Urban outdoor air pollution kills ~ 1.2 million 
people prematurely worldwide (WHO, 2009)

2009

(cid:1007)(cid:856)(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:393)(cid:286)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:381)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:258)(cid:271)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:455)
• (cid:28)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:296)(cid:296)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:272)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)

(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:449)(cid:258)(cid:271)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:449)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:367)(cid:3)
(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:336)(cid:374)(cid:349)(cid:296)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:393)(cid:367)(cid:381)(cid:455)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:449)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)
(cid:28)(cid:104)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:437)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:454)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:854)

• (cid:47)(cid:374)(cid:374)(cid:381)(cid:448)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:876)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:296)(cid:296)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:272)(cid:455)(cid:3)
(cid:272)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:393)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:882)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:400)(cid:855)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:437)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:282)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)
(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:410)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:381)(cid:282)(cid:3)
(cid:393)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:282)(cid:437)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:437)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:282)(cid:437)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:393)(cid:393)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)
(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:437)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:455)(cid:854)(cid:3)

88

(cid:100)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:28)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:381)(cid:258)(cid:282)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:393)(cid:3)(cid:1006)(cid:1004)(cid:1009)(cid:1004)(cid:3)

(cid:28)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:381)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:882)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:437)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:336)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:282)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)
(cid:437)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:437)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:346)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:367)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:374)(cid:381)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:282)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)
(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)

(cid:75)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:361)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:437)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:855)

(cid:1005)(cid:856)
(cid:1006)(cid:856)
(cid:1007)(cid:856)
(cid:1008)(cid:856)

(cid:28)(cid:373)(cid:393)(cid:367)(cid:381)(cid:455)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:373)(cid:393)(cid:286)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:854)
(cid:28)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:381)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:349)(cid:336)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:455)(cid:854)
(cid:44)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:336)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:393)(cid:437)(cid:367)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:854)
(cid:90)(cid:286)(cid:336)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:894)(cid:437)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:895)(cid:3)(cid:282)(cid:286)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:381)(cid:393)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:381)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)

(cid:90)(cid:286)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:28)(cid:104)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:336)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:374)(cid:381)(cid:448)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)
(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:296)(cid:296)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:272)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:449)(cid:258)(cid:271)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:455)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)
(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:271)(cid:381)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:856)

89

(cid:28)(cid:296)(cid:296)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:437)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:400)

• (cid:87)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:336)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:410)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:853)(cid:3)
(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:449)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:336)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:437)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:282)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:400)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:393)(cid:393)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:367)(cid:381)(cid:449)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:381)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:3)
(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:296)(cid:296)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:853)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:437)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:449)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:296)(cid:296)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:400)(cid:381)(cid:3)
(cid:449)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:449)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:282)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:393)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:437)(cid:367)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:75)(cid:882)(cid:1006)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)
(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:854)

• (cid:90)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:437)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:437)(cid:271)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:282)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:882)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:437)(cid:271)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:282)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:437)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:3)

(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:282)(cid:437)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:854)

• (cid:94)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:437)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:28)(cid:104)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:336)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:282)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)
(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:437)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:460)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:448)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:258)(cid:271)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:437)(cid:393)(cid:393)(cid:367)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:449)(cid:258)(cid:271)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:272)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:28)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:393)(cid:286)(cid:3)
(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:296)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:258)(cid:3)(cid:3)

(cid:68)(cid:258)(cid:361)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:437)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:374)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:258)(cid:367)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:28)(cid:104)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:455)(cid:3)
(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:367)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)
• (cid:69)(cid:437)(cid:272)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:3)(cid:393)(cid:346)(cid:258)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:449)(cid:346)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:349)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:75)(cid:882)(cid:1006)(cid:3)

(cid:286)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:282)(cid:437)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:854)(cid:3)

• (cid:90)(cid:286)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:296)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:28)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:393)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:28)(cid:373)(cid:349)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:100)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:282)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:894)(cid:28)(cid:100)(cid:94)(cid:895)(cid:3)

(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:400)(cid:437)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:286)(cid:410)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:258)(cid:454)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:437)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:400)(cid:854)

• (cid:4)(cid:367)(cid:367)(cid:381)(cid:272)(cid:258)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:437)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:448)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:367)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:272)(cid:258)(cid:393)(cid:258)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:455)(cid:3)

(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:28)(cid:104)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:271)(cid:381)(cid:437)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:272)(cid:349)(cid:410)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:336)(cid:396)(cid:349)(cid:282)(cid:854)

• (cid:4)(cid:282)(cid:282)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:400)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:336)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:455)(cid:3)(cid:373)(cid:258)(cid:396)(cid:364)(cid:286)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:296)(cid:258)(cid:349)(cid:367)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:258)(cid:374)(cid:282)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:282)(cid:437)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)

(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)(cid:373)(cid:286)(cid:258)(cid:400)(cid:437)(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:400)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:381)(cid:3)(cid:400)(cid:437)(cid:393)(cid:393)(cid:381)(cid:396)(cid:410)(cid:3)(cid:410)(cid:346)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:349)(cid:374)(cid:410)(cid:396)(cid:381)(cid:282)(cid:437)(cid:272)(cid:410)(cid:349)(cid:381)(cid:374)(cid:3)(cid:381)(cid:296)(cid:3)
(cid:396)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:449)(cid:258)(cid:271)(cid:367)(cid:286)(cid:3)(cid:286)(cid:374)(cid:286)(cid:396)(cid:336)(cid:349)(cid:286)(cid:400)

90

Annex I

Participants

EGE round table 
on the energy mix in Europe

91

Members of the European Group 
on Ethics (EGE)

Julian KINDERLERER
EGE President 
Professor of Intellectual Property 
Law, University of Cape Town, South 
Africa; Professor of Biotechnology 
and Society, University of Technology, 
Delft, the Netherlands

Linda NIELSEN 
EGE Vice-President 
Professor of Global Law and 
Governance, doctor jurist, University of 
Copenhagen, Denmark

Paula MARTINHO da SILVA
Lawyer, visiting Professor and Senior 
Investigator at the Bioethics Institute, 
Portuguese Catholic University, 
Portugal

Emmanuel AGIUS
Professor of Moral Philosophy and 
Moral
Theology, Faculty of Theology,
University of Malta, Malta

Inez de BEAUFORT
Professor of Health Care Ethics, 
Erasmus Medical Centre, Dept of 
Medical Ethics,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands

Hille HAKER
Richard McCormick S.J. Chair of 
Catholic Moral Theology, Loyola 
University Chicago, USA (since 2010); 
Professor of Moral Theology and 
Social Ethics, University of Frankfurt, 
Germany (since 2005)

Pere PUIGDOMÈNECH ROSELL
Research Professor of CSIC,
Director of Plant Molecular Genetics
Laboratory, CSIC-IRIA,
Barcelona, Spain

Günter VIRT
Professor emeritus for Moral Theology, 
University of Vienna, Austria

Peter DABROCK
Chair for Systematic Theology (Ethics), 
University of Erlangen-Nuremberg,
Germany

Andrzej GORSKI
Professor of Medicine, Medical 
University of Warsaw and Polish 
Academy of Sciences, Poland

Ritva HALILA
Head of Department, Hjelt Institute, 
University of Helsinki, Finland 
(2010–13); General Secretary, National 
Advisory Board on Social Welfare and 
Health Care Ethics (ETENE), Finland

Herman NYS
Lawyer, Professor of Medical Law, 
Faculties of Law and Medicine, KUL 
Leuven, Belgium

Siobhán O’SULLIVAN
Chief Bioethics Offi  cer, Department 
for Health and Children, Lecturer 
in Healthcare Ethics and Law, Royal 
College of Surgeons of Ireland

Representatives of religion

Kostas ZORMPAS
Theologian sociologist
Belgium

Canon Michael WILLIAMS
United Kingdom

Academics

Bram DELVAUX
Institute of Energy and Environmental 
Law and ELECTA,
Faculty of Law, Collegium Falconis, KU 
Leuven
Belgium

Laura PALAZZANI
Professor of Philosophy of Law, Lumsa 
University, Rome, Italy

Kristian KRIEGER
The Institute for European Studies
Belgium

Marie-Jo THIEL
Professor, University of Strasbourg, 
France; Director of the European 
Centre for the Study and Teaching 
of Ethics (CEERE), University of 
Strasbourg, France

Speakers

Richard ADAMS
European Economic and Social 
Committee
Belgium

Christian HEY 
Secretary-General of the German 
Advisory Council of the Environment
Germany

AbuBakr S. BAHAJ
Professor of Sustainable Energy at the 
University of Southampton
United Kingdom

Anita RØNNE
Associate Professor
in Energy Law, University of 
Copenhagen 
Denmark

Pier VELLINGA
Chairman of the national research 
programme ‘Knowledge for climate’, 
Wageningen University and Vrij 
Universiteit Amstersdam
The Netherlands

Roberto CAPUZZO DOLCETTA
Department of Physics , Università di 
Roma ‘La Sapienza’ 
Italy

Szabina TÖRÖK
Environmental Physics
Centre of Energy Research, Hungarian 
Academy of Sciences
Hungary

Michael KUHN
Vienna Institute of Demography,
Austrian Academy of Sciences
Austria

NGOs, agencies and associations

André BEECKMANS DE 
WEST-MEERBEECK
Retired from the Belgian Nuclear
Research Centre
Belgium

Diane WHITEHOUSE
The Castlegate Consultancy
Belgium

Yves KALUZNY
Alternative Energies and Atomic 
Energy Commission (CEA)
France

Rikke BAGGER JORGENSEN
Danish Council of Ethics
Denmark

92

Lieve Van WOENSEL 
European Parliament
Directorate-General for Internal 
Policies
Directorate for Impact Assessment and 
European Added Value
Belgium

DG Research and Innovation

DG Interpretation

Anne LYKKESKOV
Danish Council of Ethics
Denmark

Bernd NILLES
International Alliance of Catholic 
Development Agencies (CIDSE)
Belgium

Ernestine CATH
The Netherlands

Eva DONELLI
Nucnet
Belgium

Mark O’DONOVAN
Foratom
Belgium

Tellervo TAIPALE
Foratom
Belgium

Representatives of industry 
and media

European Parliament

Tatiana SCHMITZ
Radio Television Belge 
Francophone (RTBF)
Belgium

Mirela ATANASIU
Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Joint 
Undertaking 
(FCH JU)
Belgium

Sorcha EDWARDS
Housing Europe — Federation of 
Public, Cooperative and Social Housing
Belgium

Jesse SCOTT
EURELECTRIC AISBL
Belgium

Simon BLAKEY
EUROGAS — European Union of the 
Natural Gas Industry
Belgium

Roger GARBIL
European Commission

Gilles LEQUEUX
European Commission

Frederick MARIEN
European Commission

Giuseppe Giovanni DAQUINO
European Commission
Research Executive Agency 
to the European Commission

Panagiotis MANOLATOS
European Commission

Kimberley LANSFORD
European Round Table of Industrialists
Belgium

Domenico ROSSETTI DI VALDALBERO
European Commission

Angela SAINZ ARNAU
European Energy Forum
Belgium

Guillermo BELTRA
The European Consumers’ 
Organisation
Belgium

Ilona VAATERI
Aula Europe
Belgium

Teresa LUIS-RUIZ
Endesa Brussels Offi  ce
Belgium

Tomasz SLIWINSKI
European Commission

Isidoros KARATZAS
European Commission

Michel ANDRIEU
European Commission
Eureka Secretariat

Amandine LACOURT
European Commission

Laurent BONTOUX
European Commission

Maria VELKOVA
European Commission

93

Rositsa PETROVA
European Commission

Timea BALOGH
European Commission

Zdenka PALAJOVA
European Commission
Joint Research Centre

Pierre KOCKEROLS
European Commission
Joint Research Centre

DG Energy

Marc DEFFRENNES
European Commission

Jean-Marie BEMTGEN
European Commission

Marie ROBIN
European Commission

Sandrine CARTIER
European Commission

Laura KONIG-CHOMEL
European Commission

Corinne KESSLER
European Commission

Susan BLACKWELL
European Commission

Christel. KOZORT
European Commission

DG Communication, 
Audiovisual Services

Jennifer JACQUEMART
European Commission

Etienne ANSOTTE

European Commission
Bureau of the European Policy 
Advisers (BEPA)

Maurizio SALVI
European Commission
Head of the EGE Secretariat

Kim-Hoang LÊ
European Commission

Adriana OLTEAN
European Commission

EGE website: http://ec.europa.eu/
european_group_ethics/index_en.htm

94

Annex II

Secretariat of the 
European Group 
on Ethics

EGE round table 
on the energy mix in Europe

95

Secretariat of the European 
Group on Ethics

Secretariat address 
European Commission
Berl 8/362
1049 Brussels
BELGIUM
Fax +32 22994565 
E-mail: BEPA-ETHICS-GROUP@ec.europa.eu

Maurizio SALVI, 
MBA, MBS, PhD, D. Biotech.
European Commission 
Head BEPA Ethics sector,
Head of the EGE Secretariat,
General Secretary EC IBD,

Berl 8/359, 1049 Brussels – BELGIUM
E-mail: maurizio.salvi@ec.europa.eu

Kim Hoang LÊ
European Commission
EGE Secretariat

Berl 8/362, 1049 Brussels – BELGIUM
Tel. +32 22999228
E-mail: kim-hoang.le@ec.europa.eu

Adriana Sorina OLTEAN
European Commission
EGE Secretariat

Berl 8/362, 1049 Brussels – BELGIUM
Tel. +32 22993016
E-mail: adriana-sorina.oltean@ec.europa.eu

Website:
http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm

96

Mail address

European Commission

Secretariat of the European Group on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies

Berlaymont Building
BERL 8/362
Rue de la Loi/Wetstraat 200
1049 Bruxelles/Brussel
BELGIQUE/BELGÏE

Offi  ce

European Commission
Berlaymont Building
Rue de la Loi/Wetstraat 200
1049 Bruxelles/Brussel
BELGIQUE/BELGÏE

Website

http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm

97

European Commission

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies: Round table on the energy mix in Europe

Luxembourg: Publications Offi  ce of the European Union 

2012 — 97 pp. — 21 × 29.7 cm

ISBN 978-92-79-26538-9
doi:10.2796/18654

HOW TO OBTAIN EU PUBLICATIONS

Free publications:

• 

• 

via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu);

 at the European Union’s representations or delegations. You can obtain their
contact details on the Internet (http://ec.europa.eu) or by sending a fax
to +352 2929-42758.

Priced publications:

• 

via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu).

Priced subscriptions (e.g. annual series of the Official Journal  of the European Union 
and reports of cases before the Court of Justice of the European Union):

• 

 via one of the sales agents of the Publications Office of the European Union
(http://publications.europa.eu/others/agents/index_en.htm).

N
J
-
3
0
-
1
2
-
8
7
1
-
E
N
-
C

T
h
e

E
u
r
o
p
e
a
n
G
r
o
u
p

o
n

E
t
h
i
c
s

i

n

S
c
i
e
n
c
e

a
n
d
N
e
w
T
e
c
h
n
o
o
g
e
s

l

i

The European Group on Ethics 
in Science and New Technologies: 
Round table 
on the energy mix in Europe

Brussels, 18 September 2012

doi:10.2796/18654

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
