ISSN 1725-5562

Ethically
speaking

A newsletter providing information on the 
activities of the national ethics committees 
compiled by the Secretariat of the European 
Group on Ethics in Science and New 
Technologies to the European Commission

Issue 16 — July 2012

K
A
-
A
I
-
1
2
-
0
1
6
-
E
N
-
C

E
t
h

i
c
a

l
l
y

s
p
e
a
k
i

n
g

I
s
s
u
e

1
6
—

J
u

l
y

2
0
1
2

 
 
 
 
 
 
HOW TO OBTAIN EU PUBLICATIONS

Free publications:

•	
•	

via	EU	Bookshop	(http://bookshop.europa.eu);
	at	the	European	Union’s	representations	or	delegations.	You	can	obtain	their	
contact	details	on	the	Internet	(http://ec.europa.eu)	or	by	sending	a	fax		to	+352	
2929-42758.

Priced publications:

•	

via	EU	Bookshop	(http://bookshop.europa.eu).

Priced subscriptions (e.g. annual series of the Official Journal of the European 
Union and reports of cases before the Court of Justice of the European Union):

•	

	via	one	of	the	sales	agents	of	the	Publications	Office	of	the	European	Union	(http://
publications.europa.eu/others/agents/index_en.htm).

Ethically speaking

Issue 16

July 2012

Maurizio SALVI  

Chief Editor

Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers 
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers 
or these calls may be billed.

More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu).

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication.

Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2012

ISSN 1725-5562

© European Union, 2012
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Printed in Luxembourg

Printed on white chlorine-free PaPer

Contents

Editorial 
Maurizio Salvi, Head of the EGE Secretariat 
Editorial 
Julian Kinderlerer, President of the EGE 

General information on activities of the EU national and regional ethics committees 

Austria 
Belgium 
Cyprus 
Denmark 
Finland 
France 
Germany 
Greece 
Italy 
Latvia 
Malta 
Poland 
Portugal 
Sweden 
United Kingdom 

General information on activities of the European Commission 

European Commission 

General information on activities of the non-EU national and regional ethics committees 

Argentina 
Australia 
China 
Copab 
Indonesia 
Japan 
Mexico 
Russia 
Switzerland 
United States of America 

General information on activities of the international organisations 

Council of Europe 

EGE Secretariat 

5

7

9

11
13
17
21
23
25
27
31
35
37
39
41
43
47
49

51

53

55

57
59
61
65
67
69
71
73
75
77

79

81

83

Editorial

Maurizio Salvi, Head of the EGE Secretariat

EGE opinion on the Ethical Implications of Information Communication Technology and EGE opin-
ion on the Ethics of Energy mix in Europe

The Commission adopted in May 2010 the Digital Agenda for Europe, aiming to promote innovative 
uses of information communication technologies (ICT) while respecting citizens’ rights and EU fun-
damental values. This was one of the seven flagship initiatives foreseen in the Europe 2020 strategy for 
smart, sustainable and inclusive growth.

In order to promote a responsible, socially inclusive and ethically sound implementation of this strat-
egy, J. M. Barroso, the President of the European Commission, requested the European Group on Eth-
ics  in  Science  and  New  Technologies  (EGE),  the  independent  advisory  body  to  the  Commission,  on 
22 March 2011, to issue an opinion on the ethical implications of information communication technology. 
The EGE held its third meeting on 12 and 13 April in Brussels, its fourth meeting on 17 and 18 May in 
Brussels and its fifth meeting on 21 and 22 June, its sixth meeting on 22 September and its seventh meet-
ing on 18 and 19 October and had meetings on 15 and 16 November and 13 and 14 December 2011. The 
EGE discussed the forthcoming opinion on ethics and ICT with the chairpersons of the EU-27 national 
ethics councils on 21 September 2011. On 15 November, the EGE held an open conference with relevant 
stakeholders on ethics of ICT (100 participants).

The EGE unanimously adopted the opinion on 22 February 2012, which was then sent to President Bar-
roso. Subsequently, the EGE met Commissioner Kroes to treat the opinion’s main findings.

The ICT opinion emerged from a forceful succession of meetings with external experts and relevant 
stakeholders  (including  industry,  civil  society,  NGOs,  academia  and  the  chairpersons  of  the  EU-27 
national ethics councils). The opinion addresses governance aspects (ethical, legal, social and political) 
related to the following sectors of the EU Digital Agenda: social networks; e-government; e-commerce; 
corporate  social  responsibility;  digital  divide;  e-skills;  e-advertising;  cybercrime;  net  neutrality;  the 
Internet of Things; e-health; EU regulatory frameworks for personal data protection; data mining and 
data profiling; protection of vulnerable groups; political participation; environmental impact and use of 
raw materials, etc.

In the opinion, the EGE recognises the potential of the Digital Agenda for Europe (DAE) for the Euro-
pean Union and stresses the need to promote a responsible, inclusive and socially sustainable implemen-
tation of this important policy sector. The group therefore advocates the need to promote DAE actions in 
accordance with European Union fundamental values. The EGE opinion calls for the following specific 
actions to be undertaken at EU level:

• 

• 

to secure and promote the right of access to the Internet;

to provide means to foster responsibility amongst those using ICT, whether individual users or 
those providing services (with additional safeguards for children and adolescents);

•  personal data in ICT to be processed on the basis of the explicit consent of the person concerned 

(including withdrawal provisions) or other legitimate basis;

• 

the need for keeping the Internet as a communication domain where freedom of expression is pro-
tected from censorship within the framework of the Charter of Fundamental Rights;

• 

to ensure that social media networks protect the data submitted by users in a responsible manner;

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

5

• 

• 

• 

to encourage companies to take privacy into consideration when applying their corporate social 
responsibility measures — also using the technological solutions such as privacy impact assess-
ment, privacy enhancing technology and piracy by design;

individuals to be explicitly informed by businesses, state bodies or research bodies that their infor-
mation may be mined for specific purposes;

the establishment of transparent informed consent procedures for the collection of ICT users’ data 
and clear definition of responsibilities of relevant actors involved in the use of such data.

President Barroso and Commissioner Kroes welcomed the opinion and its support for actions by the 
European Commission to implement the Digital Agenda for Europe in a responsible way. They indicated 
that the Commission will now take inspiration from the proposed recommendations to further foster 
societal and ethical consideration in the construction of the European digital society.

On 19 December 2011, the President of the European Commission requested the EGE to ‘contribute to 
the debate on a sustainable energy mix in Europe by studying the ethical impact of research on different 
energy sources on human well-being’. The EGE will mainly focus on the ethical aspects of this tangled 
topic and its opinion should be adopted by the end of 2012. Following the adoption of the EGE opinion 
on ethics and ICT, on 20 and 21 March, the EGE Group started working on its new opinion on ethics of 
energy, requested by President Barroso. The opinion will contribute to the debate on a sustainable energy 
mix in Europe. On 17 and 18 April, the EGE Group held its 13th meeting in Brussels. Foreseen meetings 
for this task are: 15 and 16 May; 18 June; 18 and 19 September — open round table; 4 and 5 October — 
meeting with the EU-27 NECs; 20 and 21 November; and 11 and 12 December.

Maurizio Salvi,
MBA, MBS, MD Bioethics, DPH, D Biotech,
Advisor to the President, BEPA,
Head BEPA Ethics Sector,
Head EGE Secretariat,
Secretary General EC IDB,
Editor in Chief Ethically speaking

See also:

EGE opinion (http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european-group-ethics/docs/publications/ict_final_22_ 
february-adopted.pdf)
EGE round-table proceeding (http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european-group-ethics/docs/publications/ 
ict_round-table_november2011.pdf)
EGE activities (http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european-group-ethics/welcome/activities/index_en.htm)

6 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

Editorial

Julian Kinderlerer, President of the EGE

The EGE is well into its new mandate, with one opinion published, and a second on its way. It had been 
assumed that, even though the name of the group provided for ethical advice in all of science and new 
technologies, most of the work would relate to the life sciences. Indeed, most ethical analyses in relation 
to science over the last half-century have addressed medical or biological issues. Clearly there are eth-
ical issues in other areas of science, which we are beginning to think about. Indeed, in this mandate the 
first three opinions will have departed from this traditional position and will address ethical issues in 
a much broader area of science and technology; addressing ethical issues is crucial to the embedding of 
the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the EU policy frame.

President Barroso invited the EGE to draft an opinion that could ‘offer a reference point to the Commis-
sion to promote a responsible use of the Digital Agenda for Europe and facilitate the societal acceptance 
of such an important policy area’. The Digital Agenda recognises that ‘[T]oday, under EU law, citizens in 
the EU enjoy a series of rights that are relevant to the digital environment, such as freedom of expression 
and information, protection of personal data and privacy, requirements for transparency and universal 
telephone and functional Internet services and a minimum quality of service’. Every day more than 250 
million Europeans connect to the Internet, to work, learn, communicate, play and socialise. The digital 
economy has grown rapidly around all those activities. The manner in which we work, shop and organ-
ise our leisure is now heavily dependent on electronic communication; personal meetings now include 
interactions unlimited by place or time. It has been a fascinating exploration of these areas, including 
concepts of identity, privacy and identification. We published our opinion at the beginning of this year.

We had expected to draft a second opinion on issues related to information and communication tech-
nology immediately after finishing Opinion No 26. President Barroso had reminded the group that the 
European Commission is committed to ensure that ethical values are fully respected when developing 
security technologies. It seemed important that we addressed the ethical issues related to ICT and se -
curity in a separate document as these have enormous ramifications for the citizens of Europe. In the event 
we were asked to address a crucial issue first and will return to looking at the security issues next year.

The President of the Commission wrote to the EGE concerning an opinion on ethics, energy research and 
production. ‘On 28 June the Competiveness Council of the European Union reached a political agree-
ment on a Commission proposal for a nuclear research and a training programme for 2012–13. Although 
the council’s discussion has been successfully concluded, it was felt that a broad discourse on ethical 
issues and the sustainable energy mix in Europe should take place. Therefore, the Commission decided 
to ask the EGE to contribute to the debate on a sustainable energy mix in Europe by studying the ethical 
impact of research on different energy sources on human well being.’ It was hoped that the EGE opinion 
will contribute to, inter alia: (1) the interinstitutional debate on the Horizon 2020 EU programme, (2) an 
interdisciplinary study on the benefits and limitations of nuclear fission for a low carbon economy to be 
issued by the Commission in 2012 and (3) an interdisciplinary symposium on energy sources that the 
Commission will organise in 2013. We are working on producing an effective response for the Commis-
sion before the end of 2012.

It has been an exciting 18 months, and we look forward with some trepidation to the tasks that face our 
group.

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

7

General information on 
activities of the EU national 
and regional ethics 
committees

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

9

AUSTRIA

Austrian Bioethics Commission

Commission recommends terminology for medical decisions in end-of-life situations

Before the end of its term in October 2011, the Austrian Bioethics Commission published a recommen-
dation  regarding  the  terminology  of  medical  decisions  in  end-of-life  situations.  In  October  2011,  the 
commission was reappointed (1). The new commission is presently working on ethical aspects of assisted 
reproduction technology.

Terminology of medical decisions in end-of-life situations

The scientific and technical changes have given rise to a partial discrepancy between ethical arguments, 
terminology in current legal texts and medical interventions in end-of-life situations. Death seems to be 
becoming less of a natural occurrence and more of a medically and technically designed process. In the 
dying process, the moral principles of physicians, financial constraints and planning, as well as pharma-
cological promises, often clash with the wishes of the dying person and his or her relatives.

In juridical teachings and jurisprudence, a traditional distinction is made between active and passive, and 
direct and indirect, euthanasia. These terms, however, no longer apply. The process of changing a ther-
apy goal by giving priority to palliative measures is at any rate not sufficiently covered by these juridical 
definitions. The Austrian Bioethics Commission therefore recommends dispensing with the terminology 
of ‘active’, ‘passive’ and ‘indirect’ euthanasia and replacing them with the following terms (2).

•  End-of-life care: The term ‘terminal care’ covers measures aimed at the care, support and treat-
ment of the symptoms of dying persons. These include physical care, satisfying needs such as 
hunger and thirst, reducing nausea, anxiety and shortness of breath, as well as rendering empathy 
and assistance. To conduct such measures the consent of the patient is required.

•  End-of-life  treatment:  The  concept  ‘end-of-life  treatment’  encompasses  all  medical  measures, 
including those of a palliative nature, that are initiated in the last phase of a person’s life with the 
aim of improving their living quality, extending their life or alleviating their suffering.

•  Allowing death: A medical measure with a curative aim that is viewed as life-extending can be 
refrained from if the course of the illness does not warrant further treatment and/or if the dying 
process is thereby extended. This is also the case when a patient no longer authorises the treat-
ment. Nevertheless, the care and support of a patient is always necessary, provided this is in line 
with his or her will.

Events past and future

In the reporting period the Austrian Bioethics Commission organised two scientific conferences (3):

• 

• 

‘Assisted reproduction technology — quo vadis?’, 22 and 23 June, 2011.

‘Bioethics commissions — do we need expert bodies?’, 5 October, 2011.

1    Composition of the Austrian Bioethics Commission is available on the Internet 

(http://www.bundeskanzleramt.at/site/6742/default.aspx).

2   Opinion available on the Internet (http://www.bundeskanzleramt.at/DocView.axd?CobId=46713).
3   http://www.bundeskanzleramt.at/site/7193/Default.aspx

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

11

 
The latter event was the opening conference of the Austrian Bioethics Commission in its new composi-
tion. The keynote address was held by the President of the European Group on Ethics in Science and 
New Technologies, Professor Julian Kinderlerer.

Further information

Dr Doris Wolfslehner
Head of the Secretariat
Austrian Bioethics Commission

Address
Austrian Federal Chancellery
Ballhausplatz 2
1014 Vienna
AUSTRIA
Tel. +43 153115-2987
Fax +43 153109-2987
E-mail: doris.wolfslehner@bka.gv.at

12 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

BELGIUM

The Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics, 2011

Fifteen years of the Advisory Committee on Bioethics: round-up and prospects

Established in 1996, the Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics celebrated its 15th anniversary on 
12 October 2011.

The committee is eager to take this opportunity to assess the impact of its activities after its first three 
mandates.

Have the 50 opinions issued over this time period on a wide range of often moot matters helped members 
of parliament and government ministers to reflect on matters and enabled them to adopt a position on 
issues where sensitive conflicts of values can rarely be reduced to simplistic views? Have these opinions 
served as a source of solutions, as a source of inspiration, or simply as a basis for discussion within medi-
cal ethics committees that are confronted with ethical issues on a regular basis?

What will become of some of the values that have traditionally been considered to be core values of our 
society? What role do ethics play: do they merely serve to set boundaries to biomedical and biotechno-
logical developments; do they set such boundaries only for developments that citizens consider desirable; 
or do ethics bring about a new way of viewing the relationships between biomedicine and man?

Has the committee’s way of analysing issues changed over time? Which path will the committee be tak-
ing in the future? Using which means and resources, and serving whom?

All of these questions were addressed at the eighth conference, open to the general public, where com-
mittee members, together with two distinguished foreign experts, made an assessment of the commit-
tee’s first 15 years. Members of the public were involved as key players in the conference, both by partici-
pating in an interactive panel debate and by communicating their ideas in a series of filmed interviews.

These reflections are now available in a book published in French and in Dutch (Ed. Lannoocampus). 
This book includes six articles written by members of the Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics 
(BACB) and two contributions kindly offered by two international specialists on bioethics, Ms Nouzha 
Guessous and Mr Albert Weale. A DVD offers the opportunity to discover interviews (translated into 
French and Dutch) of citizens and Belgian specialists on topics treated in the articles and during the 
conference.

Let us look at these very varied themes.

1.  The universality of the principles of bioethics in a multicultural society context (Nouzha Guessous)

Ms Guessous considers Belgium as a very interesting country because of its multicultural nature by 
virtue of its French, Dutch and German communities, and of its communities made of different sources 
of immigration. Her reflection aims to analyse some opinions of the BACB chosen for their sensitivity 
to cultural aspects. Her analysis is based on Unesco’s recommendations and on approaches proper to 
Muslim societies and communities. The author raises ethical questions linked to the technology and 
regulation of pre-implantation sex choice, to organ transplantation and to filiations.

2.  The bioethics of pluralism: a view from the United Kingdom (Albert Weale)

The constitution and workings of the Belgian Advisory Committee are an example of ethical pluralism. 
In this respect, given the way the committee is constituted, it reflects how Belgian society is pluralist 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

13

in outlook and view. It is pluralist not only with respect to the obvious feature of language but also with 
respect to religious and philosophical positions of its citizens. This is not to say that ‘anything goes’. 
Even within the highly pluralist societies of Europe, there are limits to the range of opinions that find 
their way into public deliberation. The value of social inclusiveness and the prohibition on reproductive 
human cloning are two obvious examples. However, within the limits that are commonly accepted in 
highly pluralist societies, there is considerable scope for differences of view to be expressed. The author 
develops a view as to what the role of bioethics committees should be; he notes how deep cultural plural-
ism complicates the mission of any bioethics committee; he identifies some characteristics of the Belgian 
reports; and he suggests some challenges for the committee.

3.	 Social	justice:	a	high-profile	notion?	(Michel	Dupuis)

If the scientific and technical disciplines are only devoted to professional specialists, ethics as ‘a dis-
cipline of the human’ is exercised at a double level: a professional level (the philosophical practice or the 
specialised practice) and a citizen level (basic or naive practices) For the author, these two levels are 
complementary in the ethical reflection and especially in a reflection conducted in an advisory bioethical 
committee. The double methodology of ethics — one professional, with organisational tasks and analytic 
approach of situations, the other profane, mostly turned towards the feeling and the intuition of the situ-
ation — are very useful to take over the issue of justice in bioethics.

4. 

 Vulnerable people and the opinions of the committee: between autonomy and protection 
(Gilles Genicot)

The author offers a detailed analysis of the notion of vulnerability in identifying the place of the vulne-
rable  persons  per  definitio  in  different  BACB  opinions.  These  are  minor  or  major  persons  unable  to 
express their will, in reason of their age (too young or too old) or their mental state), unable to understand 
sufficiently the given information and to consent freely to the care and treatments provided. In these 
cases, it is very important to think how to make a bridge between the principle of autonomy and the 
notion of vulnerability in situations of end of life or during human experimentation.

5.  Genetic testing: between promises and reality (Inge Liebaers)

Today genetic tests are used to answer a question linked to diagnosis but they could be useful in a pre-
ventive strategy. We talk then of genetic screening. In the future, both kinds of use will be more effec-
tive and accurate. The question of the choice between a ‘focused research’ or ‘general research focused 
on one point’ will be raised. In the first case, technology is performed to screen a well-known defect in 
a specific context. In the second case, a broader research is conducted and offers the opportunity to relate 
a well-known defect to a new problem. These two kinds of research don’t delete the old question of the 
patient’s information. On the contrary, the content of this information and its use by the patient are more 
than ever at the centre of the ethical reflection.

6.  Impact of the committee’s opinions on Belgian legislation (Herman Nys)

This study is based on two sources. The first is the 49 opinions published between 12 May 1997 and 
20 April 2009 by the BACB; the second is the federal legislation published since the establishment of the 
Belgian committee, more especially the parliamentary documents linked to this legislation. In a chrono-
logical order, the author confirms the impact of the BACB’s opinions on the parliamentary work or on the 
law, and conversely the impact of the legislation on the opinions.

7.	

	The	elaboration	of	the	reflection	in	a	bioethics	advisory	committee:	a	comparative	study	on	
the use of the precautionary principle (Marie-Geneviève Pinsart)

An  opinion  is  the  final  result  of  a  reflection  and  it  is  often  considered  as  the  one  and  only  interest-
ing  expression  of  the  ethical  dimension  of  a  question.  But  this  final  report  is  only  possible  because 

14 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

methodological choices have been done beforehand, and these choices themselves express some ethical 
perspective. The eye constructs what it sees, and thus the reality is only one possible vision. The author 
wants to underline the methodological specificity of the BSCN by comparison of its opinions with those 
of the French CCNE concerning the precautionary principle. Coming from environmental ethics, this 
principle is now used in the public health area. If it allows to extend the reflection beyond the notion of 
caution or of preventive action, its excessive use has also been strongly criticised.

8.	

My	dignity	or	human	dignity?	(Paul	Schotsmans)

In  the  bioethics  context,  the  term  ‘dignity’  or  the  expression  ‘human  dignity’  is  frequently  used.  Its 
various occurrences raise questions: some persons think that the concept of dignity expresses an intrinsic 
value, others see it as too general and confusing. The author puts forward three different interpretations 
of the concept of human dignity and states that two of them characterise mainly the Belgian committee’s 
opinions: the individual definition of what each person considers to be his/her dignity, and the more uni-
versal and anthropological conception of the notion of dignity.

Further information

Prof. Marie-Geneviève Pinsart
President (2011–12)
Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics
Website: http://www.health.fgov.be/bioeth

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

15

CYPRUS

The Cyprus National Bioethics Committee (CNBC) was established in 2001 by ‘Τhe law providing for 
the establishment and function of the National Bioethics Committee’.

Its mandate is to monitor constantly, survey, systematically analyse and evaluate the issues and problems 
associated with scientific research, advances in and applications of biotechnology, biology, medicine, 
genetics and pharmaceutics, along with human intervention in biological processes and the human geno-
type, and to investigate their moral, deontological, social, humanistic and legal dimensions.

The CNBC is an independent body not subjected to administrative supervision by any ministry, agency, 
department or service and has the powers conferred on it by the current law and any other law.

The CNBC has 13 members, including the chairperson. The members represent different professions and 
disciplines, and are appointed by the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Cyprus for a 4-year term. 
The law stipulates that at least four members must come from the humanities and social sciences; four 
from medical and biological sciences and four members must be from any other science or profession or 
be distinguished for their contribution in any area of activity in the science and the society.

On 14 July the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Cyprus appointed new CNBC members for a term 
of office until 13 July 2015.

According to the provisions of the national legislation currently in force, the CNBC is the body respon-
sible for performing the bioethical review of all research protocols involving human subjects in Cyprus 
(both biomedical and clinical research). In order to fulfil this, the CNBC has adopted with very few 
changes the World Health Organisation ‘Operational guidelines for ethics committees that review bio-
medical research’ as the basis of the guidelines for ethics committees reviewing biomedical research 
involving human subjects in Cyprus, which were enacted on 31 March 2005 (Κ.Δ.Π. 175/2005).

In accordance with these guidelines and with the authority conferred on it by Law No 150 (I)/2001 the 
committee set up the following three review bioethics committees:

I.  The Review Bioethics Committee for Biomedical Research on Human Beings and their Biological 

Substances,

II.  The Review Bioethics Committee for the Clinical Trials on Medicinal Products of Human Use, 

and

III. The Review Bioethics Committee for Biomedical Research on Human Beings and their Biological 

Substances and the Clinical Trials on Medicinal Products of Human Use.

The review bioethics committees review protocols relating to:

•  biomedical research on human beings and their biological substances,

•  clinical trials on medicinal products for human use, and

• 

research on medical devices applied to human beings.

The role of the review bioethics committees is to:

1.  contribute  to  safeguarding  the  dignity,  rights,  safety  and  well-being  of  all  actual  or  potential 

research participants;

2.  provide independent, competent and timely review of the ethical aspects of proposed studies;

3.  review research proposal before the research begins.

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

17

The CNBC appoints the members of the review bioethics committees and monitors, directs and coor-
dinates their work, and reviews their decisions by applying the specific procedures provided for in the 
operational guidelines (Κ.Δ.Π. 175/2005).

On 1 December 2011 new members were appointed in the review bioethics committees in replacement 
of the members for whom the term of office finished on 30 November 2011. The term of office of the new 
members is from 1 December 2011 to 30 November 2013.

Current work and forthcoming opinions

•  Preparation for hosting the next NEC Forum in Cyprus in October 2012;

•  Updating the ‘Operational guidelines for conducting biomedical research in Cyprus’.

Previous opinions

1.  Opinion of the Cyprus National Bioethics Committee on the Bioethical Considerations arising 
from the chemical (hereinafter referred to as medicinal) and surgical castration of people con-
victed for sexual offences, issued on 6 July 2010 (available only in Greek).

2.  Opinion of the Cyprus National Bioethics Committee on obtaining informed consent from minors 

in the context of research protocols, issued on 25 May 2010 (available only in Greek).

3.  Opinion of the Cyprus National Bioethics Committee on obtaining informed consent from adults, 

issued on 1 December 2009 (available only in Greek).

4.  Opinion on the establishment and use of human biobanks and registries of human biological sam-

ples for research purposes, issued on 23 June 2009 (available in Greek and English).

5.  Opinion on the use of ionising radiation in medical practice, issued on 12 May 2009 (available in 

Greek and in English).

6.  Opinion on palliative care for terminally ill and dying patients, issued on 1 July 2008 (available in 

Greek and English).

7.  Opinion on genetically modified organisms, issued on 3 April 2008 (available in Greek and Eng-

lish).

8.  Opinion on the prenuptial test for thalassaemia before the conclusion of a civil wedding, issued on 

24 March 2008 (available only in Greek).

9.  Opinion on predictive health information in the conclusion of health and life insurance contracts, 

issued on 22 January 2008 (available in Greek and English).

10. Opinion on medically assisted human procreation (5 March 2007) (available only in Greek).

11. Opinion on PGD and sex selection of the in vitro procreated embryos, issued on 1 November 2006 

(available only in Greek).

12. Opinion on human cloning, issued on 12 September 2006 (available only in Greek).

13. Opinion on human organ donors’ registries, issued on 19 July 2006 (available only in Greek).

14. Opinion on cord blood banking, issued on 27 April 2004 (available only in Greek).

15. Opinion  on  transplantation  of  biological  substances  of  human  origin,  issued  on  14 April 2003 

(available only in Greek).

16. Opinion  on  the  use  of  the  preimplation  genetic  diagnosis  method,  issued  on  20 October 2003 

(available only in Greek).

18 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

Further information

Dr Michael Voniatis
Chairman
The Cyprus National Bioethics Committee

Address
Nikou Kranidioti
Engomis Medical Centre
1st Floor
2411 Engomi
CYPRUS
Tel. +357 22809038 / 22809039
Fax +357 22353878
E-mail: cnbc@bioethics.gov.cy
Website: http://www.bioethics.gov.cy

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

19

DENMARK

NEC name: The Danish Council of Ethics

Year of establishment of the NEC: 1987

Remit of the NEC

The council advises and creates debates on biotechnology issues which affect human life, nature, the 
environment and food. The council also works with all ethical issues related to the healthcare sector.

Composition of the NEC

In total, 17 members — eight women and nine men — or vice versa. Nine are appointed by the Com-
mittee at the Folketing (the Danish Parliament) and four by the Minister of Health. The other four are 
appointed  (one  each)  by  the  Minister  for  Food,  Agriculture  and  Fisheries,  the  Minister  for  Environ-
ment, the Minister for Science, Technology and Innovation and the Minister for Economic and Business 
Affairs.

List of the last three NEC opinions

— The need for common guidelines in relation to hospitals’ and doctors’ handling of aborted foetuses 

and the involvement of their parents

— Healthcare treatment of incompetent demented

— Screening of sperm donor

List of the next topics to be covered by NEC opinions

1.  Psychiatry

2.  Food, climate and ethics

3.  Ethics and language

4.  Genetic testing

5.  Commercialisation of the body

6.  Prioritisation in the healthcare sector

Chairperson and Secretariat

Chair: Mr Jacob Birkler

Director of Secretariat: Mrs Lise Wied Kirkegaard

Contact details:

The	Danish	Council	of	Ethics
Rentemestervej 8
2400 Copenhagen NV
DENMARK
Tel. +45 72216860
E-mail: info@etiskraad.dk
E-mail: Mr Jacob Birkler (jb@etiskraad.dk)
E-mail: Mrs Lise Wied Kirkegaard (lwk@etiskraad.dk)

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

21

FINLAND

NEC name: National Advisory Board on Social Welfare and Healthcare Ethics (Finland)

Year of establishment of the NEC: 1998

Remit of the NEC

Composition of the NEC

Chairman and maximum of 19 members representing social and healthcare, ethics and legal issues.

List of the last three NEC opinions 

— Coercive treatment of pregnant woman dependent on opioids or alcohol

— Restriction of civil right of persons in long-term treatment

— Housing for persons with disabilities

List of the next two topics to be covered by NEC opinions 

— Stem cell research 

— Virginity testing

Chairperson and Secretariat

Chair: Mr Markku Lehto
General Secretary: Ms Päivi Topo

Contact details:

PO Box 33
FI-00023 Government
FINLAND
Tel. +358 916073834
E-mail: etene@stm.fi

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

23

FRANCE

NEC name: Comité Consultatif National d’Ethique pour les sciences de la vie et de la santé (CCNE) 
French National Ethics Advisory Committee for Life and Health Sciences

Year of establishment of the NEC: 1983

Remit of the NEC

Casting  light  on  the  progress  of  science,  raising  new  societal  issues  and  looking  at  change  from  the 
perspective of ethics. At the very heart of society’s present-day debates, the CCNE always encourages 
thinking on bioethics by contributing to the debates. One of our goals is to get citizens involved in ethical 
thinking and help them understand the ethical stakes raised by progress in health and life sciences, for 
instance in biometrics and nanotechnologies.

Composition of the NEC

President appointed by the President of the Republic for a renewable period of 2 years, who oversees the 
Committee’s work;
plus 39 members appointed for 4 years (renewable once):

— 5 personalities belonging to the ‘main philosophical and spiritual families’;

— 19 personalities chosen for their ‘qualifications and interest in ethical problems’;

— 15 personalities from the field of research.

List of the last three NEC opinions 

No 117:  The use of human stem cells from umbilical cord blood, umbilical cord itself and placenta, and 

their conservation in biobanks — Ethical questioning

No 116: Ethical issues in functional neuroimaging

No 115: Ethical issues in connection with organ harvesting and donation for transplanting 

List of the next two topics to be covered by NEC opinions 

— Ethical issues related to health products (drugs and medical devices)

— Ethical issues raised by the techniques of global analysis of the human genome in their medical 

and social uses

Chairperson and Secretariat

Chairperson: Prof. Alain Grimfeld
Secretariat General: Ms Marie-Hélène Mouneyrat

Contact details:

Djamila	Rahmani
CCNE
35 rue Saint-Dominique
75700 Paris
FRANCE
Tel. +33 142756642
E-mail: rahmani@comite-ethique.fr

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

25

GERMANY

The German Ethics Council

Opinion on the situation of intersex people

In February 2012, the German Ethics Council presented its opinion on the situation of intersex people, as 
commissioned by the federal government. The Ethics Council takes the view that intersex people, as mem-
bers of a society that espouses diversity, deserve the respect and support of that society. They must also be 
protected from undesirable medical developments and from discrimination in the community.

A recurring issue in the debate has been whether surgery on the sex organs of individuals with DSD (differ-
ences of sex development) and in particular of affected infants should ever be permissible.

Irreversible medical sex assignment measures in persons of ambiguous gender infringe the right to physical 
integrity, to preservation of sexual and gender identity, to an open future and often also to procreative free-
dom. The decision concerned is personal. The Ethics Council therefore recommends that it should always be 
taken solely by the individual concerned. In the case of a minor, such measures should be adopted only after 
thorough consideration of all their advantages, disadvantages and long-term consequences and for irrefut-
able reasons of child welfare. This is at any rate the case if the measure concerned serves to avert a serious 
concrete risk to the life or physical health of the affected individual.

If the individual’s sex can be unequivocally determined, as with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), the 
decision on surgical alignment of the genitals with that sex in a minor should always be based on thorough 
consideration of the medical, psychological and psychosocial advantages and disadvantages of early inter-
vention. The guiding principle in this situation too should be the welfare of the child. In doubtful cases, 
sex disambiguation surgery of this kind should also not be carried out before the individual is competent to 
decide.

Medical diagnosis and treatment of persons with DSD should be restricted to specialised interdisciplinary 
centres  and  conducted  by  teams  comprising  medical  practitioners  and  experts  in  all  the  relevant  fields. 
Ongoing  medical  care  should  then  be  provided  at  independent  specialised  centres  and  accompanied  by 
simultaneous advice given by other affected individuals and self-help organisations. All treatment measures 
should be comprehensively documented and remain accessible to those concerned for at least 40 years. The 
time-bar provisions applicable to criminal acts against children should be extended to criminal acts result-
ing in irreversible impairment of fertility and/or sexual sensitivity.

A fund should be established for the recognition and assistance of persons with DSD who have undergone 
pain,  personal  suffering,  difficulties  and  permanent  restriction  of  their  quality  of  life  due  to  treatments 
which are not, or are no longer, deemed to conform to the state of the art in medical science and technology 
and are based on discriminatory social conceptions of sexual normality. Self-help groups and associations of 
intersex people should in addition be assisted from public funds.

The Ethics Council also believes that personal rights and the right to equality of treatment are unjustifiably  
infringed if persons whose physical constitution is such that they cannot be categorised as belonging to 
the female or male sex are compelled to register in one of these categories. Provision should be made for 
such persons to register not only as ‘female’ or ‘male’ but also as ‘other’, or for no entry to be made until 
they have decided for themselves. To allow persons registered as ‘other’ to enter into a responsible and 
reliable relationship recognised by the state and in law, the majority of the members of the Ethics Council  
suggest  that  persons  whose  sex  is  registered  as  ‘other’  should  be  able  to  enter  into  a  registered  civil 
partnership. Some Ethics Council members recommend in addition that they should be allowed to marry. 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

27

Future decisions on legislation should be based on a consideration of whether it is still necessary for a per-
son’s sex to be registered at all.

The term ‘intersex’ relates to individuals with physical specificities such that they cannot be unequivo-
cally categorised as ‘male’ or ‘female’. It is used by the public at large to denote a range of differences of 
sex development. It is sometimes deemed to include persons who do not regard themselves as intersex and 
indeed oppose the application of the term to themselves. For this reason the Ethics Council’s opinion uses 
the phrase ‘differences of sex development’ (DSD) as a generic medical term for all such specificities. Each 
of the various forms of DSD is associated with particular problems and needs on the part of those affected, 
and must therefore be considered individually in terms of the ethical and legal issues involved.

In addition, the Ethics Council distinguishes in its opinion between ‘sex disambiguation’ and ‘sex assign-
ment’ measures, each of which calls for a different approach. ‘Sex disambiguation’ denotes a measure for 
correction of a biochemical and/or hormonal dysfunction that presents a potential health risk. It may also 
sometimes signify surgery to align external appearance with a person’s genetic sex as determined by the 
internal sex organs. Sex assignment surgery, on the other hand, represents a much more far-reaching inter-
ference with a  child’s personality, because parents and doctors decide to which sex the child should be 
assigned where the sex is indeterminate.

The opinion can be accessed (in German) at http://www.ethikrat.org. An English and French translation will 
be available in due course.

Opinion on human–animal mixtures in research

In  September  2011,  the  German  Ethics  Council  published  its  opinion  on  the  creation  of  human–animal 
combinations in biomedical research. The document includes recommendations on work with cybrids, brain 
chimeras and transgenic animals.

The breeding of mice as ‘model organisms’ for research on human disorders by the introduction of dis-
ease-specific human genes into the mouse genome has been commonplace since as long ago as the 1980s. 
Researchers are now working on the transfer not only of genes but also of entire chromosomes. In addition, 
nerve precursor cells derived for instance from human stem cells have been transferred into the brains of 
experimental animals, including primates, for the investigation and possible eventual treatment of disorders 
such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease. Such experiments increasingly call into question the biological 
species boundary between humans and animals. For this reason, the Ethics Council considers it necessary 
to identify the ethical challenges that may be presented by the creation of human–animal mixtures and to 
determine where it may be appropriate to set binding limits. With this in view the Ethics Council concen-
trates its attention on the transfer of human material to animals, which it examines on the basis of three 
examples: cytoplasmic hybrids (cybrids), formed by the insertion of a human cell nucleus into an enucleated 
animal egg; transgenic animals with human genetic material; and the transfer of human cells into the brains 
of fetal or adult animals (brain chimeras). The Ethics Council presents recommendations on these examples, 
chief among which are those listed below.

The Ethics Council endorses the prohibition laid down in Section 7 of the Embryonenschutzgesetz (ESchG 
— Embryo Protection Act) on the transfer of human embryos into an animal or the creation of interspecific 
chimeras or hybrids using human embryos or human and animal gametes. These restrictions should be 
supplemented by a ban on the transfer of animal embryos into humans, a ban on the introduction of animal 
material into the human germline and a ban on procedures that could result in the formation of human egg 
or sperm cells in an animal.

The members of the Ethics Council unanimously hold that human–animal cybrids must not be implanted 
into  a  human  or  animal  uterus.  An  explicit  prohibition  of  such  implants  should  be  incorporated  in  the 
Embryo Protection Act.

28 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

However, the positions of the Ethics Council members diverge on the issue of the cybrid creation. Some 
consider that the creation and use of cybrids is ethically acceptable, arguing: first, that the result is an arte-
fact that can be classified neither as human nor as animal, but can on no account be regarded as a human 
embryo; and, second, that human embryos too may, subject to certain conditions, be used for research and, 
in the opinion of some members, even be created for that purpose.

The  members  of  the  Ethics  Council  who  take  the  view  that  the  creation  and  use  of  cybrids  is  ethically 
unacceptable because they possess all the characteristics of a fertilised human egg call for the inclusion of 
a statutory ban in the Embryo Protection Act.

On transgenic animals and brain chimeras, the Ethics Council makes different recommendations for pri-
mates, great apes and other mammals.

The Ethics Council considers that the common research practice of inserting human genes into the germline 
of mammals (other than primates) is ethically acceptable if the objective of the research is of overriding 
importance especially in terms of the expected benefit to humanity and provided that the generally applic-
able ethical requirements of animal welfare are satisfied.

On the other hand, owing to our provisional and limited knowledge of the possible effects on appearance, 
behaviour and capabilities, the insertion of human genetic material into the germline of primates should be 
permissible only after an interdisciplinary evaluation process involving the national committee stipulated in 
the European directive on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes. Such experiments should 
be carried out only if there is no alternative and if the expected medical benefit is of overriding importance.

The creation of transgenic human–animal mixtures involving great apes should be banned.

In the view of the Ethics Council, the creation of brain chimeras by the transfer of human cells to mammals 
other than primates is ethically acceptable if: first, the objective of the research is of overriding importance 
especially in terms of the expected medical benefit to humanity; second, the generally applicable ethical 
requirements of animal welfare are satisfied; and, third, chimerisation does not take place prior to the for-
mation of rudimentary organs. To ensure an appropriate level of concern for the animal, the degree of cell 
integration and the behaviour of the animal should preferably be monitored after birth.

In  view  of  the  possibly  drastic  repercussions  of  the  implant  of  brain-specific  human  cells  into  primate 
brains, of the vital importance of the brain and nervous system for species-specific capabilities and of our 
provisional and limited knowledge of the possible effects on physiognomy and cognitive capacity, the inser-
tion of brain-specific human cells into primate brains should be permissible only after an interdisciplinary 
evaluation process involving the national committee.

The insertion of brain-specific human cells into the brains of great apes should be prohibited.

Ethics Council member Regine Kollek explains in a dissenting position statement why she is unable to agree 
with the version of the opinion as presented. In her statement she also notes that she considers the creation 
of human–animal cybrids to be ethically acceptable because there are good reasons for assuming that such 
entities do not constitute viable human embryos.

The opinion can be accessed (in German) at http://www.ethikrat.org. An English and French translation will 
be available in due course.

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

29

Further information

Dr	Joachim	Vetter	
Head of Office 

Address
German Ethics Council 
Jaegerstrasse 22/23 
10117 Berlin 
GERMANY 
Tel. +49 3020370-242 
Fax +49 3020370-252 
E-mail: vetter@ethikrat.org 
Website: http://www.ethikrat.org 

Ulrike	Florian
Press and Public Relations Officer

German Ethics Council
Jaegerstrasse 22/23
10117 Berlin
GERMANY
Tel. +49 3020370-246
Fax +49 3020370-252
E-mail: florian@ethikrat.org
Website: http://www.ethikrat.org

30 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

GREECE

HELLENIC NATIONAL BIOETHICS COMMISSION

A. Most recently issued opinions

The commission has recently issued an opinion on ‘Direct-to-consumer genetic testing’ (March 2012).

Abstract

The National Bioethics Commission published an opinion on the issue of direct-to-consumer (DTC) 
genetic testing. The term refers to any genetic test detecting DNA changes which are available directly to 
the public as a kit. The commission stresses that it is vital to maintain the balance between free access to 
health information and fortification of vulnerable people undergoing inappropriate or excessive genetic 
testing. DTC genetic testing for health purposes, including tests that estimate disease risk, must be per-
formed after genetic counselling with a liable doctor or geneticist, who will assess the feasibility of the 
test and will evaluate the findings. Exceptionally, DTC genetic testing for nutrigenomic or genealogy 
purposes may not demand genetic counselling. According to the commission, DTC genetic testing of 
asymptomatic children with no apparent medical need is not justified, especially concerning late onset 
diseases. DTC genetic services must be based on accurate information about the actual prognostic or 
diagnostic value of the test, warranting protection of all personal data. Finally, the commission believes 
that an  explicit  legislation  is  required,  including:  (a)  recognition  of  the  specialty  of  clinical  genetics, 
(b) quality accreditation/certification, (c) rules of procedure for genetic centres offering DTC genetic 
testing and (d) use of biologic material or genetic data generated by DTC genetic testing for research 
purposes, with the subject’s informed consent.

It also issued an opinion on the ‘Conflict of interest in biomedical research’ (July 2011).

Abstract 

The  National  Bioethics  Commission  published  an  opinion  on  the  issue  of  conflict  of  interest  in  bio-
medical research. The commission supports the collaboration between the private sector and hospitals 
or research institutes, but under the strict condition that the ethical integrity of research is protected. 
According to the commission the researcher has always the moral duty to search for and reveal the truth, 
even when the research results are unfavorable to the sponsor. An efficient way to eliminate conflict of 
interest is to conduct collaborative clinical trials. All results, including negative results, must be pub-
lished. Any complaints concerning plagiarism, falsification or conscious concealment of results must 
be immediately investigated. The commission recommends additional control procedures, including: 
(a) establishment of special ethics committees in hospitals and research institutes, (b) establishment of 
central research committees in universities, (c) establishment of internal research ethics procedures in 
industries, (d) disclosure of any working relationship between the researcher and the sponsor to the hos-
pital authorities, state authorities, editorial boards of scientific journals upon publication of results, con-
ference-organising committees upon presentation of results and each participating patient, and (e) estab-
lishment of a regular education for individuals involved in research.

The above opinions will be translated into English and will soon be available on the English pages of the 
commission’s website (http:// www.bioethics.gr).

Please  note  that  the  full  text  (in  PDF  format)  of  all  opinions  and  reports  issued  by  the  commission, 
in  English,  can  be  found  on  the  website  (http://www.bioethics.gr/category.php?category_id=55)  or 
requested from the Secretariat (Secretariat@bioethics.gr).

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

31

B. Current work

Currently  the  commission  is  discussing:  ‘Plastic  surgery:  its  medical,  legal  and  social  aspects’  and 
‘Medical confidentiality and modern technology’.

C. Seminars on bio-law

The commission continues to organise the seminar series on bio-law, first launched in February 2010.

This initiative, which is addressed mainly to young scientists (lawyers, physicians, sociologists) aims 
at inspiring participants in their work and at supporting the development of the new field of bio-law in 
Greece.

The seminars are held once per month either at the premises of the commission or at the premises of 
other institutions or organisations of the public sector that host the event. The participants present their 
work on a specific bioethical issue and the presentation is followed by discussion led by a commentator. 
So far there have been presentations on the following subjects: ethical status of the foetus, euthanasia, 
clinical trials, biobanks, patents, surrogacy, genetic data, social media, biopiracy, rights of the mentally 
ill, QUALYs, medical guidelines, etc.

D.	Cooperation	with	other	public	authorities/related	bodies

April 2012: Upon invitation by the National Technological University of Athens (NTUA) the commission 
participated in a workshop concerning the control of ethics in research. Mr Isidoros Karatzas, Head of 
the Ethics Sector of the Research and Innovation DG, participated as well.

February 2012: The commission in collaboration with the Greek Ombudsman for the Children examined 
the issue of legislation that is applied regarding clinical trials on children.

E. Communicative tools

Since October 2008, the commission’s newsletter ‘Bio-Ethica’ has proved to be a most valuable tool for 
communication  of  the  commission  with  the  general  public.  The  newsletter  includes  announcements, 
news and events of the commission, international news related to bioethics, book reviews and informa-
tion on local and international bioethics meetings or conferences and is sent to an extensive list of recipi-
ents in Greece, at the end of every month.

F. First educational event: ‘Bioethics goes to school’

On 22 November 2011, the commission launched an educational initiative welcoming for the first time 
in its premises 15 high school students, in order to inform them about bioethical issues, especially about 
stem cells and cloning. An enthusiastic dialogue was triggered between the students and the representa-
tives of the commission.

The commission either hosts approximately once per month a group of students of different schools (high 
school or lyceum) in its premises or the scientific officers visit them at school following a previous con-
tact with their professor in charge of these educational meetings.

G.	10th	anniversary	—	in	memoriam	of	the	first	chairman,	George	Koumantos

The commission, wishing to celebrate its 10th anniversary (1999–2009), organised a conference on eutha-
nasia (on 2 December 2009) in memoriam of its first chairman, George Koumantos.

32 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

On March 2012 a special edition on ‘Euthanasia — In memoriam of the first chairman of the commis-
sion, George Koumantos’ was published. It includes the presentations of the speakers who were invited 
to the conference held in the auditorium of the New Museum of Acropolis.

One  of  the  distinguished  main  speakers  invited  to  this  conference  was  Professor  Göran  Hermerén, 
Chairman of the EGE (2005–10), whose presentation on ‘The role and impact of ethics committees in 
democratic societies’ attracted considerable attention from the audience. We address our special thanks 
to him.

Further information

Mrs	Marianna	Dracopoulou
Head of Secretariat

Address
47, Evelpidon str.
113 62 Athens
GREECE
Tel. +30 210-8847700
Fax +30 210-8847701
E-mail: Secretariat@bioethics.gr
Website: http://www.bioethics.gr

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

33

ITALY

National Bioethics Committee

Update on NBC activities in 2011

Opinions

Note  on  the  pharmacists’  conscientious  objection  to  the  sale  of  emergency  contraceptive  products 
(25 February 2011)

Different standpoints emerged within the NBC. All the arguments of these various positions are pre-
sented in the document. The members of the NBC agreed that the acknowledgment of the right to con-
scientious objection on the part of pharmacists and pharmacy personnel has to be compatible with the 
interests of the woman asking for the drug (ensuring its access elsewhere or through different means). 
The institutions and competent authorities, in consultation with the professional bodies involved, should 
provide the most appropriate system to make the necessary tools and figure responsible explicit for the 
implementation of both rights.

Clinical trials in developing countries (27 May 2011)

The NBC recommends that research be oriented according to the common ethical criteria considered 
essential to avoid any form of discrimination in order to ensure health and global justice and reduce 
inequality. The committee believes that research should avoid hidden forms of involvement that take 
‘advantage’ of a lack of awareness or state of vulnerability and should take into account the health needs 
of the population with solidarity. 

Knowing one’s biological origins in heterologous medically assisted procreation (25 November 2011)

The NBC recommends that parents reveal the modality of their birth to their children with appropriate 
criteria and with the help of counselling and that children, sufficiently mature, have the right to access 
the genetic data of the donors. The members of the NBC disagreed on the possibility to know the donors’ 
personal data. Some consider that the donors’ anonymity is opportune, given the absence of any relation-
ship between the offspring and the donor and the concerns due to possible interference in the family. 
Other members recognise the right to know the full information about the donor, considered necessary 
for their personal identity.

Orphan drugs for persons affected by rare diseases (25 November 2011)

The NBC deals with the question of rare diseases and orphan drugs in the framework of the problem of 
the distribution of healthcare resources. The NBC recommends: economic support to public and private 
research, at national and international level; the avoidance of waste of resources; international coopera-
tion, above all in the studies of genetic anomalies; reduction of the threshold in the definition of the rarity 
of the disease to help promotion of research avoiding any form of commercialisation and speculation; 
monitoring the efficacy and tolerability of drugs used off-label.

Motion

Motion to complete the ratification procedure of the Oviedo Convention (24 February 2012)

On February 24 2012, the NBC’s plenary meeting approved (a draft of the motion was presented at the 
plenary meeting of 27 January 2012) a motion claiming the Italian ratification of the Council of Europe’s 
Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine (the ‘Oviedo Convention’). Since the ratification instru-

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

35

ment, Act No 145/2001 ‘Ratifica ed esecuzione della Convenzione del Consiglio d’Europa per la protezi-
one dei diritti dell’uomo e della dignità dell’essere umano riguardo all’applicazione della biologia e della 
medicina: Convenzione sui diritti dell’uomo e sulla biomedicina, fatta a Oviedo il 4 aprile 1997, nonché 
del Protocollo addizionale del 12 gennaio 1998, n. 168, sul divieto di clonazione di esseri umani’, has not 
yet been registered, the NBC underlines the need to conclude the ratification process and to examine all 
the issues related to the completion of the ratification from a bioethical perspective, including an indica-
tion of potential conditions and modifications of the domestic law and regulations.

Working groups

The NBC’s mandate (extended for the period 2010–12) will expire at the end of 2012. Due to the lit-
tle time available, the working groups are doing their utmost in order to conclude their work by this 
deadline. The ongoing work is focused on the examination of the main ethical, societal and legal issues 
related to the following topics: bioethics in plastic and reconstructive surgery, conscientious objection, 
body donation to research, bioethical issues in autism, clinical trials in patients who are unable to express 
informed consent, military bioethics and enhancement, ethics committees, synthetic biology, neurosci-
ence and enhancement, human health, nutrition and animal welfare.

International workshop

The Italian National Bioethics Committee and CIGA, a multidisciplinary research centre working on 
the ethical social and legal aspects involved in the development of nanotechnologies of the University 
of Padova, organised a workshop, ‘Scienza, tecnologia e società: riflessioni su sostenibilità e perfezione’ 
(Science, technology and society: reflections on sustainability and perfection), which was held in Rome 
on 30 March 2012. The initiative was aimed to promote the dialogue between different members/experts 
of the French and Italian Committees for Bioethics on the ethical issues of emerging technologies, espe-
cially nanotechnologies, analysing these issues from two different perspectives: the sustainability prin-
ciple and the approach based on techno-scientific power, from the point of view of human enhancement 
ethical problems/human rights issues and synthetic biology debate.

Further information

Prof. Laura Palazzani
Vice-President of the Italian Bioethics Committee
Full Professor of Philosophy of Law at Lumsa University (Italy)

Dr	Daniela	Marrani
Member of the Scientific Secretariat of the Italian Committee for Bioethics
Researcher in International Law at the University of Salerno (Italy)

Address
Comitato Nazionale per la Bioetica
via della Mercede 96
00197 Rome RM
ITALY
Tel. +39 0667794601
Fax +39 0667794686
E-mail: cnbbioetica@palazzochigi.it; palazzani@lumsa.it; dmarrani@palazzochigi.it
Website: http://www.governo.it/BIOETICA/

36 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

LATVIA

NEC name: Central Medical Ethics Committee of Latvia

Year of establishment of the NEC 

1998 by Cabinet of Ministers Regulation No 9 ‘Statutes of Central Medical Ethics Committee’

Remit of the NEC

Cabinet  of  Ministers  Regulation  No  9  ‘Statutes  of  Central  Medical  Ethics  Committee’,  Article  4  — 
Functions of the committee: 

4.1. 

4.2. 

4.3. 

4.4. 

to consult and advise the interested institutions about the ethical issues of biomedical pro-
gress;

to consult governmental, municipal, medical and other institutions about the compliance of 
regulations issued by those institutions to the norms of medical ethics; 

to facilitate the inclusion of medical ethics in the study programmes of social medicine, psy-
chology and communication;

to review any application from either a physical or legal person and to issue resolutions on 
the ethics of biomedical progress requested by ethics committees of professional organisations 
of medical specialists;

4.5. 

to evaluate the compliance of new medical technologies and biomedical research involving 
human subjects (biomedical research) with the norms of medical ethics;

4.6. 

to initiate the revocation of medical certificates in the case of breach of ethical norms; 

4.7. 

4.8. 

4.9. 

to take part in developing draft laws and other regulations regarding the ethics of biomedical 
progress; 

to cooperate with institutions interested in the ethics of biomedical progress (both Latvian and 
foreign); 

to coordinate and methodically supervise the operation of ethics committees reviewing bio-
medical research, to educate the population, advise on the ethical issues of biomedical progress 
and consult ethics committees reviewing biomedical research;

4.10.  to issue resolutions regarding research and biotechnologies of both national importance and 

international scale; 

4.11.  to evaluate the compliance with principles of ethics in genetic research, creation of a genome 

database and the activities of the chief processor.

Composition of the NEC

Cabinet of Ministers Regulation No. 9 — ‘Statutes of Central Medical Ethics Committee’, Article 3 — 
Composition of the committee: 

•  1 representative of the Ministry of Health

•  1 representative of Riga Stradins University

•  1 scientist

•  1 representative of the medical research institution

•  2 physicians

•  1 representative of professional medical persons organisations’ union

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

37

•  1 nurse

•  1 pharmacist

•  1 disabled person

•  1 pensioner

•  1 Lutheran priest 

Total number of members: 12

List of the last three NEC opinions 

Review of submitted protocols 

List of the next three topics to be covered by NEC opinions 

1.  CMEC plans to organise a seminar meeting of Baltic RECs in 2012. 

2.  Facilitate public communication by means of modern technologies. 

3.  Revise normative documents and establishment of a register of acting RECs. 

Chairperson and Secretariat

Chairperson: Mr. Rinalds Mucins, Deputy State Secretary at the Ministry of Health

Secretary:  Mrs.  Antra  Valdmane,  Head  of  the  Department  of  Healthcare  Quality  at  the  Ministry  of 
Health (antra.valdmane@vm.gov.lv)

Contact details: 

Central Medical Ethics Committee of Latvia
Ministry of Health
Brivibas Str.72
Riga, LV 1011
LATVIA

38 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

MALTA

Human	body	parts	for	profit?

In early March 2012, an advertisement appeared on a Maltese locally run commercial website, used to 
sell all sorts of commodities from switches to cars and houses, calling for kidney donors to come for-
ward to donate a kidney against a personal compensation of EUR 5 000. The woman responsible for this 
advertisement was seeking to obtain a kidney for transplantation into her former male partner ‘X’ with 
whom she had had a child. The partner was diagnosed with bilateral renal failure and needed a renal 
transplant. About 20 people answered the advertisement. This story was carried on a well-read national 
newspaper.

Article 3(2) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights states quite clearly that there is to be ‘the prohibition 
on making the human body and its parts as such a source of financial gain’. Maltese law is silent on the 
matter of organ donations against payment. Malta has also not yet signed the Bioethics Convention of the 
Council of Europe, which states quite clearly in Article 21 that ‘The human body and its parts shall not, 
as such, give rise to financial gain’.

The Malta Bioethics Consultative Committee (BCC) discussed the issue after several members alerted 
the chairperson about the advertisement. The BCC had posted an opinion on organ donation on its web-
site in 2010 and it was made clear then that any organ donation had to be made free of charge, although 
post-transplantation  compensation  was  allowed  for  such  things  as  loss  of  earnings  and  transport  or 
accommodation expenses. It also alluded to the situation where one should not be allowed to choose who 
to give one’s organ to, except in very special, well-defined cases. The chairperson immediately issued 
a clarifying statement along these lines in the national newspaper that had carried the story.

A national debate followed which centred on two issues. First, whether the woman concerned was in 
order when offering to pay EUR 5 000 for compensation to the donor concerned for an estimated 6 
weeks  operational  disability.  The  average  wages  in  Malta  come  nowhere  close  to  EUR  5  000  for  6 
weeks! Therefore the promised contribution went far beyond the lawfully allowed compensation men-
tioned above. The second problem concerned the issue of whether she had the right to contract the ser-
vices of a donor for a specific recipient ‘X’ when there was a waiting list of about 70 patients who had 
been officially put on the list and were ardently waiting for a donor to appear.

The position of the BCC on both issues ran as follows. First, that the sum mentioned smacked more of 
financial gain and commodification of the organ than a compensatory amount given to the donor even if 
this was not the primary intention of the lady who paid for the advert. Compensatory accounts had to be 
settled fairly after the transplantation had taken place and not dangled as an enticement before the pro-
cedure had taken place. This was important to retain organ donations on a high value level of complete 
charity and solidarity by the donors and also to avoid attracting people who could have other financial 
motives for the organ donation due to the financial difficulties or lifestyles that they were living through.

On the second issue, the BCC was not happy with the recipient jumping the queue while others had either 
been on the list longer or were more urgent cases. If this situation were to be allowed to proceed, then 
abuse would ensue as every potential recipient could make personal financial arrangements to receive 
an organ, in effect promoting individuals with money and power contacts to the top of the queue while 
those with lesser financial and social networking resources would automatically fall back to the end of 
the queue. This would bring about huge distributive injustices in the system and therefore, except in the 
case of very close degree relatives, this should not be allowed to happen. The patients on the list had to 
be treated in the order and severity that each individual case called for.

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

39

The Department of Health issued a statement meanwhile, that the state was in the process of transposing 
Directive 2010/53/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on standards of quality and safety 
of human organs intended for transplantation, which disallows any profit on the sale of organs but is not 
so clear when it comes to allowing whether donors may or may not choose the person to whom the dona-
tion is made, possibly leaving that decision to be considered on subsidiarity principles.

The Live Organ Transplant Advisory Committee of Mater Dei Hospital, the main state-run hospital in 
Malta, headed by a respected experienced consultant physician, examined the case and concluded in late 
March 2012 that the 20 people who offered to donate their kidney to individual ‘X’ will not be allowed 
to give their organ specifically to him as this would go against the principle of distributive justice. It also 
declared itself against any form of financial inducement or advertising. It asked, however, if the donors 
involved could contact the hospital to start the process to donate their kidneys, which would go to who-
ever needed them most urgently.

Up to the moment of writing this article in mid-April, it is known that nine of these 20 people have 
contacted the hospital to donate their kidneys for use by any other patients on the official list of persons 
waiting for a kidney transplant.

Dr	Michael	Asciak,	MD,	MPhil,	PhD
Chairman BCC
Malta

Further information

Dr	Michael	Asciak,	MD,	MPhil,	PhD

Chairman
Bioethics Consultative Committee Malta

Address

60, Sodales Akkwedott Street
Birkirkara
BKR 2973
MALTA
Tel. +356 21446784
E-mail: Michael.asciak@gov.mt
Website: https://ehealth.gov.mt/HealthPortal/others/regulatory_councils/bioethics_committee/ 
bioethics_committee_home_page.aspx

40 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

POLAND

NEC name: Bioethics Commission, Ministry of Health, Warsaw, Poland

Year of establishment of the NEC: 2001

Remit of the NEC

1.  Considering appeals against decisions of the bioethics committees of the regional chambers of 
physicians, institutions of higher medical education, as well as institutions of higher education 
with departments of medicine, and also medical research and development institutions.

2.  Cooperating with bioethics committees, organising meetings and training for the members of bio-

ethics committees.

3.  Issuing opinions on relevant matters in bioethics and clinical research in response to government 

inquiries. 

Composition of the NEC

Shown on the website (http://www.kb.mz.gov.pl)

List of the last three NEC opinions 

— Opinion on the legislation on clinical trials — sent to the Minister for Health

— Opinion on act on physician profession — sent to the Minister for Health

— Opinion on the project of recommendation on biomedical research with the use of human biologi-

cal material — sent to the Council of Europe

List of the next future topic covered by NEC opinions 

Opinion on the project of the Minister for Health — recommendations related to good clinical practice 
— sent to the Office for Registration of Medicinal Products

Chairperson and Secretariat

Prof. A. Górski

Secretary: E. Olesinska

Contact details

Miodowa 15
00-952 Warsaw
POLAND
Tel. +48 226349331
Fax +48 226349465
E-mail: okb@okb.mz.gov.pl

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

41

PORTUGAL

The National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences — CNECV

Introduction

The National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences (CNECV — Conselho Nacional de Ética para as 
Ciências da Vida) was set up in 1990 pursuant to Law No 14/90 of 9 June as an independent consultative 
body aiming at analysing and giving opinions regarding the ethical problems which arise out of scien tific 
progress in the fields of biology, medicine or general healthcare and the life sciences. Having entered its 
fourth term of office, the CNECV has functioned adjunct to the Portuguese Parliament since 2009 — 
Law No 24/2009 of 29 May.

Recent opinions

60/CNECV/2011	—	Opinion	on	health	information	and	computer	health	records:	The CNECV dis-
cussed by its own initiative the ethical issues related to ‘health information’, the recording of that infor-
mation on computerised means and the respective accesses and uses. The benefits and potential risks of 
the set-up of digital records that implies dematerialisation of clinical files were weighed up, along with 
the ethical values and concerns that come into play. Furthermore, the CNECV found that a future ‘elec-
tronic health record’ in Portugal in the sense of an ICT suprastructure that will permit the intercommu-
nicability of data between health service providers must be subject to special attention when identifying 
the issues of an ethical nature relevant to its creation and functioning.

61/CNECV	 CBE/2011	 —	 Joint	 opinion	 CNECV/CBE	 on	 synthetic	 biology:  Issued  by  the  Portu-
guese National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences and the Spanish Bioethics Committee, after their 
meetings in Lisbon and Barcelona on 8 November 2010 and 24 October 2011 respectively. Recognising 
synthetic biology as a potentially beneficial development for humankind in a wide variety of sectors, the 
precautionary principle was nevertheless at the forefront in the discussion. The CNECV and CBE set 
out recommendations regarding, among others, the importance of researching into the ethical, legal and 
social aspects of synthetic biology; biosafety and biosecurity; patents; and the responsibility of the scien-
tists in providing adequate and precise information to all stakeholders. The establishment of independ-
ent commissions aiming at monitoring, supervising and following up activities related to the emerging 
biotechnologies was also suggested. 

62/CNECV/2011	 —	 Opinion	 on	 ethical	 aspects	 of	 animal	 testing:  The  animal  testing  debate  was 
rekindled  in  Portugal  following  the  adoption  on  22 September 2010  of  Directive  2010/63/EU,  which 
updates and replaces the 1986 Directive 86/609/EEC on the protection of animals used for scientific 
purposes.

In its reflection, the CNECV considered of the utmost importance to rapidly transpose the new directive 
into the Portuguese legal framework, as well as draw attention to the continued pursuit of work method-
ologies that uphold the three Rs — replace, reduce, refine — and define ‘humane endpoints’ regarding 
the use of animals in scientific research.

63/CNECV/2012	—	Opinion	on	medically	assisted	reproduction	and	surrogacy: At the request of 
the Parliamentary Health Committee, the CNECV analysed earlier this year Draft Bills Nos 131/XII and 
138/XII and issued an opinion regarding medically assisted reproduction and surrogacy. Six years after 
the approval of Law No 32/2006 of 26 July, the CNECV draws attention to the need to encourage studies 
and acquire solid evidence on the various aspects of medically assisted reproduction and surrogacy, as 
well as divulge data on the assisted reproduction centres’ efficacy rates in Portugal. The CNECV also 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

43

recommends the implementation of social mechanisms aiming at the prevention of late parenthood and 
simpler adoption procedures.

Regarding surrogacy the CNECV set out 13 conditions adding to the exceptional provisions under which 
the draft bills admit surrogate motherhood. The CNECV recommendations intend to safeguard, as much 
as possible, the welfare and dignity of the unborn child, as well as to foster a profound reflection among 
the couple and the perspective surrogate, prior to their decision.

Following the CNECV’s reflection, the draft bills are under discussion and have not yet been scheduled 
for a final vote in parliament.

Recent conferences held by the CNECV

•  Ethical principles in health priorities — Lisbon, 26 November 2011.

•  The Forensic DNA Profile Database in Portugal — Coimbra, 13 April 2012.

Upcoming	conference:	‘Bioethics	and	religions’	—	Lisbon,	7	December	2012

This seminar is a joint organisation with the Luso-American Development Foundation (FLAD). It aims 
to  provide  a  unique  opportunity  for  a  plural  debate  on  ethical  issues  regarding  the  dialectic  relation 
between bioethics and several of the most representative monotheistic religions, bringing together the 
scientific community, the media and the general public.

Joint meetings

•  First joint meeting CNECV/healthcare committees — Lisbon, 14 June 2012.

•  Third joint meeting on bioethics CNECV/CBE (Spanish Bioethics Committee) — Porto, 1 October 

2012.

Forthcoming opinions: By its own initiative, the CNECV is currently preparing new opinions on the 
following subjects.

‘Ethics and the use of potable water’

According to the WHO, approximately 1 billion people worldwide have no access to potable water. This 
has a tendency to increase, which brings to the forefront of the ethical reflection the value of potable 
water. Clean water is a non-renewable resource. It is essential for maintaining the ecosystems and to the 
survival of all living organisms, including the human species. Access to clean water is thus regarded 
as a fundamental human right. The CNECV will debate the necessity of ensuring high-quality drink-
able water, its importance in healthcare and the equality in the access for all to such a precious natural 
resource.

‘Ethics in public health’

This  reflection  aspires  to  highlighting  the  ethical  questions  which  arise  out  of  public  health  choices, 
in the context of the multiple philosophical perspectives therein. It also aims at proposing a model for 
analysis which will serve as a reference for ethical deliberation in public health. The development of 
bioethics is essentially linked to the evolution of medical care and clinical research. The ethical questions 
brought about by these matters do not necessarily extend to public health, in the sense that public health 
is focused on the health of populations, more than that of individuals.

‘Ethical aspects of umbilical cord blood banks’

A discussion on the benefits and harms of umbilical cord blood banking, bearing in mind the current 
legal framework and the establishment in 2009 of the first public umbilical cord biobank, Lusocord.

44 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

Further information

Miguel Oliveira da Silva
President
E-mail: mos@cnecv.pt

Michel Renaud
Vice-President
E-mail: mrenaud@cnecv.pt

Cíntia Águas
Executive Secretary
E-mail: caguas@cnecv.pt

Address
National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences
Avenida D. Carlos I, n.º 146 — 2º Esq.
1200-651 Lisbon
PORTUGAL
Tel. +351 213910884
Fax +351 213917509
E-mail: geral@cnecv.pt
Website: http://www.cnecv.pt

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

45

SWEDEN

NEC name: Swedish National Council on Medical Ethics

Year of establishment of the NEC: 1986

Remit of the NEC

Forum  for  interactions  between  politicians,  experts  and  citizens  on  medical  ethics.  Advisory  to  the 
government and the parliament. Special emphasis on emerging healthcare technologies. 

Composition of the NEC

Members  from  each  of  the  political  parties  represented  in  the  parliament  and  a  non-political  chair. 
Experts, including patient representative, are non-voting members.

List of the last three NEC opinions 

— Large-scale research databases

— Procedures to analyse committed suicides

— Pharmacovigilance

List of the next two topics to be covered by NEC opinions 

— New technologies to treat infertility

— Patient integrity and empowerment

Chairperson and Secretariat

Chair: Prof. Kjell Asplund 
Head of Secretariat: Lotta Eriksson

Contact details

SMER
Ministry of Health and Social Affairs
SE-103 33 Stockholm
SWEDEN
Tel. +46 84052758
E-mail: smer@social.ministry.se

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

47

UNITED KINGDOM

The	Nuffield	Council	on	Bioethics

Introduction

The Nuffield Council on Bioethics (NCB) is an independent body that examines and reports on ethical 
issues in biology and medicine. It was established by the Nuffield Foundation in 1991 and since 1994 it 
has been funded jointly by the Nuffield Foundation, the Wellcome Trust and the Medical Research Coun-
cil. The NCB’s role is to respond to public concern about aspects of biomedicine and biotechnology; to 
provide independent advice to policymakers; and to stimulate debate in bioethics.

Human bodies in medicine and research

The NCB published the report Human bodies: donation for medicine and research in October 2011, which 
considers how far society should go in encouraging people to donate bodily material. The report concludes:

• 

the state has a role both in trying to improve public health to reduce the need for donated material, 
and in helping to make donation as easy as possible;

• 

the welfare of the donor should be the most important consideration;

•  altruism should continue to be at the heart of donation, but this does not exclude the possibility of 

some form of reward in some circumstances;

•  body parts should not be bought or sold directly.

The report goes on to make specific recommendations for policy. The NCB’s suggestion that the UK 
National Health Service could meet the funeral expenses of people who sign the Organ Donor Register 
and subsequently become organ donors led to widespread debate in the broadcast and online media. The 
report also recommends that the cap of GBP 250 on recovery of lost earnings for egg and sperm donors 
should be removed. Shortly afterwards, the government regulator for human fertilisation and embry-
ology decided that women who donate their eggs will be compensated GBP 750 per cycle of donation, 
and that sperm donors be compensated GBP 35 per clinic visit.

Solidarity

Solidarity has arisen as an important concept in several areas of the NCB’s work, such as biofuels and 
caring for people with dementia. In 2011, the NCB commissioned an analysis of the different uses and 
meanings of solidarity, and how it can be used to support policy discussions. The resulting report, Soli-
darity: reflections on an emerging concept in bioethics, defines solidarity as people’s willingness to help 
others even if this incurs ‘costs’ for them, such as time, emotional investment and, in some cases, money. 
Solidarity can take place between just two individuals, but it can also be a more widely shared societal 
practice. The report uses this new understanding of solidarity to help find solutions in three areas of 
policymaking: biobanks, pandemics and lifestyle diseases.

Emerging biotechnologies

Over the years the NCB has examined the ethical issues raised by a range of bioscience developments, 
such as stem cell research, xenotransplantation and GM crops. As similarly controversial technologies 
continue to emerge, such as synthetic biology and nanotechnology, the NCB has decided to examine the 
cross-cutting ethical and social issues they present to society. The objective of the project is to develop 
principles and recommendations to assist decision-makers to reach ethically informed judgments relating 
to emerging biotechnologies. A report with recommendations will be published in autumn 2012.

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

49

Mitochondrial disorders

The treatment of inherited mitochondrial abnormalities in human embryos using donor mitochondria is 
an advancing area of research. The new techniques involve making changes to the embryo that would 
be inherited by future generations, and it is currently unlawful to offer them for treatment in the United 
Kingdom. The NCB is conducting a short inquiry to consider the ethical issues raised by the new tech-
niques in order to inform forthcoming policy debates about their legality and will publish its findings in 
summer 2012.

Novel neurotechnologies

In this project, the NCB is focusing on the ethical issues raised by three types of novel neurotechnolo-
gies in the early stages of development: brain–computer interfaces, neurostimulation and neural stem 
cell therapy. These technologies could have enormous benefits, but they also raise concerns for some 
in relation to their safety and efficacy, their impact on the individual and his/her mind, and the societal 
consequences of their wide-spread use. A report setting out the NCB’s findings will be published in 2013.

20th anniversary

The year 2011 saw the 20th anniversary of the NCB, making it one of the longest-running bioethics com-
mittees of its kind. Throughout the year we celebrated our achievements and looked ahead to the next 
20 years and how the NCB can build on its core values of independence and quality. Activities to mark 
the anniversary included an international symposium on global health inequalities, the publication of 
a report that reviews the NCB’s 20 years of work, and a public lecture by Baroness Onora O’Neill, one of 
the founding members of the NCB.

Educational activities

By supporting teachers to facilitate debate on bioethics in the classroom, the NCB aims to equip future 
generations with the tools they need to consider ethical issues that arise in everyday life. In 2011, the 
NCB published teaching resources on the ethics of biofuels, personalised healthcare and dementia. The 
NCB also launched ‘Box office bioethics’, a new film-making competition for students that aims to get 
young people making short films about contemporary bioethics issues.

Contact details

Hugh Whittall
Director
Nuffield Council on Bioethics

Address
The Nuffield Council on Bioethics
28 Bedford Square
London WC1B 3JS
UNITED KINGDOM
Tel. +44 2076819619
Fax +44 2076371712
E-mail: bioethics@nuffieldbioethics.org
Website: http://www.nuffieldbioethics.org

50 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

General information  
on activities of the  
European Commission

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

51

EUROPEAN COMMISSION

BEPA ethics activities 2012

EGE Secretariat

The EGE is an independent advisory body with a status defined in several EC legal documents (e.g. 
Directive  98/44/EC).  On  10 January 2011,  the  President  of  the  European  Commission,  José  Manuel 
Barroso, appointed the 15 members of the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technolo-
gies (EGE) for 2011–16. The selected EGE members serve in a personal capacity and are asked to offer 
independent advice to the Commission. The EGE held its first meeting on 8 and 9 February in Brussels 
and had a meeting with President Barroso. The EGE held its second meeting on 15 and 16 March in 
Brussels. The EGE elected Prof. Julian Kinderlerer as its President and Prof. Linda Nielsen was elected 
Vice-President. The EGE adopted its rules of procedure on 15 March.

On 22 March, the President of the European Commission requested the EGE to issue an opinion on the 
ethical implications of information communication technology (ICT). The EGE held its third meeting on 
12 and 13 April in Brussels, its fourth meeting on 17 and 18 May, its fifth meeting on 21 and 22 June, its 
sixth meeting on 22 September, its seventh meeting on 18 and 19 October, its eighth meeting on 15 and 
16 November and its ninth meeting on 13 and 14 December 2011. The EGE discussed the opinion on 
ethics of ICT with the chairpersons of the EU-27 national ethics councils on 21 September. On 15 Novem-
ber the EGE held an open conference with relevant stakeholders on ethics of ICT (100 participants).

Eleven EGE meetings were organised and 26 experts have been invited for the EGE hearings including 
members of the Geoghegan-Quinn Cabinet, Kroes Cabinet, Reding Cabinet and the EU Data Protection 
Supervisor.

On 21 and 22 February, the EGE Group adopted its ‘Opinion 26: Ethics of information and communica-
tion technologies’. The EGE also had a meeting with European Commission Vice-President Neelie Kroes 
in order to discuss the content of its Opinion 26. Vice-President Kroes welcomed the EGE opinion and 
underlined that the Commission will now take inspiration from the proposed recommendations to fur-
ther foster societal and ethical consideration in the construction of the European digital society.

On 19 December 2011, the President of the European Commission requested the EGE to ‘contribute to 
the debate on a sustainable energy mix in Europe by studying the ethical impact of research on different 
energy sources on human well-being’. On 20 and 21 March the EGE Group started working on the opin-
ion, which will contribute to the debate on a sustainable energy mix in Europe.

On 17 and 18 April, the EGE Group held its 13th meeting in Brussels; the 14th meeting followed on 15 
and 16 May. EGE meetings include 18 to 20 June, 17 and 18 July, 18 and 19 September — open round 
table, 4 and 5 October — meeting with the EU-27 NECs, 20 and 21 November and 11 and 12 December. 
The EGE opinion should be adopted by the end of 2012 or beginning of 2013.

The Inter-Service Group on Ethics of EU Policies

The Inter-Service Group on Ethics of EU Policies (ISG) was established in agreement with the Presi-
dent’s Cabinet in 2006. It aims to rationalise and coordinate European Commission actions in the fields 
of ethics and EU policies. Dr Salvi acted as Chairperson of the ISG with full responsibility for the ana-
lytical and organisational work related to its functioning and its relationship with institutional counter-
parts (UN agencies and CoE). Actions carried out to implement this task include those listed below.

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

53

The 13th meeting of the ISG took place on 23 February 2011. Sixteen Commission services attended 
the meeting (the Bureau of Policy Advisers, the Research and Innovation DG, the Information Society 
and Media DG, the Joint Research Centre, the Trade DG, the Health and Consumers DG, the Enterprise 
and Industry DG, the Home Affairs DG, the Secretariat-General, the Agriculture and Rural Develop-
ment DG, the Maritime Affairs and Fisheries DG, the Regional Policy DG, the Energy DG, the Edu-
cation and Culture DG, the Internal Market and Services DG and the Development and Cooperation 
DG — EuropeAid) as well as the European External Action Service. The meeting aimed to identify 
topics for future EGE opinions.

The 14th meeting of the ISG took place on 29 June 2011. Seventeen Commission services attended the 
meeting (the Agriculture and Rural Development DG, the Communication DG, the Competition DG, the 
Development and Cooperation DG — EuropeAid, the Information Society and Media DG, the Education 
and Culture DG, the Economic and Financial Affairs DG, the Energy DG, the Enterprise and Industry DG, 
the Home Affairs DG, the Joint Research Centre, the Maritime Affairs and Fisheries DG, the Research 
Executive Agency, the Research and Innovation DG, the Health and Consumers DG, the Trade DG and the 
Bureau of Economic Policy Advisers) as well as the European External Action Service. The ISG Group 
discussed: the societal dimension in security research, and work of the Expert Group on Societal Impacts; 
the  interinstitutional  negotiation  on  the  revision  of  the  novel  food  regulation;  responsible  research  and 
innovation, the external IPR policy of the EGE opinion on ethics of ICT and future opinions (2012).

The 15th ISG meeting took place on 23 November 2011.

The  16th  meeting  of  the  ISG  took  place  on  31 May 2012.  Fifteen  Commission  services  attended  the 
meeting (the Information Society and Media DG, the Research Executive Agency, the Health and Con-
sumers DG, the Competition DG, the Enterprise and Industry DG, the Secretariat-General, the Research 
and Innovation DG, the Communication DG, the Home Affairs DG, the Education and Culture DG, the 
Joint Research Centre, the Energy DG, the Bureau of Economic Policy Advisers, the Justice DG and 
the Environment DG) as well as the European External Action Service. Topics debated included: ‘The 
revision of the clinical trials directive’ (Health and Consumers DG); ‘Ethical issues across the European 
digital agenda’ (Communication Networks, Content and Technology DG, the former Information Society 
and Media DG); ‘The interinstitutional symposium in 2013 on the benefits and limitations of nuclear 
fission for a low-carbon economy’ (Research and Innnovation DG); ‘The role of the EC Chief Scientific 
Adviser in the Commission architecture’; ‘The European strategy and policy analysis system’ (Bureau of 
Policy Advisers); ‘The EGE opinion on ethics of ICT and the EGE opinion on energy (2012–13)’ (Bureau 
of Policy Advisers).

Additional meeting organised:

At the request of the French Prime Minister and in agreement with the Bureau of Policy Advisers, the 
French  Institute  for  Higher  National  Defence  Studies  (IHEDN)  conference  ‘Common  security  and 
defence policy, ethics and moral values’ took place on 7 July 2011, co-organised with the European Com-
mission (Bureau of Policy Advisers) and with the support of the Thales Group. The conference addressed 
issues related to ethics in EU security and defence. Invited speakers included the Director of the French 
Institute for Higher National Defence Studies (IHEDN); the Director-General of the Bureau of Policy 
Advisers; the Senior Vice-President of NATO–EU–UN, Thales; the Vice-President of the EGE; the Chair 
of the EU Military Committee; and representatives of academia, industry and the EU diplomatic corps.

In 2012/13, the Bureau of Policy Advisers ethics sector will publish the following (4): the EGE opinion 
on energy, the EGE open round table on ethics and ICT proceedings; Ethically speaking No 16, the third 
IBD conference report.

4   http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european-group-ethics/publications/index_en.htm

54 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

General information on 
activities of the non-EU 
national and regional  
ethics committees

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

55

ARGENTINA

NEC name:  Comité Nacional de Ética en la Ciencia y la Tecnología 

(National Committee of Ethics in Science and Technology)

Year of establishment of the NEC: 2001

Remit of the NEC

1.  Studies controversial issues related to research ethics and the ethical implications of policies and 

regulations involving all areas of scientific research and new technologies.

2.  Identifies ethical questions raised by new advances in science and technology and addresses topics 

of scientific responsibility for larger social concerns.

3.  Receives requests for studies and recommendations from different governmental bodies, public 

and private institutions and individuals.

4.  Elaborates recommendations and reports based on the critical transdisciplinary analysis of the best 

available evidence in the light of relevant ethical principles.

5.  Appoints experts from different disciplines to produce discussion papers on the state of art of the 

issues under study.

6.  Promotes regional and international cooperation in research ethics.

Composition of the NEC

Total number: 11 members

Multidisciplinary team of experts from exact, natural, biomedical and social sciences, law and humanities.

List of the last three NEC opinions 

— Ethical issues involved in assisted human reproduction techniques

— Guidelines for socially responsible research in science and technology

— Opinions about the ongoing reform of the National Civil Law Code, Jurists dialogue with scien-

tists and technologists

List of the next two topics to be covered by NEC opinions 

— Guidelines for responsible research conduct in nanosciences and technologies

— Ethics in the use of laboratory animals in research

Chairperson and Secretariat

Otilia Vainstok

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

57

Contact details

Prof. Alfredo Stolarz
Comité Nacional de Ética en la Ciencia y la Tecnología
Ministerio de Ciencia, Tecnología e Innovación Productiva
Ecuador 873 4° piso
C1214ACM Buenos Aires
ARGENTINA
Tel. +5411 48918796 / 48918300-7812
E-mail: cecte@mincyt.gov.ar 
Website: http://www.cecte.gov.ar

58 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

AUSTRALIA

NEC name:  The National Committee of Australia 

Australian Health Ethics Committee (AHEC)

Year of establishment of NEC: 1991

Remit of the NEC

The functions of the AHEC, as set out in Section 35(3) of the National Health and Medical Research Act 
1992 (NHMRC Act), are:

— to advise the Council on the ethical issues relating to health; and

— to develop and give the Council human research guidelines under subsection 10(2) of the NHMRC 

Act; and

— any other functions conferred on the Committee in writing by the Minister after consulting the 

CEO; and

— any other functions conferred on the Committee by the NHMRC Act, the regulations or any other 

law.

One of the CEO’s functions under the NHMRC Act is to inquire into, issue guidelines on and advise 
the community on ethical issues relating to health. This function includes the issuing of human research 
guidelines.  Under  Section  10(2)  of  the  NHMRC  Act,  the  Council  may  only  provide  human  research 
guidelines to the CEO under Section 9(1) precisely as developed by the AHEC. 

In the course of its activities, the AHEC consults extensively with individuals, community organisa-
tions, health professionals and governments, and undertakes formal public consultation when developing 
guidelines. The AHEC may also provide advice on international developments in health ethics issues. 

Composition of the NEC

(Chair)

Person with understanding of the concerns of people with a disability

Person who has expertise in religion

Person who has expertise in philosophy

Person with experience in clinical medical practice

Person with expertise in the health needs of Aboriginal people and Torres Strait islanders

Person who has experience in nursing or allied health practices 

Person with knowledge of the ethics of the medical profession

Person who has expertise in the law

Person who has experience in public health research

Person with expertise in the field of medicine, genetics and the law

Person with understanding of health consumer issues

Person who has experience in medical research

Person who has experience in social science research 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

59

List of the last three NEC opinions 

— Ethics and the exchange and commercialisation of products derived from human tissue — back-

ground and issues

— An ethical framework for integrating palliative care principles into the management of advanced 

chronic or terminal conditions

— Living well with an advanced chronic or terminal condition: how ethics helps

List of the next two topics to be covered by NEC opinions 

TBA

Chairperson and Secretariat

Chair: Dr Sandra Hacker AO

Secretariat: as listed below

Further information 

Samantha Robertson
Executive Director, Research Translation Canberra
Australian Health Ethics Committee

Address
AHEC Secretariat
NHMRC
GPO Box 1421
Canberra ACT 2601
AUSTRALIA
Tel. +61 262179070
Fax +61 262179175

60 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

CHINA

The National Committee of China

A report from the NEC in China (April 2010 to August 2011)

The NEC in mainland China is affiliated to the Ministry of Health (MOH). During the period April 2010 
to August 2011 the NEC in mainland China performed the tasks listed below.

Completed the Ethical guidelines on clinical trials and clinical application of adult stem cells and 
submitted it to the MOH

Hypes on ‘Stem cell therapy’

Since 2000, ethical discussions have moved towards ‘stem cell therapy’. In mainland China, there may be 
about 400 health institutions which offer unproven and unregulated stem cell therapies that are alleged 
to work. It is difficult to ascertain whether the stem cell products offered are effective or even if they 
are real stem cells and not just ordinary cells, because no third party has tested them and the methods 
and results have yet to be published in reputable journals. The health institutions usually advertise for 
patients via the Internet. In these advertisements, the stem cell therapy is described as a ‘magic bullet’ 
that can cure any disease.

The patients they enroll are desperate, with untreatable, debilitating and ultimately fatal illnesses. They 
do not know how to assess the efficiency of the therapy, how to find resource persons to consult or how 
to claim their rights when they feel they have been deceived.

Therapeutic misconception

One reason is that in mainland China, the therapeutic misconception has tended to become common. 
Physicians and investigators have deliberately confused clinical trials with medical care, thereby avoid-
ing any ethical review and informed consent process, but with the explicit or implicit intention of making 
money from uninformed patients. And no regulation on the relationship between drugs/equipment manu-
facturing companies and physicians/investigators or IRB members has been developed (5).

Promotion of responsible translation

In order to promote the successful and ethical translation of stem cell research into clinical application 
and to protect patients’ welfare and rights, the Ethics Committee of the MOH considered it necessary 
to draft the Ethical guidelines on clinical trials and clinical application of adult stem cells and submit 
the work to the MOH. The draft work is authored by Professor Hu Ching-li, a member of the committee 
who, in collaboration with his team members, brilliantly developed the draft work and submitted it to the 
committee in November 2010. The committee approved his draft, with some revisions, and submitted it 
to the MOH. Now the draft is being reviewed in the MOH (6).

Ethical principles

The  draft  suggested  that  any  action  in  clinical  trials  and  clinical  application  of  adult  stem  cells  (not 
including routine hematopoietic stem cell therapy) should comply with the following ethical principles: 

5   Zamiska, N., 2007; Qiu, J., 2007, 2009, 2010; Qiu, R. Z. and Zhai, X. M., 2009; Zhai, X. M., 2007a, 2009, 2010b; Hu, C. L. et al., 2009; 
Cyranovski, D., 2009; CDS, 2010; Dong, Y. P., 2010; McMahon, D. S. et al., 2010; Xue, C. H., 2010; Mao, K. Y., 2010; Yang, Y. et al., 2011.
6   Ethics Committee, Ministry of Health China,  Ethical guidelines on clinical trials and clinical application of human adult stem cells, 

drafted by the team with the Chairperson, Professor Hu Ching-li, 2010.

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

61

scientific validity, non-maleficence/beneficence, informed consent, justice, public good and non-com-
mercialisation.

Two essential relationships

A  main  part  of  the  draft  is  to  elucidate  the  relationships  between  clinical  trials  and  clinical  applica-
tion, and between pre-clinical research and clinical research/trials. Pre-clinical (lab and animal) research 
is the premise of clinical trials and a clinical trial is the necessary condition for clinical application. 
Sufficient evidence of safety and efficacy is only obtained during the two steps of scientific research 
(pre-clinical research and clinical trials); the results are evaluated scientifically and ethically and if the 
application is approved by the health administration, adult stem cells are permitted to be translated into 
clinical application.

The draft makes it clear that, except for those adult stem cells which are not specially treated in vitro 
such as hemopoietic stem cells or cartilage cells and which are routinely used to treat diseases of the 
blood system, cornea injuries or cartilage injuries, the safety and efficacy of all other adult stem cells 
used for treating diseases have not yet been proven.

So before adult stem cells are applied clinically, clinical trials must be conducted in compliance with 
scientific and ethical principles. It is not permitted for any institution to provide adult stem cells to clinics 
as a routine service until the safety and efficacy have been proven by clinical trials.

Ensuring the quality and safety of adult stem cells

In order to ensure the quality and safety of adult stem cells, the draft requires:

•  screening to be carried out for genetic and epidemic diseases of donors;

• 

the use of strict aseptic techniques and preventive measures to ensure non-contamination and non-
pathogenic bacteria transmission;

•  establishing unified criteria for the preparation and system of quality management;

•  ensuring the minimisation of genetic variation in vitro (genetic recombination, genetic deletion 

and other genetic abnormal change, or oncogenesis, etc.);

•  establishing unified normative criteria of transplantation (including time, route, number and evalu-

ation index of clinical observation) to ensure the safety of human subjects.

Review of protocols

The draft requires a protocol of clinical trials for a stem cell product being reviewed by an independent 
review committee and requires this committee to review the following points of the protocol.

1.  Are the adult stem cells used for clinical trials provided by a qualified institution? There should be 
a scientific authentication report to prove whether their biological features provided meet scientific 
criteria.

2.  The principal investigator should provide data, reports and scientific evaluation of the safety and 

efficacy of pre-clinical research on adult stem cells.

3.  Do the investigators’ qualifications and experience meet the requirements of the clinical trials?

4.  Regarding the scientific validity of the clinical trials, is the protocol scientifically valid?

5.  Is the ratio of risks to which the subjects are exposed and the expected benefits ethically accept-

able?

6.  During  the  process  of  informed  consent  is  the  information  disclosed  to  subjects  complete  and 
understandable? Is the method for obtaining consent appropriate? Is the consent form appropriate?

7.  Is the measure for confidentiality of the subjects’ personal information adequate?

62 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

8.  Are the criteria for inclusion and exclusion of subjects appropriate and fair?

9.  Are subjects clearly informed of their rights, including the right to withdrawal at any time without 

reason and not being discriminated against?

10. Is there compensation if the subjects are injured or even die while participating in clinical trials?

11. Are there, among the investigators, staff members who are responsible for the informed consent 

and safety of subjects?

12. Are protective measures taken for the risks borne by subjects?

13. Is there any conflict of interest between investigators and subjects?

Innovative therapy or experimental treatment

The draft also prescribes the conditions under which stem cell therapy is permitted to be used as inno-
vative therapy or experimental treatment. In the case that the patients with untreatable and fatal dis-
eases insistently request treatment with adult stem cells, the provision of experimental treatment of this 
unproven therapy for a few patients is permitted.

But the patients selected should be those suffering from cancer that is at a late stage or untreatable or 
other debilitating and fatal diseases. In these cases, clinicians should provide a complete written plan of 
such experimental treatment: scientific validity for choosing adult stem cells treatment; data of safety 
and efficacy of pre-clinical research; qualifications of the medical staff; the patient’s voluntary choice; 
a valid consent form; qualified stem cells technical operation facilities; responses to side-effects, compli-
cations and adverse effects; follow-up plans; etc.

And clinicians should take responsibility for establishing therapeutic results in a systematic and objective 
manner; reporting therapeutic results including negative results and adverse events to the scientific com-
munity at conferences or in journals; and timely turning to clinical trials after obtaining positive results 
in order to provide universalised knowledge

Completed the draft of Ethical guidelines on medical publications

The drafting of Ethical guidelines on medical publications was conducted by a team headed by Profes-
sor Yuan Zhong, member of the NEC, the President and Editor-in-Chief of the Peking Union Medical 
College Press.

Four sessions were organised to review the draft: two by the team and two by the NEC. The revised 
version of the draft was basically approved by NEC with a need for further rhetoric changes.

After completion, the draft will be submitted to the MOH. It will also be circulated among the commu-
nity of editors and publishers of medical publications and, hopefully, will become the professional code 
of conduct for them.

The work is divided into seven chapters: preamble, authors, peer review, editors and publication institu-
tions, research misconduct, conflict of interest and advertisements.

Discussed	the	drafts	of	the	opinions	on	other	topics

During the period, the NEC also discussed the drafts of the opinions on the following topics:

•  capacity building for research ethics;

• 

the ethical governance of institutional review committees;

•  operating procedures of institutional review committees;

•  emerging issues in human-assisted reproductive technologies.

The NEC also reviewed the progress of the project on public health ethics.

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

63

Organised training workshops on research ethics

During the period, the NEC organised two training workshops on research ethics in Hangzhou City, 
Zhejiang Province, and Beijing respectively, under the sponsorship of the MOH.

Further information

Professors Xiaomei Zhai and Renzong Qiu 
Member (Zhai) and Vice-President (Qiu) of the NEC of China
National Ethics Committee, Ministry of Health, China

Address
Centre for Bioethics
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences/Peking Union Medical College
5 Dongdan San Tiao
Dongcheng District
Beijing 100005
CHINA
Tel. +86 1065296484
Fax +86 1065296484
E-mail: xmzhai@gmail.com or renzong@gmail.com

64 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

COPAB

NEC name: Pan African Congress for Ethics and Bioethics (COPAB) 

Year of establishment of the NEC: 2008

Remit of the NEC

Clustering NEC of Member States of the African Union (AU)

Boosting the creation and functioning of NECs of Member States of the AU

Assisting African governments and any other African institutions on capacity building and training and 
education on bioethics

Proposing bioethics laws or any bioethics text in need to Member States of the AU

Proposing African guidelines on health and scientific research to Member States of the AU

Composition of the NEC

NECs of Member States of the African Union

List of the last three NEC opinions 

•  Proposed application protocol on ethics and bioethics to the African Charter on Human and People’s 

Rights. See second congress of COPAB, Yaounde, April 2010. 

•  Proposed bioethics law to the Government of Benin. See National Workshop of Scientific Research, 
Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research, February 2011. ‘Avant projet de loi portant 
Code d’Éthique de la Recherche Scientifique et Technologique en République du Bénin’.

•  Proposed  bioethics  law  to  the  Government  of  Cameroon.  See  11th  General  Assembly  of  CBS, 
Yaounde, June 2012, for the attention of the Working Group on Bioethics, Ministry of External Rela-
tions. ‘Proposition de l’avant projet de loi portant Code d’Éthique et de Bioéthique du Cameroun’. 

List of the next two topics to be covered by NEC opinions 

•  Proposition de l’avant projet de loi portant Code de la Santé Publique du Cameroun

•  Projet de loi portant Code de la Famille au Cameroun.

Chairperson and Secretariat

Interim Chairman: Prof. Pierre EFFA, Cameroon

Interim Secretary General: Doctor Gervais Nounhatin ATAHOUET, Benin

Contact details

Prof. Pierre EFFA
Building of Pharmacie de l’Harmonie, Bonamouang, Akwa Nord, Douala
PO Box 2743 Douala
CAMEROON
Tel. +237 33409545
Mobile +237 77767519
E-mail: effapierre@yahoo.fr; cerbcbs@yahoo.fr

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

65

INDONESIA

NEC name: 

 Indonesian National Bioethics Commission (Komisi Bioetika Nasional, KBN)

Year of establishment of NEC: 17 September 2004

Remit of NEC

Government budget from Indonesian Institute of Science (LIPI), Ministry of Research and Technology, 
Ministry of Health, Ministry of Agriculture

Composition of the NEC

Chairman, three Vice-Chairmen, Executive Secretary, 30 Members

List of the last three NEC opinions 

— on stem cells experiment

— on genetic resources

— on traditional medicines

List of the next two topics to be covered by NEC opinions 

— on bioethics education

— on virus sharing

Chairperson and Secretariat

Chairman: Prof. Dr Umar Anggara Jenie

Vice-Chairman: Prof. Dr Agus Purwadianto

Executive Secretary: Dr Amru Hidary Nazif

Contact details

Secretariat of KBN
Sasana Widya Sarwono Building
2nd Floor, LIPI
JL. Jend. Gatot Subroto
Kav 10
Jakarta 12710
INDONESIA
Tel. +62 215223807
Fax +62 215223806
Mobile (Chairman) +62 811139041

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

67

JAPAN

NEC name: Expert Panel on Bioethics, Council for Science and Technology Policy(CSTP), 

Cabinet Office

Year of establishment of the NEC: 18 January 2001

 (The former body called ‘Bioethics Committee, Council of Science and Technology Policy’, established 
in 1998, was replaced by the current panel pursuant to the reform of government structure.)

Remit of the NEC

Investigation and study relating to bioethics in response to rapid development of life science.

Composition of the NEC

23 members: 8 executive members of the CSTP (ex officio), 15 experts (life and medical sciences, law, 
sociology, psychology, ethics, media)

List of the last three NEC opinions 

— Opinion on the guidelines on the use of human embryonic stem cells (27.4.2010)

— Opinion  on  the  guidelines  on  the  derivation  and  distribution  of  human  embryonic  stem  cells 

(27.4.2010)

— Report on the research of assisted reproductive medicine involving creation of human fertilised 

embryo (29.3.2010)

List of the next three topics to be covered by NEC opinions 

— Creation of human embryo with gametes differentiated from embryonic and other stem cells

— Creation of human organ using animal human chimeric embryo introducing human iPS cell or 

other cell

— Research on the creation of new types of human embryo for the purpose of deriving pluripotent 

stem cells

Chairperson and Secretariat

Chairperson: AIZAWA, Masuo, Executive Member, CSTP

Secretariat: Expert Panel on Bioethics, Life Science Group, Bureau of Science and Technology Policy, 
Cabinet Office, Government of Japan 

Contact details

IDA, Ryuichi, Professor of Doshisha University
Member of Expert Panel on Bioethics
E-mail: rida@mail.doshisha.ac.jp
Secretariat e-mail: glife@cao.go.jp

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

69

MEXICO

NEC name:  Comisión Nacional de Bioética de México 

(National Bioethics Commission of Mexico)

Year of establishment of the NEC

The National Bioethics Commission of Mexico (NBC) was established in 1992. However, it starts a new 
era through the presidential decree issued on September 2005 that creates it as a deconcentrated body, 
with technical and operative autonomy.

Remit of the NEC

The comprehensive mission of the NBC is to promote a bioethics culture in Mexico, by a lay analysis, 
plural and inclusive of bioethical dilemmas, based on respect for the rights of the human being, the pro-
tection of living beings and the preservation of the environment.

Composition of the NEC

The Council:
The President of the Council (4-year mandate).
Counsellors (six honorary designated for 2-year mandates by the Minister for Health). 
The Council tends to be multidisciplinary, plural and gender balanced.

The Executive Director:
Academic and operational units and the Bioethical Knowledge Center (CECOBE). 

List of the last four NEC opinions

— Protecting life: from conception until death

— Recognition of the term obstetric violence in the General Law on Women’s Access to a Life Free 

of Violence

— Amendments to the Criminal Code of the State of Oaxaca (Mexico) for the classification of obstet-

ric violence as a crime

— Ethics of the care and control of infectious diseases

List of the next three topics to be covered by NEC opinions

— The imperative of state bioethics commissions, ethical research committees and bioethics hospital 

committees

— Emerging biotechnologies 

— Protection of personal data and biological samples

Chairperson and Secretariat

President of the Council: Manuel H. Ruiz de Chávez, MD

Executive Director: Simón Kawa, MD

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

71

Contact details

President of the Council, Manuel H. Ruiz de Chávez, MD

 Calz. Arenal N° 134 — 5° Piso, esq. Xochimaltzín  
Col. El Arenal Tepepan 
Delegación Tlalpan 
14610 México, D.F.  
MEXICO
Tel. +52 5554879902-59412
E-mail: manuelruizdechavez@gmail.com; manuel.ruizdechavez@salud.gob.mx
Website: http://www.cnb-mexico.salud.gob.mx

72 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

RUSSIA

The National Committee for Bioethics

Legal and ethical problems with research databases under the Russian law on protection of per-
sonal data

Four years after Russia enacted personal data protection legislation (PDPL) a number of lessons have 
been learned and number of problems arisen. The PDPL was misused for keeping in secrecy the personal 
data of criminal ‘prosecutors’ in legal cases of the Communist time, including the Katyn killings. Per-
sonal data are continuously accessed these days by ‘law’ enforcement bodies, including those watching 
for political protesters. The passport data are routinely collected by any security enterprises guarding the 
doors in thousands of office buildings.

In healthcare research, the PDPL has become a serious obstacle because it effectively banned research-
ers from collecting any data without the explicit written consent from every participant concerned in the 
collection and handling of any data. Physicians as well as ethics committees are troubled by the necessity 
to approve and provide the protocol in agreement with the PDPL.

International  clinical  and  non-clinical  studies  are  in  a  good  position  to  overcome  the  barriers  of  the 
PDPL, and demonstrate the possibility of data collection and management under the PDPL in a situation 
of the lost trust of government and healthcare bodies. Unfortunately, researchers from outside the big 
studies usually have neither the resources nor support to overcome the barriers of the PDPL. Thus, small 
non-commercial studies suffer more from the PDPL than commercial studies.

Further information

Website: http://www.bioethics.ru/eng/rucommittee/

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

73

SWITZERLAND

NEC name: Swiss National Advisory Commission on Biomedical Ethics (NEK-CNE)

Year of establishment of the NEC: 2001

Remit of the NEC

The National Advisory Commission on Biomedical Ethics is an extra-parliamentary body. It was estab-
lished by the Federal Council on 3 July 2001.

The Commission monitors the development of the sciences relating to human health and disease and 
their practical applications. It comments from an ethical perspective — in an advisory capacity — on the 
social, scientific and legal issues arising in this area.

The Commission’s efforts to clarify ethical aspects in relation to new scientific knowledge and tech-
nologies are designed to produce a careful and comprehensive ethical assessment, contributing to the 
definition of positions through an equitable, argument-based process and ultimately to the welfare of the 
people concerned and society at large.

Composition of the NEC

— President: Otfried Höffe, Prof Dr. Dr h.c. mult., Professor emeritus of Philosophy, Eberhard Karls 

University Tübingen; Visiting professor of Philosophy of Law, University of St. Gallen

— Ruth Baumann-Hölzle, Dr theol., Leiterin des Interdisziplinären Instituts für Ethik im Gesund-

heitswesen, Dialog Ethik, Zürich

— Annette Boehler, Prof. Dr med., Leitende Ärztin der Abteilung Pneumologie und Lungentrans-

plantationsprogramm am Universitätsspital Zürich

— Alberto Bondolfi, Prof. Dr theol., professeur associé émérité d’éthique à l’université de Genève

— Kurt Ebneter-Fässler, Dr med., Facharzt für Allgemeine Medizin FMH, Appenzell

— Carlo Foppa, PhD, Ethicien clinique, Communauté d’intérêts de La Côte, Morges

— Olivier Guillod, Prof. Dr iur., Professeur ordinaire de droit civil et Directeur de l’Institut de droit 

de la santé de l’université de Neuchâtel

— Bertrand Kiefer, Dr med., lic. theol., Rédacteur en chef ‘Revue médicale suisse’, Genève

— Margrit Leuthold, Dr phil. II, Direktorin, International Institutional Affairs der ETH Zürich

— Jean Martin, PD Dr med., Ancien Médecin cantonal et Privat-docent à l’université de Lausanne

— Judit Pók Lundquist, Dr med., Leitende Ärztin für Frauenheilkunde am Universitätsspital Zürich

— Franziska Probst, lic. iur. und lic. phil., Psychologin, Zürich

— François-Xavier Putallaz, Prof. Dr phil., Professeur titulaire de philosophie à la faculté de théolo-

gie de l’université de Fribourg

— Maya  Shaha,  PhD,  RN,  Lehrbeauftragte  MER  1  an  der  Universität  Lausanne,  Institut  für 
Pflegewissenschaft, und wiss. Mitarbeiterin am Inselspital Bern, Direktion Pflege/MTT, Bereich 
Fachentwicklung und Forschung

— Brigitte Tag, Prof. Dr iur. utr., Professorin für Strafrecht, Strafprozessrecht und Medizinrecht, 

Universität Zürich

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

75

List of the last three NEC opinions 

— Research on children (16/2009)

— Advance directives (17/2011)

— Human enhancement (18/2011)

List of the next two topics to be covered by NEC opinions 

— Intersexuality: ethical aspects 

— Cost-effectiveness in healthcare and health technology assessment

Chairperson and Secretariat

Chairman: 
Prof. Dr Dr h.c. mult. Otfried Höffe, Tübingen, Germany

Secretariat: 
Dr Jean-Daniel Strub (head), Dr. Susanne Brauer, Berne, Switzerland

Contact details

Nationale Ethikkommission im Bereich Humanmedizin
Bundesamt für Gesundheit
Seilerstrasse 8
3003 Bern
SWITZERLAND
Tel. +41 313240236
Fax +41 313226233
E-mail: jean-daniel.strub@bag.admin.ch 
Website: http://www.nek-cne.ch

76 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

The Presidential Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues

Under Executive Order 13521, dated 24 November 2009, the Presidential Commission for the Study of 
Bioethical Issues (the ‘commission’) was established to advise the President on bioethical issues that 
may emerge as a consequence of advances in biomedicine and related areas of science and technology. 
The commission pursues its work with the goal of identifying and promoting policies and practices that 
ensure scientific research, healthcare delivery and technological innovation are conducted in an ethically 
responsible manner.

The commission consists of 13 members appointed by the President, drawn from the fields of bioethics, 
science, medicine, technology, engineering, law, philosophy, theology or other areas of the humanities 
or social sciences. 

Amy Gutmann, PhD, serves as Commission Chair and James W. Wagner, PhD, serves as Vice-Chair; 
they have led the commission since its inception in November 2009. Dr Gutmann is the President of the 
University of Pennsylvania and Dr Wagner is the President of Emory University. In April 2012, Lisa M. 
Lee, PhD, MS, left her post as Chief Science Officer in the Office of Surveillance, Epidemiology and 
Laboratory Sciences at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and took on the role of 
Executive Director of the Commission.

Since 2009, at the President’s request, the commission has advised the White House on the benefits and 
risks of synthetic biology; assessed the rules that currently protect human subjects in research; and com-
pleted an independent investigation into the specifics of the US Public Health Service STD experiments 
in Guatemala in the 1940s. The commission’s reports are:

New directions: the ethics of synthetic biology and emerging technologies

Moral science: protecting participants in human subjects research

‘Ethically impossible’ STD research in Guatemala from 1946 to 1948

The  commission  is  currently  working  on  two  major  projects:  first,  access  to  and  privacy  of  human 
genome sequence data; and second, at the request of Health and Human Services Secretary, Kathleen 
Sebelius, ethical advice on the development of medical countermeasures for children. The commission 
expects to provide President Obama with a report and recommendations on genomics and privacy in the 
autumn and on paediatric medical countermeasures by the new year.

The commission meets quarterly, with upcoming meetings planned for 1 and 2 August 2012 in Kansas 
City, KN, and 5 and 6 November 2012, in Chicago, IL, and expects to issue two reports this year.

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

77

Further information

Lisa	M.	Lee,	PhD,	MS
Executive Director
Presidential Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues

Address
1425 New York Avenue, NW, Suite C-100
Washington, DC 20005
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Tel. +1 202233-3960
Fax +1 202233-3990
E-mail: info@bioethics.gov
Website: http://www.bioethics.gov

78 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

General information  
on activities of the  
international organisations

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

79

COUNCIL OF EUROPE

Committee	on	Bioethics	(DH-BIO)

On 1 January 2012, following the reorganisation of intergovernmental bodies at the Council of Europe, 
the Committee on Bioethics (DH-BIO) took over the responsibilities of the Steering Committee on Bio-
ethics (CDBI) for the tasks assigned by the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine and for the 
intergovernmental work on the protection of human rights in the field of biomedicine. The reorganisation 
also results in creating a closer link between the DH-BIO and the Steering Committee on Human Rights 
(CDDH).

Decision-making	process	regarding	medical	treatment	in	end-of-life	situations

In the framework of the activities in relation to the protection of patient rights, a symposium on the 
decision-making process regarding medical treatment in end-of-life situations was held on 30 November 
and 1 December 2010. On the basis of its conclusions, a drafting group has been entrusted with the task 
of preparing a preliminary draft ‘guide’ on the decision-making process regarding medical treatment in 
end-of-life situations. This ‘guide’ will aim at facilitating the implementation of the principles laid down 
in the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, including the principle laid down in its Article 9 
concerning previously expressed wishes. It is intended to be examined by DH-BIO at its second plenary 
meeting in December 2012.

Predictivity, genetic testing and insurance

The Committee on Bioethics is continuing its work on predictivity and genetic testing in the field of 
insurance with a view to the possible elaboration of a legal instrument. A document on predictivity, 
genetic testing and insurance was made public for consultation of the stakeholders in February 2012. The 
consultation closed on 27 April 2012.

The purpose of this consultation was to elicit comments and replies from bodies representative of the 
different fields concerned (in particular patients, consumers, insurers and reinsurers, doctors, geneticists, 
ombudspersons), at national and international levels, on proposals and questions regarding the use of 
predictive health-related data, in particular genetic data, in the field of insurance. The outcome of this 
process will be taken into account with a view to considering the possibility of preparing a draft legal 
instrument on the use of predictive health-related data for insurance purposes.

Symposium on biobanks and research on biological materials of human origin (19 and 20 June 2012)

A symposium on biobanks, organised by the Committee on Bioethics, was held on 19 and 20 June 2012 
in Strasbourg. The objective of this symposium was to provide a basis for the re-examination of the 
Council of Europe Recommendation (2006)4 on research on biological materials of human origin, which 
applies to the full range of research activities in the health field involving:

— the removal of materials of human origin to be stored for research purposes (research biobanking),

— the  use  of  biological  materials  of  human  origin  either  stored  for  research  purposes  or  initially 

removed for another purpose.

To that end, the symposium will examine the developments in biobanking and research on biological 
materials of human origin which have taken place in particular since the adoption of the recommenda-
tion, and consider their possible evolution, in order to assess the challenges they may raise with respect to 
the ethical and legal principles enshrined in the recommendation. More information on the symposium 
can be found on the Internet (http://www.coe.int/bioethics).

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

81

An International Conference on ‘Ethics review of clinical research in pharmaceuticals’ (http://www.coe.
int/t/dg3/healthbioethic/Conferences_and_symposia/default_en.asp) organised by the Council of Europe 
and the Ministry of Health and Social Development of the Russian Federation took place in Moscow on 
28 and 29 November 2011. The conference was broadcast live and it was possible to put questions online 
(recording available at http://www.coe.int/bioethics). This made it possible for more than 500 representa-
tives  of  the  sectors  concerned  (competent  authorities,  laboratories,  researchers,  patients,  members  of 
ethics committees, organisations specifically tasked with clinical trials and insurers) to participate. The 
conference focused on ethics reviews of biomedical research on humans, particularly in clinical trials, on 
legislation, the bodies involved in considering the ethics of research projects and the process of evaluat-
ing the ethics of projects.

The  conference  was  also  the  occasion  for  the  Council  of  Europe  to  launch  its  ‘Guide  for  Research 
Ethics Committee members’, aimed at facilitating implementation of the ethical principles established 
by European legal instruments, in particular the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine and its 
additional protocol concerning biomedical research (see http://www.coe.int/bioethics for translation of 
the guide in different languages).

New additional protocol on protection of the human rights and dignity of persons with mental 
disorder

The Committee on Bioethics included in its work programme for 2013 the elaboration of an additional 
protocol to the Oviedo Convention on protection of the human rights and dignity of persons with mental 
disorder, in particular with regard to involuntary treatment and placement.

Background document on preimplantation and prenatal genetic testing

This background paper comes within the realm of the reflection on ethical issues raised by the applica-
tions of genetics. The document aims at providing information on clinical practice, trends and techno-
logical  developments  concerning  preimplantation  and  prenatal  genetic  diagnosis  (Part  I)  as  well  as 
relevant legal framework in force in the Council of Europe member states (Part II). Part II of the docu-
ment is updated regularly.

82 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

EGE Secretariat

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012 

83

Secretariat

Address 
European Commission
Berl 8/362
1049 Brussels
BELGIUM
Fax +32 229-94565
E-mail: BEPA-ETHICS-GROUP@ec.europa.eu

Maurizio SALVI 
MBA, MBS, PhD, D. Biotech.
European Commission
Head BEPA Ethics Sector
Head of the EGE Secretariat
General Secretary EC IBD
Berl 8/359
1049 Brussels
BELGIUM
E-mail: maurizio.salvi@ec.europa.eu

Kim Hoang Le
European Commission
EGE Secretariat
Berl 8/362
1049 Brussels
BELGIUM
Tel. +32 229-99228
E-mail: Kim-hoang.le@ec.europa.eu

Adriana Sorina Oltean
European Commission
EGE Secretariat
Berl 8/362
1049 Brussels
BELGIUM
Tel. +32 229-93016
E-mail: adriana-sorina.oltean@ec.europa.eu

Website: http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm

84 

Ethically Speaking 16, July 2012

