ISSN 1725-5562

Ethically
speaking

A newsletter providing information on the 
activities of the national ethics committees 
compiled by the Secretariat of the European 
Group on Ethics in Science and New 
Technologies to the European Commission

Issue 17 — January 2013

K
A
-
A
I
-
1
3
-
0
0
1
-
E
N
-
C

E
t
h

i
c
a

l
l
y

s
p
e
a
k
i

n
g

I
s
s
u
e

1
7
—

J
a
n
u
a
r
y

2
0
1
3

 
 
 
 
 
 
HOW TO OBTAIN EU PUBLICATIONS

Free publications:

•	
•	

via	EU	Bookshop	(http://bookshop.europa.eu);
	at	the	European	Union’s	representations	or	delegations.		
You	can	obtain	their	contact	details	on	the	Internet	(http://ec.europa.eu)		
or	by	sending	a	fax		to	+352	2929-42758.

Priced publications:

•	

via	EU	Bookshop	(http://bookshop.europa.eu).

Priced subscriptions (e.g. annual series of the Official Journal of the European 
Union and reports of cases before the Court of Justice of the European Union):

•	

	via	one	of	the	sales	agents	of	the	Publications	Office	of	the	European	Union		
(http://publications.europa.eu/others/agents/index_en.htm).

Ethically speaking

Issue 17

January 2013

Maurizio SALVI  

Chief Editor

Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers 
to your questions about the European Union

Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11

(*) Certain mobile telephone operators do not allow access to 00 800 numbers 
or these calls may be billed.

More information on the European Union is available on the Internet (http://europa.eu).

Cataloguing data can be found at the end of this publication.

Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2013

ISSN 1725-5562

© European Union, 2013
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Printed in Luxembourg

Printed on white chlorine-free PaPer

Contents

Editorial 
Maurizio Salvi, Head of the EGE Secretariat 

General information on activities of the EU national and regional ethics committees 

BELGIUM 
CYPRUS 
FRANCE 
GERMANY 
GREECE 
ITALY 
MALTA 
PORTUGAL 
UNITED KINGDOM 

5

9

11
13
17
19
21
23
27
31
35

General information on activities of the non-EU national and regional ethics committees 

37

ARGENTINA 
COPAB 
INDIA 
MEXICO 
RUSSIA 

European Commission 

European Commission, Bureau of European Policy Advisers’ Ethics Sector 

General information on activities of the international organisations 

Council of Europe 
Unesco 
World Health Organisation (WHO) 

EGE Secretariat 

39
43
45
47
51

53

55

57

59
61
63

67

Editorial

Maurizio Salvi, Head of the EGE Secretariat

EGE Opinion 27: An ethical framework for assessing research, production and use of energy

With the entering into force of the Lisbon Treaty, ethical considerations are integral components in the 
formulation  of  European  Union  policies,  including  energy  policy.  This  ethical  analysis  requires  that 
the production systems being considered are comparable. The analysis cannot only consider economic 
issues, but must consider the impact, either positive or negative, that may occur during the entire life 
cycle of the system and this should encompass the impact on the environment and the implications of 
the use (or indeed cessation of use) of a particular energy source. An ethically sound policy design is 
a challenge for the formulation of such an important policy sector that affects 10 % of the entire GDP 
of the European Union as well as global geopolitical and macroeconomic considerations. This need has 
been appreciated by European Union Member States (1) and, on 19 December 2011, the President of the 
European Commission requested the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (2) 
(EGE) to ‘contribute to the debate on a sustainable energy mix in Europe by studying the ethical impact 
of research on different energy sources on human well-being’.

The EGE accepted this request and decided to:

•	 address the ethical issues arising from energy use within the EU energy agenda, the mix of energy, 
consequences  for  the  future,  energy  policy  and  regulation  (including  environmental  consider-
ations), the precautionary principle and intergenerational justice;

•	

identify the ethical criteria on the manner in which decisions concerning research on sources of 
energy are to be taken on an informed basis and the implications arising from the use of energy in 
different areas;

•	 propose an integrated ethics framework for the purpose of addressing the ethical issues related to 

the production, use, storage and distribution of energy;

•	

identify the ethically relevant areas of energy research.

On 16 January 2013, the group adopted its 27th opinion unanimously: ‘An ethical framework for assess-
ing research, production and use of energy’. 

This opinion was composed during an intense working agenda, listening carefully to many opinions 
and evidence from a range of relevant experts (3),	including	President	Barroso’s	Chief	Scientific	Advi-
sor. The EGE addressed this problem during 10 meetings (March 2012 to January 2013), one open round 
table (100 participants) and a meeting with the chairs of national ethics councils of the European Union 
(or equivalent bodies).

(1)  On 28 June 2011 the Council reached a political agreement on a Commission proposal for a nuclear research and training 
programme for 2012–13. Although the Council’s discussion has been successfully concluded, some Member States felt that 
a broad discourse on ethical issues and sustainable energy mix in Europe should take place and indicated the need to have 
an opinion of the EGE on this topic.

(2)  The role of the EGE is to provide the Commission with high quality and independent advice on ethical aspects of science 

and new technologies in connection with the preparation and implementation of Community legislation or policies.

(3)  http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european-group-ethics/welcome/activities/index_en.htm 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

5

In its opinion, the EGE has adopted an integrated ethics approach to achieve an equilibrium between 
four criteria — access rights, security of supply, safety and sustainability — in the light of social, envir-
onmental and economic concerns. 

The EGE recommended the following.

1.  Access to energy

The	EU	should	secure	and	promote	the	right	of	access	to	sufficient	energy	services	to	European	
citizens and this right should be included in the next revision of the Treaty or the Charter of Fun-
damental Rights.

In accordance with the millennium development goals, the EU should collaborate to ensure access 
to energy within a global perspective.

Both quantitative and qualitative data on energy poverty should be collated and analysed across 
Member States by the Commission. On the basis of these data the Commission should then pre-
pare, adopt and implement an action plan to tackle energy poverty in the interests of solidarity and 
the health and well-being of European citizens.

2.  Safety and impact assessment

Data regarding any kind of elements that affect risk in the production and transport of energy, 
health and environmental consequences of its use, and the total costs of any kind of energy pro-
duction, should be available in a well-informed and transparent way so that society informs itself 
in order to take decisions. 

Impact  assessment  of  any  energy  source  through  its  whole  life  cycle  should  be  carried  out  on 
a comparative basis including the question of accountability.

A comparative integrated impact assessment should be required for all energy sources, particularly 
new technologies. Such an assessment should also involve the participation of local communities 
at the earliest possible opportunity and assess impact and risks across the entire life cycle of the 
energy production, storage and use, in line with the Lisbon Treaty and the precautionary principle.

The EU should commission studies to: (1) obtain additional data on the environmental and social 
impact of fracking; (2) show the impact of shale gas on the transition to renewables; and (3) pro-
vide possibilities as to how to implement appropriate institutional oversight. The group therefore 
agrees that from an ethical viewpoint, if safety and environmental issues remain following these 
studies, fracking should not be pursued within the EU unless these conditions are met.

3.  Security of energy supply

The EU should decrease its vulnerability to imported energy sources in a sustainable and environ-
mentally sound manner.

It	should	ensure	a	coordinated	policy	in	the	field	of	energy	supply	as	well	as	energy	mix	in	order	to	
achieve European Union security of supply targets at national and European level.

It  should  also  develop  European  energy  smart  grids  to  secure  and  optimise  energy  supply  by 
consolidating cooperation among European Union Member States in the spirit of solidarity, and 
decentralised systems to support the energy supply. Furthermore, decentralised systems such as 
micro-generation of energy should be sustained when possible.

6 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

4.  Sustainability

Policies should be implemented to:

•	

•	

reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases producing greenhouse effects in the pro-
duction of energy, as stated in the Energy Roadmap 2050;

favour the development and use of low-carbon technologies with special attention to renewa-
bles,	for	example	by	fiscal	and	other	relevant	measures.

Every	effort	is	made	to	improve	energy	efficiency	and	to	reduce	energy	waste.	Particular	attention	
should be paid to the following implementing measures to achieve this goal:

•	

the establishment of smart grids;

•	 encourage incentives and establish normative requirements to reduce and distribute energy 
production	and	uses	in	the	field	of	transport,	construction,	heating,	etc.	(non-essential	energy	
uses,	incentives	to	build	energy-efficient	urban	renovation);

•	 promote actions to promote availability of renewable technologies to vulnerable groups of society.

The awareness of citizens should be enhanced (starting from an early age) to adopt new attitudes 
and	lifestyles	for	responsible	uses	of	energy	by	promoting	and	financing	educational	projects	and	
awareness-raising initiatives (e.g. promoting sustainability in schools).

The different Member States’ strategies should be evaluated on a regular basis, particularly in 
light of the policies to use ‘conventional’, low-carbon and ‘renewable’ energy sources.

5.  Research

The	EGE	recommends	that	priorities	for	research	should	be	identified	and	should	include	research	on:

•	

technologies that would contribute to the development of European smart grid infrastructure 
that	is	configured	in	such	a	way	to	have	sufficient	capability	to	harness	the	potential	benefits	of	
low-carbon and renewable technologies in particular when decentralised energy production is 
developed;

•	 new technologies for storage of energy where or when excess is produced in order to facilitate 

the use of energies that are intermittent;

•	

interdisciplinary research on storage and transport of materials and residues related to energy 
production and use;

•	 analysis on residue production of different energy sources, its reduction or elimination and 

possible reuse;

•	 determining the most suitable technologies, regulations and infrastructures for future carbon 

capture, storage and sequestration;

•	 energy	efficiency	in	all	areas,	but	particularly	in	urban	design	and	architecture,	transport,	utili-

ties and industrial facilities.

Research funding should be allocated to ongoing work in the area of psycho-social modelling of 
individual and community behavioural interventions in the area of energy conservation in order to 
support	energy-efficiency	initiatives	in	setting	new	standards	beyond	current	best	practice.

Comparative studies should be carried out on the implementation of the European Energy Road-
map	 2050	 in	 European	 Union	 Member	 States	 (quantitative	 and	 qualitative	 data),	 with	 specific	
emphasis	 on	 sociocultural	 and	 geographical	 factors	 that	 have	justified	 the	 adoption	 of	 specific	
energy mix systems at local level.

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

7

A comparative impact assessment of all energy sources should be undertaken, using the integrated 
methodology of technological, social and political scenarios. They should include scenarios of 
worst case (social, environmental), short-term and long-term prognoses, geopolitical contexts and 
safety risks for workers.

Social sciences (individual responsibilities), psychology, social anthropology, sociology, ethics and 
law should be studied.

Interdisciplinary	research	should	be	financed	under	Horizon	2020	on	the	ethical,	legal	and	social	
implications (thematic programme) of energy.

As  regards  democratic  deliberation,  participatory  instruments  and  responsibility  for  future  genera-
tions, the EGE recommends that the European Union should set incentives to implement participatory 
approaches, for example in the following areas: (1) civil society ‘hearings’; (2) local and regional energy 
cooperatives;  (3)  local  initiatives  to  save  energy;  and  (4)  local  and  regional  initiatives  to  low-carbon 
urban development and community design.

The EGE also recommends that the European Union and its institutions should set up a structure called 
‘Ombuds-person’ to protect the interests of future generations. Its function would not be to decide, but to 
promote enlightened decisions by bringing into discussions the long-term effects of all political, socio-
economic and technological decisions.

The EGE discussed the opinion in a public open round table on 18 September 2012 (stakeholders involved 
included academia, civil society representatives, NGOs, industry, etc.) and discussed this topic with the 
chairs of the EU national ethics councils under the auspices of the Cypriot Council Rotation Presidency 
(4 October 2012).

In order to promote transparency, all documents related to the EGE work (remit, hearings with external 
experts, conferences and meetings) have been published on the EGE website (4). The same approach has 
been taken for all actions on ethics under the responsibility of the Bureau of European Policy Advisors 
(BEPA) Ethics Sector.

The opinion will be hand-delivered to President Barroso on 20 February 2013 and presented to relevant 
experts	at	the	symposium	on	‘Benefits	and	limitations	of	nuclear	fission	for	a	low-carbon	economy’,	
organised by the European Commission in cooperation with the European Economic and Social Com-
mittee (EESC), which will take place in Brussels on 26 and 27 February 2013.

The group will now start its work on a new opinion, requested by President Barroso, on ethics of security 
and surveillance technologies. The above opinion should be adopted by December 2013 or January 2014.

Maurizio Salvi, PhD, 
Bureau of European Policy Advisors (BEPA),
Head	of	the	EGE	Secretariat,
	Head	of	the	BEPA	Ethics	Sector

(4)  http://ec.europa.eu/bepa/european-group-ethics/welcome/activities/index_en.htm

8 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

General information on 
activities of the EU national 
and regional ethics 
committees

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

9

10 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

BELGIUM

The Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics

Event in Brussels (Auditorium 44, Passage 44, 1000 Brussels)

17 April 2013

My health, everyone’s health?
The ethical challenges of public health

The	concept	of	health,	defined	as	‘a	state	of	complete	physical,	mental	and	social	well-being’	(Ottawa	
Charter	for	Health	Promotion),	concerns	the	individual	as	a	person,	but	also	the	individual	as	a	member	
of	a	social	group.	So	it	shouldn’t	be	surprising	that	the	field	of	action	of	the	public	health	concept	has	
been expanding in order to more globally address the behaviour of human beings within their environ-
ment.	Naturally,	that	field	of	action	concerns	the	prevention	of	epidemics,	but	also	the	prevention	of	
cardiovascular diseases, addictions, violence in the family and sexual abuse or bullying, to mention just 
a few examples.

Starting	from	current	topics	such	as	compulsory	vaccination,	the	fight	against	tobacco	addiction,	obe-
sity and stress, the Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics will, on the occasion of its ninth biennial 
conference, pose questions about the practice and the idea of public health, on the basis of the values and 
standards that play a role therein. Solidarity, responsibility, autonomy, equality, integration, justice: how 
are	they	evolving?	Where	do	the	potential	conflicts	lie?	What	will	become	of	the	double	principle	of	soli-
darity and collective responsibility on which the protection of public health is based?   

The subject is a wide-ranging one, since it touches upon health and, more broadly, biological life itself, 
which over the past half century have become central elements in our value systems. But as usual, the 
committee will — in a didactic yet lively manner — address the subject in interaction with members of 
the public who, throughout the day, will have a chance to speak, after having participated in a survey 
during the morning.  

Please join us on 17 April 2013 to share your views and impressions.

For further information, please log on to the committee’s website at http://www.health.belgium.be/bioeth

Most recent publications

Opinion No 51 of 12 March 2012 on the publication of research results of experiments on humans.

Opinion No 52 of 12 March 2012 on the ethical aspects of certain provisions of the European and Bel-
gian regulations on human tissues and cells used in reproductive medicine.

Opinion No 53 of 14 May 2012 on the refusal of medical treatment by a pregnant woman with impact 
on the foetus.

Opinions are available in French and Dutch, on the website  
http://www.health.belgium.be/bioeth

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

11

Further information
Monique Bosson
Information	Officer
Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics

Address
Rue de l’Autonomie 4
1st	floor
1070 Brussels
BELGIUM
Tel.: + 32 25250907
E-mail: monique.bosson@health.fgov.be
Website: http://www.health.fgov.be/bioeth

12 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

CYPRUS

The Cyprus National Bioethics Committee

The	Cyprus	National	Bioethics	Committee	(CNBC)	was	established	in	2001	by	‘Τhe	Law	providing	for	
the establishment and function of the National Bioethics Committee’ (Laws 2001 until 2010).

Its mandate is to monitor constantly, survey, systematically analyse and evaluate the issues and problems 
associated	with	scientific	research,	advances	in	and	applications	of	biotechnology,	biology,	medicine,	
genetics and pharmaceutics, along with human intervention in biological processes and the human geno-
type, and to investigate their moral, deontological, social, humanistic and legal dimensions.

The CNBC is an independent body not subjected to administrative supervision by any ministry, agency, 
department or service and has the powers conferred on it by the current law and any other law.

The CNBC has 13 members, including the chairperson. The members represent different professions and 
disciplines, and are appointed by the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Cyprus for a 4-year term. 
The law stipulates that at least four members must come from the humanities and social sciences; four 
from medical and biological sciences; and four members must be from any other science or profession or 
be distinguished for their contribution in any area of activity in science and society.

On 14 July the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Cyprus appointed new CNBC members for a term 
of	office	until	13	July	2015.

According to the provisions of the national legislation currently in force, the CNBC is the body respon-
sible for performing the bioethical review of all research protocols involving human subjects in Cyprus 
(both	biomedical	and	clinical	research).	In	order	to	fulfil	this,	the	CNBC	has	adopted	with	very	few	
changes	the	World	Health	Organisation	‘Operational	guidelines	for	ethics	committees	that	review	bio-
medical research’ as the basis of the guidelines for ethics committees reviewing biomedical research 
involving	human	subjects	in	Cyprus,	which	were	enacted	on	31	March	2005	(Κ.Δ.Π.	175/2005).		

In accordance with these guidelines and with the authority conferred on it by Law No 150 (I)/2001 the 
Committee set up the following three bioethics review committees:

I.	 The	Review	Bioethics	Committee	for	Biomedical	Research	on	Human	Beings	and	their	Biological	

Substances;

II.	 The	Review	Bioethics	Committee	for	the	Clinical	Trials	on	Medicinal	Products	of	Human	Use;	and

III.	The	Review	Bioethics	Committee	for	Biomedical	Research	on	Human	Being	and	their	Biological	

Substances	and	the	Clinical	Trials	on	Medicinal	Products	of	Human	Use.

The review bioethics committees review protocols relating to:

•	 biomedical research on human beings and their biological substances;

•	 clinical trials on medicinal products for human use; and

•	

research on medical devices applied to human beings.

The role of the review bioethics committees is to:

1.  contribute  to  safeguarding  the  dignity,  rights,  safety  and  well-being  of  all  actual  or  potential 

research participants;

2.  provide an independent, competent and timely review of the ethical aspects of proposed studies;

3.  review research proposals before the research begins.

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

13

The CNBC appoints the members of the review bioethics committees and monitors, directs, and coor-
dinates	their	work,	and	reviews	their	decisions	by	applying	the	specific	procedures	provided	for	in	the	
operational	guidelines	(Κ.Δ.Π.	175/2005).

On 1 December 2011 new members were appointed in the review bioethics committees in replacement 
of	the	members	whom	the	term	of	office	finished	on	30	November	2011.	The	term	of	office	of	the	new	
members is from 1 December 2011 to 30 November 2013.

Current work and forthcoming opinions

•	 The Cyprus National Bioethics Committee in collaboration with the European Commission Direc-
torate-General for Research and Innovation successfully organised in Nicosia, Cyprus, the 18th 
National Ethics Councils Forum from 4 to 5 October 2012. Seventy participants from the Euro-
pean Union Member States’ national ethics councils and from associated countries participated in 
the event. The main topics were information communication technology and ethics, responsible 
research and innovation, and ethics and education.

•	 Updating the operational guidelines for conducting biomedical research in Cyprus.

Previous opinions

1.  Opinion of the Cyprus National Bioethics Committee on the bioethical considerations arising from 
the chemical (hereinafter referred to as medicinal) and surgical castration of people convicted for 
sexual offences, issued on 6 July 2010 (available only in Greek).

2.  Opinion of the Cyprus National Bioethics Committee on obtaining informed consent from minors 

in the context of research protocols, issued on 25 May 2010 (available only in Greek).

3.  Opinion of the Cyprus National Bioethics Committee on obtaining informed consent from adults, 

issued on 1 December 2009 (available only in Greek).

4.  Opinion on the establishment and use of human biobanks and registries of human biological sam-

ples for research purposes, issued on 23 June 2009 (available in Greek and in English).

5.  Opinion on the use of ionising radiation in medical practice, issued on 12 May 2009 (available in 

Greek and in English).

6.  Opinion on palliative care for terminally ill and dying patients, issued on 1 July 2008 (available in 

Greek and in English).

7.	 Opinion	on	genetically	modified	organisms,	issued	on	3	April	2008	(available	in	Greek	and	in	

English).

8.  Opinion on the prenuptial test for thalassaemia before the conclusion of a civil wedding, issued 

on 24 March 2008 (available only in Greek).

9.  Opinion on predictive health information in the conclusion of health and life insurance contracts, 

issued on 22 January 2008 (available in Greek and in English).

10. Opinion on medically assisted human procreation (5 March 2007) (available only in Greek).

11. Opinion on PGD and sex selection of the in vitro procreated embryos, issued on 1 November 2006 

(available only in Greek).

12. Opinion on human cloning, issued on 12 September 2006 (available only in Greek).

13. Opinion on human organ donors’ registries, issued on 19 July 2006 (available only in Greek).

14. Opinion on cord blood banking, issued on 27 April 2004 (available only in Greek).

15. Opinion on the transplantation of biological substances of human origin, issued on 14 April 2003 

(available only in Greek).

16. Opinion on the use of preimplantation genetic diagnosis method, issued on 20 October 2003 (avail-

able only in Greek).

14 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

Further information
Dr Michael Voniatis
Chairman
The Cyprus National Bioethics Committee

Address
Nikou Kranidioti
Engomis Medical Centre
1st Floor 
2411 Engomi
CYPRUS 
Tel. +357 22809038 / 22809039
Fax +357 22353878 
E-mail: cnbc@bioethics.gov.cy
Website: http://www.bioethics.gov.cy

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

15

FRANCE

The National Consultative Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences

Legal basics and mandate

•	 The law of 6 August 2004 was reviewed in July 2011.

This new law gives to the French National Consultative Ethics Committee (CCNE) a very important new 
mission in terms of initiating a public debate, every time there is a project of reform submitted to the 
parliament	in	the	field	of	its	skills.

In the absence of a project, the CCNE has to organise ‘general states’ every 5 years.

•	 The mandate of half the committee members was renewed in April 2012.

The new composition of CCNE in April 2012 is as follows.

 ♦ President: Alain Grimfeld

Vice-President: Ali Benmakhlouf

Honorary	Presidents:	Didier	Sicard,	Jean-Pierre	Changeux

 ♦ Members:

Yves Agid, Jean Claude Ameisen, Régis Aubry, Michaël Azoulay, Christiane Basset, François 
Beaufils,	 Joëlle	 Belaisch-Allart,	 Marie-Germaine	 Bousser,	 Margaret	 Buckingham,	 Sylvie	
Cazalot, Bernard Cazeau, André Comte-Sponville, Alain Cordier, Bernard Debré, Anne-Marie 
Dickelé,	 Frédérique	 Dreifuss-Netter,	 Roger-Pol	 Droit,	 Pierre-Henri	 Duée,	 Patrick	 Gaudray,	
André Glucksmann, Jean-Pierre Kahane, Xavier Lacroix, Claire Legras, Claude Matuchansky, 
Lucien  Neuwirth,  Francis  Puech,  Alice  René,  Philippe  Rouvillois,  Michel  Roux,  Louis 
Schweitzer,  Dominique  Stoppa-Lyonnet,  Claude  Sureau,  Dominique  Thouvenin,  Claudine 
Tiercelin, Didier Truchet, Michel Van Praët, Jean-Louis Vildé, Bertrand Weil.

 ♦ General	Secretary:	Marie-Hélène	Mouneyrat

•	 By decree of 9 November 2012, Jean Claude Ameisen was appointed President and Alain 

Grimfeld was appointed Honorary President.

The CCNE on the international scene

•	 A delegate from the CCNE was present at the Ninth Global Summit of National Bioethics Advi-

sory Bodies which was held from 25 to 28 September 2012 in Tunis.

•	 A trilateral meeting was held between the German, British and French ethics committees in Berlin 

on 8 November 2012.

Current work

•	 Three permanent working groups:

 ♦ neurosciences;

 ♦ medically assisted procreation;

 ♦ biodiversity relations between the human race and the living.

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

17

•	 Other current working groups:

 ♦ ethical questions raised by the products of health;

 ♦ ethical questions raised by global analysis of the human genome;

 ♦ ethical	questions	raised	by	self-screening	tests	for	HIV;

 ♦ ethical questions connected to medical-surgical techniques related to transsexualism.

More recent publications

•	 Opinion No 116: Ethical issues arising from functional neuroimaging.

•	 Opinion No 117: Use of stem cells derived from umbilical cord blood, the umbilical cord itself and 

the placenta, their storage in biobanks. Ethical issues.

•	 30th anniversary of the CCNE, Paris, 22 and 23 March 2013.

18 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

GERMANY

The German Ethics Council

Opinion on dementia and self-determination

In April 2012, the German Ethics Council presented its opinion on dementia and self-determination, 
whose aim is to facilitate understanding of the situation of persons with dementia and which contains 
recommendations for more account to be taken of the individual situation of those concerned so as to 
assist the preservation of their self-determination.

Some 1.2 million people with moderate to severe dementia are currently living in Germany. In view of 
the growing number of affected persons, dementia is one of the principal health-related challenges of 
our time, in terms not only of health and social policy, but also of our conception of ourselves as human 
beings and citizens.

Self-determination is an essential aspect of humanity’s understanding of itself and a particular focus 
of	all	ethical	discourse.	Attention	has	hitherto	centred	almost	exclusively	on	the	deficiencies	associated	
with dementia. If human individuals are equated with their intellectual faculties, dementia will inevi-
tably be seen as involving the destruction of their humanity. If, however, they are regarded not only as 
thinking but also as feeling, emotional and social beings, it will be easier to allow for the resources that 
still exist in each affected person. This approach underlies the German Ethics Council’s opinion, which 
is concerned to show that people with dementia also retain elements of self-determination that should be 
observed and supported.

Both research in and the practice of medicine and nursing are predominantly directed towards early 
diagnosis and symptomatic relief, less attention being devoted to the long-term progress of the disorder 
and the ongoing care for which it calls. At present the condition can only be delayed, but not permanently 
held in check, so that persons with dementia are confronted with progressively declining autonomy and 
an increasing need for help. Precisely in this situation, allowing scope for the exercise of whatever degree 
of self-determination is still possible is positively demanded by the respect we owe to every individual. 
It is therefore all the more important to discover and facilitate the perception and promotion of, and 
respect for, the remaining self-determination of people with dementia. This calls for a posture of atten-
tiveness	that	is	based	on	the	concrete	needs	of	the	affected	person	and	reflects	the	approach	of	‘assisted	
self-determination’.

The  German  Ethics  Council  notes  that  the  principles  of  attentive  treatment  of  people  with  dementia 
whereby their self-determination is supported for as long as possible are observed with great commit-
ment in many families and care homes. The caring family members and professional nursing staff with-
out whose ongoing dedication the current level of care could not be maintained deserve all possible rec-
ognition	and	support.	However,	great	efforts	are	called	for	on	the	part	of	society	as	a	whole	if	the	care	of	
people with dementia is still to be guaranteed in the future. To this end, the German Ethics Council has 
drawn up a total of 16 recommendations, the most important of which are outlined below.

•	 The German Ethics Council supports the federal government’s aim of developing a national action 
plan for dementia with a view to coordinating the work of all actors involved so as to achieve 
nationwide improvement of the medical, nursing and social care of people with dementia. This 
will also help to strengthen the social inclusion of people with dementia and to acknowledge their 
entitlement to self-determination.

•	 The concept of long-term care needs should be reviewed to take adequate account of the self-

determination potential of persons with dementia and the resulting nursing tasks.

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

19

•	 The	work	of	caring	family	members	requires	effective	support	and	financial	recognition.	Consid-
eration should be given to seeking the help of people familiar with caring in the home environment 
to nurse a person with dementia in hospital too.

•	 Greater	financial	support	should	be	given	to	outpatient	communal	housing	and	residential	com-
munities for persons with dementia. These include in particular assisted-living communities close 
to the homes of those concerned, offering an environment permitting self-determination in which 
professional nursing staff and family members work together.

•	 Fundamental	research	in	the	field	of	dementia	should	be	assisted	mainly	in	the	form	of	transla-
tional research directed towards clinical applications. The support given should also extend to 
research on the aspects of clinical medicine and nursing science, psychosocial issues and accom-
panying ethico-legal research and research on care provision.

•	 To preserve and protect the self-determination potential of persons with dementia, the principles 
of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which extend equally to people 
with dementia, should be consistently applied.

•	 The willingness of family members to undertake voluntary care should be reinforced by practical 

support in the process of care and by societal recognition.

•	

In evaluation of the applicability of an advance directive, expressions of the will to live by a patient 
who lacks decision-making capacity should be taken into account. In cases where the presence of 
decision-making	competence	cannot	be	reliably	ruled	out,	life-affirming	utterances	should	always	
take priority over statements to the contrary in an advance directive owing to the irreversibility of 
abstaining from life-preserving measures.

In  a  dissenting  position  statement,  council  Member  Volker  Gerhardt  expressed  misgivings  on  two 
aspects.	The	first	concerns	the	irrevocable	loss	of	personality	that	accompanies	the	increasing	decline	
in self-determination — a  factor that must on no account be minimised. The second is the question 
of  a  wish  to  commit  suicide,  which  is  particularly  relevant  in  dementia  in  view  of  the  problems  of 
self-determination.

The opinion can be accessed (in German) at http://www.ethikrat.org. An English and French translation 
will be available in due course.

Further information
Dr Joachim Vetter 
Head	of	Office		 	

Address
German Ethics Council  
Jaegerstrasse 22/23 
10117 Berlin 
GERMANY 
Tel. +49 3020370242  
Fax +49 3020370252 
E-mail: vetter@ethikrat.org  
Website: http://www.ethikrat.org 

Ulrike Florian
Press	and	public	relations	officer

German Ethics Council
Jaegerstrasse 22/23
10117 Berlin
GERMANY
Tel. +49 3020370246
Fax +49 3020370252
E-mail: florian@ethikrat.org
Website: http://www.ethikrat.org

20 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

 
 
	
	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GREECE

The Hellenic National Bioethics Commission

A. Current work

Currently the commission is discussing ‘Enhancement of human characteristics: physical, mental and 
cognitive’.

Please note that the full text (in PDF format) of all opinions and reports issued by the commission, in 
English, can be found at the following URL: http://www.bioethics.gr/category.php?category_id=55 or 
can be requested from the Secretariat, Secretariat@bioethics.gr.

B. Seminars on bio-law

The	 commission	 continues	 to	 organise	 the	 seminar	 series	 on	 bio-law	 which	 was	 first	 launched	 in	
February 2010.

This initiative, which is addressed mainly at young scientists (lawyers, physicians and sociologists) aims 
at	inspiring	participants	in	their	work	and	at	supporting	the	development	of	the	new	field	of	bio-law	in	
Greece.

The seminars are held once per month either at the premises of the commission or at the premises of 
another institution or organisation of the public sector which hosts the event. The participants present 
their	work	on	a	specific	bioethical	issue,	and	the	presentation	is	followed	by	discussion	led	by	a	com-
mentator. So far there have been presentations on the following subjects: ethical status of the foetus, 
euthanasia, clinical trials, biobanks, patents, surrogacy, genetic data, social media, biopiracy, rights of 
the mentally ill, QUALY’s, medical guidelines, etc.

C. A new educational initiative

Since January 2013, the commission organises an integrated educational programme of seminars aiming 
at an introduction to bioethical topics. The programme, which will last up to June, consists of 12 2-hour 
meetings that can be attended by undergraduate and postgraduate students as well as graduates of higher 
academic institutions. The number of participants will be limited to 15 (prioritised in order of submis-
sion	of	the	application,	for	which	some	proof	of	experience	on	the	topic	will	be	required).	A	certificate	of	
participation will be issued to those who attended the programme. Registration is free.

D. Communicative tools 

Since October 2008 the commission’s newsletter Bio-ethica has proved to be a most valuable tool for 
communication  of  the  commission  with  the  general  public.  The  newsletter  includes  announcements, 
news and events of the commission, international news related to bioethics, book reviews and informa-
tion on local and international bioethics meetings or conferences and is sent to an extensive list of recipi-
ents in Greece, at the end of every month.

E. ‘Bioethics goes to school’

On	22	November	2011,	the	commission	launched	an	educational	initiative	welcoming	for	the	first	time	
in its premises 15 high-school students, in order to inform them about bioethical issues, especially about 
stem cells and cloning. An enthusiastic dialogue was triggered between the students and the representa-
tives of the commission.

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

21

The ‘Bioethics goes to school’ activity continues successfully with a total of six interested schools par-
ticipating so far.

For more information:

http://www.bioethics.gr/document.php?category_id=97&document_id=1317

F. Past and future conferences organised under the auspices of the commission

•	 11 June 2012: Conference on ‘Genetic tests — bioethical dilemmas’. This was organised by the 
Hellenic	Association	of	Medical	Geneticists	under	the	auspices	of	the	commission	and	took	place	
at the history museum of the University of Athens.

•	 11 December 2012: Conference on ‘Genetics in the service of health — genetic tests, prenatal 
diagnosis, in vitro fertilisation — contemporary challenges and dilemmas’. This was organised by 
the	Institute	of	Biomedical	Science	Golden	Helix	under	the	auspices	of	the	commission	and	hosted	
by the Eugenides Foundation.

G. Participation in meetings

•	 The	commission	regularly	participates	—	upon	invitation	of	scientific	institutions,	universities	or	

other academic institutes — at meetings/conferences/workshops held in Greece. 

•	 The commission participated — upon invitation — at the 18th national ethics councils (NECs) 
forum  in  Nicosia  organised  under  the  auspices  of  the  EU’s  Cypriot  Presidency  by  the  Cyprus 
National Bioethics Committee (3 and 4 October 2012). The commission was represented by Pro-
fessor Theocharis Patargias, Member.

Further information
Mrs Marianna Dracopoulou
Head	of	Secretariat

Address
47, Evelpidon str.
113 62 Athens
GREECE 
Tel. +30 2108847700
Fax +30 2108847701 
E-mail: Secretariat@bioethics.gr
Website: http://www.bioethics.gr 

22 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

ITALY

Update on the National Bioethics Committee’s activities in 2012

Opinions

•	 Bioethical aspects of aesthetic and reconstructive surgery (21 June 2012)

The opinion emphasises the unacceptability of disproportionate intervention, as it is excessively 
invasive	or	unnecessarily	risky	in	relation	to	the	possible	benefits	required	by	the	patient.	Inter-
vention on minors and those lacking the capacity to consent may be done in their exclusive and 
objective interest in terms of health. The committee believes that there should be adequate social 
information	and	education	regarding	the	risks	and	benefits	of	aesthetic	surgery	and	it	calls	for	
greater rigour in the formation and professionalism of plastic surgeons. As regards reconstructive 
surgery, the National Bioethics Committee (NBC) believes that these operations, although not 
essential for the survival of the patient and despite still being therapeutically experimental, are 
nevertheless	ethically	justifiable,	subject	to	careful	assessment	of	the	risks	and	benefits,	in	relation	
to general considerations of the quality-of-life improvement of the patient. The NBC encourages 
public awareness campaigns for the donation of external organs and tissues, as normally takes 
place for the donation of internal ones.

•	 Conscious objection and bioethics (12 July 2012)

On the legal side, the new frontiers of bioethics increasingly pose new challenges to the constitu-
tional, democratic and pluralist state to avoid imposing obligations contrary to consciously exploit-
ing those who exercise a profession or at least protect conscious objection when inviolable human 
rights	are	at	stake	without	stifling	the	principle	of	legality.	Therefore,	legally	sustainable	conscious 
objections	should	not	restrict	or	make	more	difficult	the	exercise	of	rights	conferred	by	law	nor	
weaken the bonds of solidarity deriving from common membership to the social body. Several 
recommendations  are  derived  from  these  conclusions:  in  the  protection  of  conscious  objection 
which ensues from its being constitutionally founded, it is necessary to take adequate measures to 
ensure the provision of services, taking care not to discriminate either objectors or non-objectors, 
and therefore the organisation of tasks and recruitment that can balance, on the basis of available 
data, objectors or non-objectors.

•	 On the communication of the national health system to patients on the costs of health services 

(28 September 2012)

In	response	to	a	question	addressed	by	the	Minister	of	Health,	the	NBC	examines	the	various	
issues  that  justify  direct  communication  to  the  patient  (transparency  by  the  state/regions,  the 
assumption of responsibility by citizens) and the opposing arguments (the possible attribution of 
guilt to the patient and the introduction of an economic logic in healthcare).

The NBC, albeit the diversity of positions within it, expressed itself unanimously on the modalities 
of communication (possible for some members, required for others). The NBC recommends the 
communication be given by an ad hoc document, with appropriate modalities and not included in 
the medical record in order to avoid discriminations and forms of attribution of guilt to the patient 
while safeguarding the privacy of personal data concerning health. The committee underlines the 
need for this communication to be included in a context of global education of society, in order to 
grasp the relationship between individual health and social health in order to underline the close 
link between individual and social health.

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

23

•	 Food animal production and animal welfare (28 September 2012)

The NBC, in the context of the recognition of the primacy of human life and health, favours bio-
culture ethics which makes it possible to eliminate a concept of the animal exclusively as a means 
of satisfaction of human needs and interests. This position is based on the advanced indicators of 
animal	welfare	that	allow	a	scientifically	satisfactory	definition	of	ethologically	and	physiologi-
cally appropriate breeding conditions. On such basis, the committee recommends the promotion 
of an enterprise and food-chain culture aimed at a solid appreciation of the value of human respon-
sibility towards animal welfare, suggesting the adoption of a labelling system which would allow 
consumers to identify these products. The committee recommends the highlighting of the central 
role of the veterinary surgeon in assessing the animals’ living conditions and in recognising the 
parameters of their well-being.

•	 Clinical trials in adult or minor patients who are unable to give informed consent in emergency 

situations (28 October 2012)

The committee, stressing the central need to protect the subject’s rights, safeguard and well-being, 
in case the patient is unable to express valid informed consent and in the absence of a legal repre-
sentative,	justifies	the	licitness	of	trials	in	emergency	situations	on	certain	conditions:	the	approval	
of a protocol based on solid experimental evidence adopted by an independent national ethics 
committee established ad hoc and composed by doctors and nurses expert in the sector, jurists, 
forensic	scientists,	patients’	rights	representatives	and	bioethicists;	the	verification	of	a	possible	
previous opposing will expressed by the patient; the request for a differed consent by the patient 
or his/her legal representative; and the publication of the trial results in order to avoid useless 
duplications.

Motions

•	 Motion	to	complete	the	ratification	procedure	of	the	Oviedo	convention	(24	February	2012)

Since	the	ratification	instrument,	Act	No	145/2001,	has	not	yet	been	registered,	the	NBC	under-
lines	 the	 need	 to	 conclude	 the	 ratification	 process	 and	 to	 examine	 all	 the	 issues	 related	 to	 the	
completion	of	the	ratification	from	a	bioethical	perspective,	including	an	indication	of	potential	
conditions	and	modifications	of	the	domestic	law	and	regulations.

•	 Declaration on the document ‘Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the 
Council on clinical trials on medicinal products for human use, and repealing Directive 2001/20/
EC’ (17 July 2012)

The declaration highlights certain elements which are approved and others which cause concern 
in	ethical	terms.	The	need	for	simplification	and	centralisation	of	administrative	procedures,	the	
search for ways to reduce excessive bureaucratisation, in order on the one hand to ensure the inter-
ests of the patient, avoiding unnecessary delays, and on the other to ensure European competitive-
ness	internationally,	are	appreciated	in	principle.	However,	the	NBC	points	out	that	the	carrying	
out of the indicated procedures in a very short time could compromise patient protection. The 
committee criticises the lack of an explicit reference to ethics committees as assessment bodies for 
clinical experimentation evaluation.

Working groups

Body donation to research; bioethical issues in the treatment of mental disabilities; military bioethics and 
enhancement; neuroscience and enhancement; ethics committees; synthetic biology.

24 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

Events

•	 National  bioethics  conference  for  schools:  ‘Good  to  eat’  bioethics,  nutrition  and  food  safety 

(11 and 12 October 2012, Salerno, Italy)

The	 conference	 was	 held	 over	 2	 days:	 the	 first	 day	 of	 the	 conference	 was	 dedicated	 to	 food,	
stressing the importance of educating pupils; the second day was dedicated to food security with 
the	participation	of	veterinarians	from	the	Ministry	of	Health,	the	European	Food	Safety	Authority	
(EFSA), the region and the local health department of Salerno.

•	

International conference on the role and functions of bioethical committees (23 November 2012, 
Rome, Italy)

The conference was held with the participation of the President of the EGE, Prof. Julian Kinder-
lerer; the President of the International Bioethics Committee of Unesco, Prof. Stefano Semplici; 
the	President	of	the	Nuffield	Council	on	Bioethics	(United	Kingdom),	Prof.	Jonathan	Montgomery;	
Member of the Comité Consultatif National d’Ethique pour les sciences de la vie et de la santé, 
Prof. Patrick Gaudray; and the Vice-Chair of the Deutscher Ethikrat, Prof. Peter Dabrock. The 
initiative aimed to promote dialogue between members representing different European bioethics 
committees on the functions and roles of bioethics committees at national and international level.

Further information
Prof. Laura Palazzani
Vice-President of the Italian Bioethics Committee
Full Professor of Philosophy of Law at Lumsa University (Italy)

Dr	Marina	Bonfili
Member	of	the	Scientific	Secretariat	of	the	Italian	Committee	for	Bioethics

Address
Comitato Nazionale per la Bioetica
via della Mercede 96
00197 Rome RM
ITALY 
Tel. +39 0667794601
Fax +39 0667794686 
E-mail: cnbbioetica@palazzochigi.it; palazzani@lumsa.it; mbonfili@palazzochigi.it 
Website: http://www.governo.it/BIOETICA 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

25

MALTA

IVF law

After 20 years of unregulated in vitro fertilisation (IVF) practice and 9 years of political debate, Malta 
finally	has	a	law	regulating	IVF	practice.	The	Bioethics	Consultative	Committee	(BCC)	played	a	sig-
nificant	part	in	reaching	the	social	consensus	necessary	for	the	passage	of	this	act	which	needed	to	be	in	
line with the social value norms held by Maltese society. The law does not only regulate IVF procedures, 
but also touches on other bioethical issues such as embryo testing, gamete donation, cloning, hybrid and 
chimera use, germ line gene therapy and stem cell use. The title of the act was inspired from the German 
law and termed the Embryo Protection Act.

The act strives to allow IVF to treat infertility for married couples and those in stable relationships and 
will make the treatment available free of charge at state hospitals. It became active on 1 January 2013. 
One interesting feature about the act is that it will not allow the freezing of human embryos as a regu-
lar part of the IVF procedure except in very rare life-threatening contingent situations which would be 
a threat to the embryo’s life itself. One such condition is the death or illness of the mother after fertilisa-
tion	has	already	taken	place.	Instead	of	embryo	freezing,	a	new	technique	called	oocyte	vitrification	will	
become	the	norm	used	with	no	more	than	three	oocytes	fertilised	and	transferred	in	difficult	cases,	but	
with	a	preferable	option	of	one	or	two	according	to	circumstances	for	both	artificial	insemination	and	
IVF.	Oocyte	vitrification	techniques	have	recently	been	shown	to	be	equally	effective	as	embryo	freezing	
techniques in obtaining pregnancy rates. This avoids the high embryo destruction rates associated with 
embryo freezing, a rate which runs into hundreds of thousands in all centres which use this technique.

Maltese society holds dear the principal that a human being occurs after the oocyte has been fertilised 
by the sperm and that this human being ought to be protected. All parties in parliament subscribe to this 
principle.	Human	embryology	gives	scientific	credence	to	this	position	and	rendering	the	sacrifice	of	
human lives in order to solve the fertility problems of infertile couples would be deemed consequentialist 
at the least and a gross disrespect to human life at its most fragile moment. This act shows that science 
and ethics can indeed move hand in hand! Information on the act may be obtained from http://www.gov.
mt by clicking on the parliament link and downloading the published Act XXI of 2012.

Below is a history of the contribution to the national debate by the BCC, prepared by the BCC secretary, 
Ms Maryanne Ciappara.

Medically assisted procreation — the contribution of the BCC

The following is a list of the major events.

1992

‘Reproductive  technology:  ethical  and  legal  considerations’,  report  of  the  subcommittee, 
National Bioethics Committee, 1992.

The document was extensively discussed at two separate seminars held at the Department 
of	Health.

2000

‘Ethical considerations relating to human reproductive technology’, report of the Bioethics 
Consultative Committee, 2000.

This document was discussed at the symposium on reproductive technology.

2004

The BCC started revising the document of 2000, however this had to be interrupted in order 
to participate in a prolonged consultation process with a Select Parliamentary Committee on 
Social Affairs.

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

27

2004–5 Members of the BCC were invited to make verbal or written submissions on various aspects 
of  medically  assisted  procreation  before  the  Select  Parliamentary  Committee  on  Social 
Affairs  between  2004  and  2005  which  was  to  advise  parliament  in  the  drafting  of  the 
legislation on medically assisted procreation. Proceedings of the meetings were published in 
a	detailed	report	on	medically	assisted	procreation	by	the	House	of	Representatives	in	2005.	

2005

2005

2009

Conference  on  ‘Bioethics  and  the  family’  in  collaboration  with  the  Family  Commission 
organised in April 2005. Prof. Agostino was the guest speaker, who expanded on the Italian 
law on reproductive technology.

The	BCC	responded	to	questions	from	the	Minister	of	Foreign	Affairs,	Hon.	Dr	Tonio	Borg,	
on a number of issues related to medically assisted procreation.

A	draft	bill	on	embryo	protection	was	sent	to	the	BCC	by	Hon.	Dr	Joseph	Cassar,	Parlia-
mentary	Secretary	for	Health,	for	an	opinion.	The	BCC	discussed	in	depth	the	draft	bill.	It	
agreed that IVF should be offered to heterosexual couples, no gamete donation should be 
accepted and counselling should be given for prospective parents, and it called for the setting 
up of an independent regulatory authority. There was no consensus on the number of eggs 
to be fertilised.

The draft bill with the amendments, accompanied by a detailed letter explaining the clauses on 
which	there	was	no	consensus,	and	concerns	of	the	BCC	were	sent	to	Hon.	Minister	John	Dalli,	
then	Minister	for	Social	Policy,	and	Hon.	Dr	Cassar,	Parliamentary	Secretary	for	Health.

The draft bill with the amendments together with the concerns of the BCC were send to the 
Minister	of	Justice,	Hon.	Dr	Carmelo	Mifsud	Bonnici,	and	were	later	discussed	with	the	
minister during a meeting held for this purpose.

2009–10 A parliamentary committee was set up to discuss legislation on assisted procreation. The 
committee was asked specially to discuss three issues, these were: the eligibility of couples 
to treatment, the freezing of embryos and the donation of gametes. These issues were left 
open in the report of the Social Affairs Committee, 2005. Members of the BCC were invited 
to make written submissions on these issues. The Parliamentary Committee on Medically 
Assisted Procreation presented its report in October 2010.

The  BCC,  after  discussing  the  report,  issued  a  press  release,  amplifying  its  opinion.  It 
objected to the freezing of embryos and noted that not enough importance was given to tech-
nological	developments	which	would	allow	the	vitrification	of	oocytes.

2011

The	BCC	continued	its	trust	in	the	vitrification	of	oocytes	as	an	alternative	to	the	freezing	
of embryos.

A	 presentation	 on	 the	 vitrification	 of	 oocytes	 was	 made	by	 the	 Chairman	 of	 the	 BCC	at	
a conference on medically assisted procreation.

The	case	for	the	vitrification	of	oocytes	was	made	at	the	meeting	of	the	Social	Affairs	Com-
mittee. The Social Affairs Committee had reconvened with the objective of evaluating the 
vitrification	of	oocytes	as	an	alternative	to	the	freezing	of	embryos	following	public	objec-
tions by the lobby group, Professionals Against Embryo Freezing (PAEF).

The report of the Social Affairs Committee was presented to parliament.

A conference on medically assisted procreation and freezing techniques was organised in 
May 2011. Guest speakers were Dr Eleonora Porcu, Assisted Reproduction Unit attached to 
the	School	of	Medicine	at	the	University	of	Bologna,	and	Dr	Helen	Watt,	Senior	Research	
Fellow at the Anscombe Bioethics Centre, Oxford. 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

2011

2011

28 

2012

2012

Issues	relating	to	medically	assisted	procreations	were	discussed	at	a	meeting	with	Hon.	Dr	
Chris Said, Minister for Justice. The BCC continued its discussions and representations on 
medically assisted procreation.

The Embryo Protection Bill was published in mid-summer and was open for consultation. 
Submissions on the bill were made by members of the BCC. The issues raised included the 
Embryo Protection Authority, and the number of embryos to be transferred to the uterus. It 
was noted that apart from some details surrounding these two issues, the bill included all the 
principles that the BCC had submitted to the authorities in the amended draft bill in 2009. 
These issues were later consensually resolved.

2012

The  Embryo  Protection  Act,  Act  XXI  of  2012,  was  passed  through  parliament  on 
26 November.

Dr Michael Asciak MD, M.Phil, PhD
Chairman

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

29

PORTUGAL

The National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences 

Name: Conselho Nacional de Ética para as Ciências da Vida (CNECV) (National Council of Ethics for 
the Life Sciences).

Year of establishment: the CNECV was set up in 1990 pursuant to Law No 14/90 of 9 June as an inde-
pendent	consultative	body.	Having	entered	its	fourth	term	of	office	(2009–14),	the	CNECV	currently	
functions adjunct to the Portuguese parliament — Law No 24/2009 of 29 May.

Remit of the CNECV: to analyse and give opinions regarding the ethical problems which arise from 
scientific	 progress	 in	 the	 fields	 of	 biology,	 medicine	 or	 general	 healthcare	 and	 the	 life	 sciences.	 The	
council has been involved in publicly debating current ethical themes and organising and participating 
in	national	and	international	events.	The	CNECV	strives	to	fulfill	its	responsibilities	and	to	stimulate	the	
bioethics debate at all levels of society.

Recent opinions

64/CNECV/2012	—	Opinion	on	a	decision	model	for	financing	the	cost	of	medicines:	The request 
made	by	His	Excellency	the	Minister	of	Health	concerned	the	drafting	of	an	opinion	on	the	ethical	basis	
for	the	funding	of	three	groups	of	drugs,	namely	retroviral	drugs	for	HIV+	patients,	oncologic	drugs	and	
biological drugs in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. The request for an opinion stated clearly that the 
measures	in	question	fall	into	the	need	for	the	sustainability	of	the	National	Health	Service	(NHS)	and	
points out that ensuring access to healthcare for all citizens is essential.

Among	other	considerations,	the	CNECV	stated	that	there	is	an	ethical	foundation	for	the	NHS	to	pro-
mote measures to contain the costs of medicines. Such measures should be based on a transparent and 
participative decision model in order to ensure the most equitable and balanced distribution of existing 
resources. In this sense, the principle of accountability for reasonableness implies the involvement of 
civil society and health professionals in the decision-making process, and all should make the respective 
declaration	of	conflict	of	interest,	to	which	there	is	public	access.

Furthermore, in decisions on cost rationalisation, it should be made clear that the fundamental choices are 
between ‘the cheapest of the best’ (drugs of proven effectiveness) and not about ‘the best of the cheapest’.

The CNECV considered it urgent to identify situations of inequality in access to medicines by different 
groups of patients, in order to try to prevent ethically unacceptable situations.

The council also recommended that, as part of their ethics training, training content on this issue must be 
introduced in the core curriculum required at pre- and post-graduate level in the health courses, allowing 
professionals to make fairer and more responsible decisions.

Moreover, models of accountability of expenditure on health should be developed and applied, allowing 
in a clear manner for everyone to know the criteria used.

In	drugs	subsidised	by	the	NHS,	the	CNECV	underlined	the	urgency	to	re-evaluate	current	spending	in	
terms of cost-opportunity and cost-effectiveness, with possible substitutions, disinvestments or suspen-
sions. Indeed, the debate cannot be limited to containment of additional costs, but to make better use of 
existing	resources	and	to	fight	waste	and	inefficiency	in	health.

In any case, the CNECV considers that it is essential to not undermine the trust connection and therapeu-
tic alliance between patients and health professionals.

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

31

The	CNECV	paid	particular	attention	to	reflection	on	this	theme	in	its	seminar	‘Ethical	grounds	in	health	
priorities,’ held on 29 November 2011 at the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation, Lisbon (CNECV, 2012).

65/CNECV/2012 — Opinion on the quality and safety legal framework for the donation, procure-
ment, testing, processing, preservation, storage, distribution and application of organs of human 
origin: At	the	request	of	the	Deputy	Secretary	of	State	to	the	Minister	of	Health,	the	CNECV	issued	an	
opinion on the draft bill for the establishment of ‘standards to ensure the quality and safety of organs of 
human origin intended for transplantation to the human body, in order to ensure a high level of human 
health protection’, thus transposing into national law Directive 2010/53/EU of the European Parliament 
and of the Council of 7 July 2010 on standards of quality and safety of organs intended for transplantation.

It is apparent that the extensive therapeutic use of organs for transplantation requires that the quality and 
safety of these organs is ensured so as to minimise any risk of disease transmission. Thus, the need to 
ensure that the organs of human origin intended for transplantation meet the quality and safety criteria 
common	to	all	the	Member	States	is	justified,	in	an	effort	to	standardise	that	reflects	at	the	outset	the	
reality of this ever-increasing exchange of organs, tissues and cells of human origin at international level.

The ethical framework in this matter is based on the fundamental values of respect for the autonomy and 
integrity of the individual, including the need for consent, even if presumed in accordance with already 
established terms, and also on values of solidarity and altruism.

In  turn,  the  safety  and  quality  of  the  transplant  procedure  are  also  ethical  benchmarks  to  take  into 
account.	Such	values	are	reflected	in	the	importance	of	maximising	the	success	of	the	technique	with	
minimal risk to the health of both the donor and the recipient. Recognising, however, that the risks asso-
ciated with the procedures cannot be completely eliminated, the assessment of risks and their impact 
must be ensured in casu, along with an accurate and detailed record of all relevant information. This 
includes the need for following up living donors and recipients, monitoring and managing adverse reac-
tions and acting accordingly, both nationally and in the cases of organ exchange with third countries.

The CNECV considered of relevant ethical value to promote coherent and uniform legislation that guar-
antees the quality of the acts of transplantation, as well as safeguarding the health and integrity of both 
donors and recipients. In this regard, the proposed draft bill did not raise substantial ethical objections, 
since there remain the fundamental aspects of respect for autonomy and integrity, information and con-
sent,	gratuitousness	and	beneficence.

However,	the	manner	of	coordinating	the	competencies	of	the	competent	authorities	must	still	be	defined	
clearly, in order to avoid situations of overlapping or cooperation failures that result in loss to the citizens.

In the special case of donors that are minors or adult donors who are disabled, the special restrictions on 
admissibility	of	the	donation	or	procurement	should	find	reinforcement.

Also,	the	system	for	recording	and	safeguarding	the	confidentiality	of	donor	and	recipient	identification	
should be subject to detailed regulations, clarifying the permissions and the degree of access to data by 
the	different	professionals	and	entities	involved,	as	well	as	defining	the	specific	mechanisms	to	guarantee	
data safety.

66/CNECV/2012 — Opinion on draft Bills No 266/2012 and No 323/2012 on clinical research and 
clinical trials: The	importance	and	significance	of	the	search	for	biological	knowledge	and	truth	and	the	
extraordinary	contribution	that	scientific	advances	have	provided	to	human	life	is	universally	recognised,	
both	in	its	quantitative	parameter	and	in	its	quality,	as	are	the	social	and	economic	benefits	that	such	
research brings. All these gains would not, by themselves, justify resorting to human beings for experi-
ments, whose risk can be estimated or calculated, but never fully anticipated. In addition to a classical 
utilitarian criterion — clinical research results as a very appreciable good to a large number of people — 
one must use other criteria of ethical reasoning.

32 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

In this regard, and bearing in mind that the progress achieved by the clinical studies and trials cannot be 
achieved solely by other means, the lawfulness of those studies and trials is established, based on values 
of	solidarity	and	altruism	to	achieve	enormous	benefits	for	the	health	of	patients,	for	individual	members	
of the community or for the community as a whole, through the voluntary and conscious participation of 
a few in such studies and trials.

Consequently,	it	is	essential	that	the	scientific	activity	is	accomplished	within	a	legal	framework	that	
guarantees its appropriateness, quality and relevance, and above all protects the human rights of the 
participants — physical and psychological integrity, as well as the dignity of the participants, must be 
guaranteed, not to mention the supreme good that is life.

At the same time, the authorities should recognise that the community must be informed in a transparent 
way	on	aspects	of	the	research	related,	among	other	factors,	to	risks,	benefits	or	results,	which	may	be	
both positive and negative.

Having	found	no	global	ethical	objections	the	CNECV	understood,	however,	that	the	draft	bills	in	question	
should	be	corrected	and	improved,	taking	into	account	various	aspects,	among	which	a	better	definition	of	
‘adverse event’, which in fact is confused with ‘adverse reaction’; the need to clarify the somewhat ambigu-
ous	definition	of	‘researcher’,	and	to	determine	with	more	precision	the	professional	and	scientific	qualifi-
cations of the main researcher; the requirements regarding ‘clinical study participants’; and the ‘declaration 
of	conflicts	of	interest’	on	the	part	of	the	sponsors	or	health	professionals	involved	in	clinical	trials.

The CNECV also recommended that placebo-controlled studies must be limited to situations where there 
are no alternatives, favouring the trial as opposed to known therapies and recognised as effective, the 
only way to ascertain the true therapeutic innovation that the new drug brings.

As for the proposed establishment of a national network of health ethics committees, the council found 
it ethically necessary and urgent to tackle this issue in the context of a possible revision of Decree-Law 
No 97/95 of 10 May, which regulates the health ethics committees in Portugal.

The above opinions have been fully translated into English and are already available on the council’s 
website — http://www.cnecv.pt/pareceres.php English version.

Update on recent activity

•	 First joint meeting CNECV/health care committees — Lisbon, 14 June 2012.

•	 Third  joint  meeting  on  bioethics  CNECV/Spanish  Bioethics  Committee  (CBE)  —  Porto, 

1 October 2012.

Upcoming conference: ‘Bioethics and religions’ — Lisbon, 7 December 2012

This seminar is a joint organisation with the Luso-American Development Foundation (FLAD). It aims 
to  provide  a  unique  opportunity  for  a  plural  debate  on  ethical  issues  regarding  the  dialectic  relation 
between bioethics and several of the most representative monotheistic religions, bringing together the 
scientific	community,	the	media	and	the	general	public.

Current work and forthcoming opinions 

The CNECV is currently preparing new opinions on the following topics.

•	

•	

‘Ethical	aspects	of	umbilical	cord	blood	banks’:	a	joint	discussion	with	the	CBE	on	the	benefits	
and harms of umbilical cord blood banking, having in mind the current legal framework in both 
countries, as well as the ongoing debate on private vs public blood cord banks.

‘The regulation of genetic testing’: at the request of the Deputy Secretary of State to the Minister 
of	Health,	the	CNECV	is	drafting	an	opinion	regarding	the	draft	bill	that	establishes	the	principles	

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

33

•	

•	

inherent to genetic testing, as well as the rules presiding to the protection of genetic data in terms 
of	access,	security,	confidentiality	and	privacy.	The	proposed	draft	bill	aims	at	regulating	a	section	
of Law No 12/2005 of 26 January on personal genetic data and health information.

‘Ethics	in	public	health’:	this	reflection	aspires	to	highlighting	the	ethical	questions	which	arise	out	
of public health choices, in the context of the multiple philosophical perspectives therein. It also 
aims at proposing a model for analysis which will serve as a reference for ethical deliberation in 
public health.

‘Ethics	and	the	use	of	potable	water’:	according	to	the	WHO,	approximately	1	billion	people	world-
wide have no access to potable water. This has a tendency to increase, which brings to the fore-
front	of	the	ethical	reflection	the	value	of	potable	water.	Clean	water	is	a	non-renewable	resource.	
Access to clean water is thus regarded as a fundamental human right. The CNECV will debate the 
necessity of ensuring high-quality drinkable water, its importance in healthcare and the equality 
in the access for all to such a precious natural resource.

Further information
Miguel Oliveira da Silva
President
mos@cnecv.pt

Michel Renaud
Vice-President
mrenaud@cnecv.pt

Cíntia Águas
Executive Secretary
caguas@cnecv.pt

Address
National Council of Ethics for the Life Sciences
Avenida D. Carlos I, n.º 146 – 2º Esq.
1200-651 Lisbon
PORTUGAL 
Tel. +351 213910884
Fax +351 213917509 
E-mail: geral@cnecv.pt 
Website: http://www.cnecv.pt

34 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

UNITED KINGDOM

The	Nuffield	Council	on	Bioethics

The	Nuffield	Council	on	Bioethics	is	an	independent	body	that	examines	and	reports	on	ethical	issues	in	
biology and medicine. Its role is to provide independent advice to policymakers and to stimulate debate 
in	bioethics.	The	council	was	established	by	the	Nuffield	Foundation	in	1991,	and	since	1994	it	has	been	
funded jointly by the foundation, the Wellcome Trust and the Medical Research Council.

Novel techniques for the prevention of mitochondrial DNA disorders: an ethical review

The Council published its report, ‘Novel techniques for the prevention of mitochondrial DNA disorders: 
ethical issues’, in June 2012. This report considers the ethical issues raised by IVF techniques being 
developed to prevent through the donation of mitochondria the transmission of mitochondrial DNA dis-
orders that can cause severely debilitating symptoms and premature death. The report is intended to 
promote and support further debate on the ethical suitability and legality of these techniques and it con-
cluded that:

•	 provided	that	the	techniques	are	proved	to	be	sufficiently	safe	and	effective,	and	an	appropriate	
level of information and support is offered, it would be ethical for families to use these techniques 
as treatment;

•	 subject to appropriate oversight, it is ethical to continue to research these techniques, in order that 
they	can	be	considered	for	treatment	use.	The	wider	policy	debate	could	benefit	from	a	fuller	dis-
cussion of the ethics of other possible future germline therapies for genetic disorders.

The	report	received	significant	media	coverage	at	the	time	of	launch	and	subsequently	when	the	United	
Kingdom’s	Human	Fertilisation	and	Embryology	Authority	(HFEA)	launched	a	public	consultation	on	
the issue in September 2012.

Emerging biotechnologies: technology, choice and the public good

Biotechnologies  play  an  important  role  in  many  areas  fundamental  to  our  well-being  and  way  of  life, 
including medicine, industry and agriculture. The potential of emerging biotechnologies seems enormous, 
yet	the	form	and	directions	they	take	are	not	a	given,	nor	are	the	benefits	self-evident.	In	practice,	only	
a fraction of the technologies that are possible can actually ever be fully realised, as particular develop-
ments	take	place,	others	are	foreclosed.	How	can	our	society	make	ethical	choices	about	such	technologies?

In December 2012, the Council published a report, ‘Emerging biotechnologies: technology, choice and 
the	public	good’,	which	identifies	and	examines	common	features	among	emerging	biotechnologies	and	
the particular challenges they pose. It develops an ethical approach for responding to these challenges, 
and makes recommendations that can help guide improved practice in policymaking, in research and in 
regulation	to	maximise	the	socially	beneficial	and	democratically	accountable	governance	of	emerging	
biotechnologies.

Donor conception: ethical aspects of information disclosure

Parents of people conceived using donor eggs or sperm may or may not choose to tell them about their 
genetic origins. Is this a private family matter, or are there wider public interests at stake? What kind of 
information might donor-conceived people and their parents need about their genetic origin? What inter-
ests do donors have in receiving information? This project considers the ethical issues that arise around 
the	disclosure	of	information	in	connection	with	donor-conceived	people,	and	will	publish	its	findings	in	
spring 2013.

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

35

Novel neurotechnologies: intervening in the brain

This project is exploring the ethical, social and legal issues arising from novel neurotechnologies such 
as deep brain stimulation, brain–computer interfaces (BCI) and neuron replacement therapy. The work-
ing	party	has	been	informed	by	a	public	consultation,	followed	by	a	series	of	fact	finding	meetings	with	
experts,	researchers	and	regulators	in	the	field.	A	report	is	expected	to	be	published	in	summer	2013.

Strategic plan

Following the completion of a wide ranging strategic review in 2011/12, the council has published a stra-
tegic plan for the period 2012–16. The plan sets out a number of objectives for the council’s work and 
outlines	specific	ways	in	which	we	will	address	our	key	priorities	over	the	coming	years,	including:

•	 diversity of input, ensuring that as wide a range of people as possible are able to contribute to our 

work;

•	 ensuring a wide reach so that both the policy impact and promotion of public debate is maximised;

•	 making sure our processes and decision-making are transparent, enabling stakeholders to see how 

we operate and how people can interact with the council;

•	 evaluation of the quality, reach and impact of our work.

Future projects

The council has decided to establish a new work theme to examine the ethical issues raised by sharing 
and linking health and biological data; this will begin in early 2013. Later in 2013 the council will start 
a project on the ethical issues raised by children taking part in medical research.

Outreach and educational activities

The council has set up a new blog where the chair, council members and others will write stories and 
comment on contemporary bioethics issues including, but not limited to, those covered in the council’s 
current and previous projects.

In	September	the	council	opened	its	film	competition	Box	office	bioethics for a second year. The compe-
tition	aims	to	inspire	young	people	to	make	short	films	about	contemporary	bioethics	issues.	

The council is continuing its work to support bioethics education through the development and promo-
tion of resources	for	teachers	and	students.	A	set	of	teaching	materials	based	on	the	report	‘Human	bod-
ies: donation for medicine and research’ is currently being developed for launch in early 2013.

Further information
Hugh	Whittall
Director,	Nuffield	Council	on	Bioethics

Address
The	Nuffield	Council	on	Bioethics
28 Bedford Square
London WC1B 3JS
UNITED KINGDOM 
Tel. +44 2076819619 
E-mail: bioethics@nuffieldbioethics.org 
Website: http://www.nuffieldbioethics.org

36 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

General information on 
activities of the non-EU 
national and regional 
ethics committees

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

37

ARGENTINA

Comité Nacional de Ética en la Ciencia y la Tecnología de la República Argentina

Large research and medical databases in clinical and research multi-centres trials 

I. 

Introduction and objectives

Given that the nature of this intervention is necessarily brief, I will show: (a) the main lines of the Argen-
tine legal system related to the ethical aspects of this issue, (b) a case that shows the weakness of the 
effectiveness of these rules, and (c) special concern of the National Committee of Ethics for public access 
to knowledge.

II.  Basic rules

(1) Law 25.326 — personal data protection law (October 2000)

This	law	describes	the	data	on	health	as	sensitive	data	and,	as	such,	it	is	protected.	The	specific	rule	—	
Section Two — says that sensitive data means personal data revealing racial and ethnic origin, political 
opinions, religious, philosophical or moral beliefs, labour union membership and information concerning 
health conditions or sexual life.

Because of this characteristic, other rules state:

‘UNIT 8.- Public or private health institutions, as well as medical science professionals are entitled to 
collect and treat personal data related to the physical or mental health of patients who make use of their 
services or who are or may have been in their care, in pursuance of the principles of professional secret.’

‘SECTION 12.- 1.- The transfer of any type of personal information to countries or international or suprana-
tional entities which do not provide adequate levels of protection, is prohibited. 2.- The prohibition shall not 
apply in the following circumstances: a) international judicial cooperation; b) exchange of medical informa-
tion, when so required for the treatment of the party affected, or in case of an epidemiological survey … ’.

(2)  Law 3301 of the City of Buenos Aires about the protection of human subjects in health 

research (2010)

This  law  contains  provisions  relating  to  both  aspects:  the  privacy  of  the  individual  subject  and  free 
access to public information.

Section 5. 15) Protection of the subject privacy: the privacy and data protection must be safeguarded 
according	 to	 Law	 25.326.	 The	 privacy	 of	 the	 subjects	 and	 the	 confidentiality	 of	 information	 will	 be	
respected, ensuring non-use of information obtained to the detriment of individuals and/or communi-
ties. The researcher is obliged to implement methods for the anonymity of the subjects and that enable 
personal	data	to	be	dissociated	from	the	functional	scientific	data	for	research.	Any	collection,	use	and	
transfer	of	any	data	not	specifically	set	forth	in	the	instruments	of	free	and	informed	consent	and	in	the	
research protocol are prohibited.

Section 5. 23) Information of public access: activities and broadcast programmes on clinical research 
should  be  promoted  and  a  database  of  public  access  to  information  on  the  researches  undertaken  in 
the city will be developed. The database will be published online and will provide relevant data of the 
protocol such as: objective, phase, responsible, place, drug used or its code, in case of need to preserve 
confidentiality.	The	enforcement	authority	will	seek	to	coordinate	and/or	unify	this	database	with	exist-
ing databases at the national, provincial and international levels.

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

39

(3)  Guidelines for research on human beings approved by Resolution 1480/2011 of the Ministry of 

Health of Argentina on 13 September 2011 (5)

These guidelines have been carefully prepared during 2011. The main items related to the topic under 
study	say	that	the	information	obtained	from	human	health	research	should	be	recorded	and	filed	so	as	to	
allow	adequate	interpretation	and	verification.	When	the	result	of	an	investigation	is	published,	it	should:	
(a)	maintain	the	accuracy	of	the	data	and	of	their	interpretation,	and	(b)	declare	the	sources	of	finance,	
labour	relations	and	other	potential	conflicts	of	interest.	Articles	that	do	not	meet	the	ethical	standards	
should not be accepted for publication (6).

Publication of the study results: researchers are obliged to disclose information that is of public inter-
est	by	any	appropriate	means	available	and	provided	that	the	confidentiality	of	participants	is	respected	
and that the interpretations or inferences are not presented as if they were proven true or in a way that 
promotes or appears to promote special interests, for example that it has been proven that a product is 
effective. The publication of the research results, both positive and negative, is strongly recommended 
to facilitate transparency and to avoid the repetition of studies already completed and the submission of 
new participants to unnecessary risk.

(4) A national project

The	Chamber	of	Deputies	passed	a	new	bill	on	23	May	2012	stating	that	all	national	scientific	institutions	
must provide open access (OA) archives of their research, allowing the public (not only scientists and 
professionals, but also the general public) full access to journal articles, dissertation theses and technical 
reports,	as	well	as	data	obtained	by	publicly	funded	projects,	but	excluding	confidential	data.

(5) A jurisprudential case that shows non-compliance with rules

The	National	Administration	of	Drugs,	Foods	and	Medical	Devices	(Anmat)	authorised	the	firm	Glaxo-
SmithKline to conduct a ‘Clinical otitis media and pneumonia study’ (Compas), phase III, randomised, 
controlled and multi-centre study to demonstrate the effectiveness of the pneumococcal vaccine for the 
prevention of acquired pneumonia and acute otitis media.

Anmat conducted several inspections at the research authorised centre; in a province some irregulari-
ties emerged, most linked to the lack of information of mothers and children, who were all vulnerable 
persons.

Anmat	fined	the	laboratory	400	000	Argentine	pesos	(about	80	000	US	dollars),	which	it	did	not	agree	to	
pay. It went to court, but the judge upheld the decision (7).

Subsequently, on 3 January 2012, Anmat reported that: (a) the sanctions were linked to irregularities 
in  the  provision  of  informed  consent,  (b)  that  none  of  the  deaths  (12  children)  that  occurred  during 
the study were linked to the vaccine administration, and (c) that the vaccine is authorised/licensed in 
over 80 countries.

III. Special concern of the national committee of ethics for public access to knowledge

In  2006,  the  National  Committee  of  Ethics  issued  a  recommendation  entitled  ‘Protecting  the  public 
domain:	 access	 to	 and	 use	 of	 scientific	 data	 and	 information’  (8).  The  general  conclusion  states  that: 
‘There	is	an	urgent	need	to	rethink	the	meaning	and	role	of	the	public	domain	in	general,	and	of	scientific	

(5)  http://leg.msal.gov.ar/index2.htm
(6)  A8. Data management and results, pages 15 and 16.
(7)  J. Penal Económico No 2, 28/12/2011, GlaxoSmithKline Argentina s/infracción ley 16.463, Doctrina Judicial, 18/4/2012, 

No 16, page 65.

(8)  http://www.cecte.gov.ar/recomendaciones-e-informes/ 

40 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

data and information, in particular. The public domain should not only be a matter of concern for the sci-
entific	community,	as	the	limitations	to	the	access	to	knowledge	and	products	derived	from	there	affect	
the society at large. The fundamental challenge is to prevent the further erosion of the public domain and 
to	ensure	that	the	use	of	scientific	information	is	not	artificially	limited	by	new	protectionist	measures.’

IV.  Provisional conclusions

There is no opposition to conducting multi-centre clinical trials of transnational companies, provided 
that the local authority has the ability to distinguish between those that truly seek to develop innovative 
medicines, from those that aim to produce mass-market medicines that only favour the company.

On	the	other	hand,	the	public	domain	should	not	only	be	a	matter	of	concern	for	the	scientific	commu-
nity, as the limitations to the access to knowledge and products derived from there affect society at large.

Further information
Mrs Aída Kemelmajer de Carlucci 
Member 

Address
Comité Nacional de Ética en la Ciencia y la Tecnología de la República Argentina 
Ecuador 873 4to Piso CP 1214 
Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires 
ARGENTINA 
Tel. +54 1148918796
E-mail: cecte@mincyt.gov.ar 
Website: http://www.mincyt.gov.ar/ministerio/estructura/unid_asesoras/cecte/index.php 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

41

COPAB

Advancing ethics and bioethics in Africa

Prof. Pierre Effa, President a.i. of the COPAB

Introductory note

Invited	to	participate	in	the	fifth	Conference	of	Ministers	of	Member	States	of	the	African	Union	for	Sci-
ence and Technology (AMCOST V) in Brazzaville, Congo from 12 to 15 November 2012, the President a.i. 
of the Pan-African Congress for Ethics and Bioethics (COPAB) seized the opportunity offered to him to 
present	the	status	of	COPAB	proposals	in	the	implementation	of	Resolution	No	AHG/Res.254	(XXXII)	on	
bioethics	and	development	of	Africa	that	was	adopted	by	the	32nd	Summit	of	Heads	of	State	and	Govern-
ment of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU)/African Union (AU) in July 1996 in Yaounde.

After the fourth International Dialogue of Bioethics in Copenhagen: implementation of privileged 
partnership for the protection of life in Africa

The results of the representation of the African Union by COPAB from the contribution of the President 
a.i. of the COPAB at the Fourth Conference of the International Dialogue of Bioethics (IDB) in Copen-
hagen on 19 June 2012 have reinforced the concern for COPAB to contribute to the implementation of 
the resolutions of the EU–Africa summit in Lisbon in December 2007. Thus, in the context of the fourth 
bipartite summit in 2013 in Brussels, COPAB suggests the establishment of a privileged partnership on 
ethics and bioethics for the protection of life in Africa, in the framework of the implementation of the 
joint African–European Union strategy (JAES).

Workshop of African platforms on ethics: implementation of the African Task Force on Ethics 
and Bioethics

The COPAB interim executive committee also found the meeting of the AMCOST V in Brazzaville 
the appropriate forum to raise this august institution to mobilise the organisation and the success of the 
regional workshop for implementation of African platforms on ethics. These platforms are a collection of 
skills and abilities without borders, in consultation and dialogue to discuss, such as the African palaver, 
issues of bioethics (bioethics forum), health, including the implementation of the declaration of Abuja and 
the	strategic	plan	of	the	African	Union	in	the	fight	against	AIDS	(health	stakeholder	forum	(COPAS))	and	
basic	and	universal	human	values	including	governance	and	the	fight	against	corruption	(ethics	forum).	 
African platforms on ethics will be the place where the COPAB discusses international partnerships for 
the	African	certification	system	for	ethical	evaluation	for	member	countries	of	the	African	Union.

Implementation of the consolidated plan of action on science, technology and innovation of the 
African Union

The AMCOST V in Brazzaville adopted the consolidated plan of action (CPA) on science, technology 
and innovation for the whole African continent for 2013 to 2023.

Finally, the COPAB is in charge of implementation of the ethics programme of the CPA on science, tech-
nology and innovation of the African Union as adopted by AMCOST V in Brazzaville for 2013 to 2023.

Programming the third session of the health actors’ forum (COPAS)

It will meet the members of the pan-African movement for ethics and bioethics concerned with health 
platforms, including the implementation of the Abuja declaration and the strategic plan of the African 
Union	in	the	fight	against	AIDS.	It	will	involve	the	Ministries	of	Health	of	the	member	countries	of	the	

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

43

African Union and major health institutions on the continent. The theme focuses on ‘improving the qual-
ity of care in all health sectors in Africa.’

Community education programme in bioethics in Africa

The COPAB began to implement its community education programme in bioethics in 2012, and envis-
ages strengthening it in 2013 and later. Indeed, the establishment of an ‘integrated ethics sphere of the 
entire African continent’ as the implementation of the resolution of the OAU/AU, and the creation and 
functioning of a Global Ethics Committee with the General-Secretariat of the United Nations organisa-
tion pledged to promote peace, justice and sustainable harmonious development, constitutes the major 
challenge of the COPAB. The strategy to achieve this is also the use of the African palaver and commu-
nity education.

The goal of the COPAB is to make ethics and bioethics concepts easily brewed in and through communi-
ties, in both rural and urban areas in Africa.

This programme will probably revive the minds of ancient practices in the collective memory, that have 
enabled Africa to perpetuate the concept of the millennium ankh, that is to say the promotion of ‘social, 
spiritual	and	cosmic	integrity	of	human	being’	as	defined	by	the	Egyptologist	Theophile	Obenga,	to	the	
triumph of the forces of life over the forces of death (cf. historian and philosopher Engelbert Mveng).

The COPAB targets or partners in this community education programme in bioethics are organisations 
of the lifeblood of the African nation in general, to the attention of their basic communities, and in par-
ticular those especially involved in implementation of bioethics activities, such as the medical profession 
as a whole.

The strategy used is to highlight bioethics, ethical, anthropological and professional lessons from the 
basic	texts	of	these	organisations,	in	light	of	the	customs	of	communities	eclectically	identified	as	proper	
to protect, preserve, promote and to value life.

In practice, it is to make a ‘coaching of communities’ in the reactivation of the spirit of their own cus-
toms and traditions with the characteristics of the protection and enhancement of life. So the subsequent 
establishment of the ethics committees and awareness of these communities in the understanding and 
application of bioethics laws and their adherence to programmes of biomedical research or health would 
find	a	fertile	ground	for	integration	or	mastering	the	modern	principles	of	bioethics	that	the	international	
community has developed to promote international research, while ensuring respect for the dignity of 
the human.

44 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

INDIA

The Indian Council of Medical Research

The Central Ethics Committee on Human Research (CECHR)

Year of establishment: 1996

Remit of the NEC: The	Central	Ethics	Committee	on	Human	Research	(CECHR)	is	the	national	ethics	
committee,	with	its	secretariat	at	the	Indian	Council	of	Medical	Research	(ICMR),	Headquarters	Office,	
New	Delhi,	India.	It	is	a	referral	body	for	the	Ministry	of	Health	and	Family	Welfare	as	well	as	other	
ministries under the government of India on bioethics. Its activities include giving opinions on bioethics 
issues at national level, formulating ethical guidelines for biomedical research involving human subjects 
and other activities related to bioethics.

Composition of the NEC:

1.  Dr P. N. Tandon, New Delhi, Neurosurgeon and President, National Brain Research Centre, Mane-

sar — Chairman

2.  Dr Ranjit Roy Chaudhury, Former Professor of Pharmacology, PGIMER, Chandigarh

3.  Dr S. D. Seth, Advisor, Clinical Trial Registry of India, New Delhi

4.  Dr N. R. Madhav Menon, Director, National Law Academy, Bhopal

5.  Dr B. N. Dhawan, Former Director, Central Drug Research Institute, Luknow

6.  Dr Vinod K. Paul, Pediatrician, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi

7.  Dr Thomas Kalam, Theologist and Director, St. John’s Medical College, Bangalore

8.	 Dr	Sunil	K.	Pandya,	Neurosurgeon,	Jaslok	Hospital	and	Research	Centre,	Mumbai	

9.  Dr P. S. S. Rao, Biostatistician, Bangalore

10.	Dr	S.	S.	Agarwal,	Human	Geneticist,	Lucknow

11. Dr Sandip Basu, Immunologist, Former Director, National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi

12. Dr C. A. K. Yesudian, Social Scientist, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai

13. Dr V. I. Mathan, Clinical Epidemiologist, Vellore

14. Dr G. Padmanabhan, Basic Scientist and Former Director, Indian Institute of Sciences, Bangalore

15. Dr Mira Shiva M.D.

	 Coordinator,	Initiative	for	Health	Equity	&	Society

  Director, Diverse Women for Diversity, New Delhi 

16. Dr  Vasantha  Muthuswamy,  Ethics  Expert  and  Former  Scientist  G,  Indian  Council  of  Medical 

Research, New Delhi

17. Lt.  Gen.  D.  Raghunath,  Sir  Dorabji  Tata  Centre  for  Research  in  Tropical  Diseases 

Innovation Centre, Indian Institute of Science Campus, Bangalore

18. Dr Vijay Kumar, Scientist F — Member Secretary

Indian Council of Medical Research

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

45

 
List of the last three NEC’s opinions

1.	 Opinion	on	bridging	studies	on	the	H1N1	vaccine.

2.  Updated  ICMR  guidelines  for  safety  assessment  of  food  derived  from  genetically  engineered 

plants (2008).

3.  Revision of guidelines for stem cell research and therapy.

List of the future topics covered by NEC’s opinions

1.  Ethical guidelines for conducting research on mental illness or cognitive impairment and research 

involving mentally ill or cognitively impaired individuals.

2.  Guidelines for compensation to participants for research-related injury in India.

3.  The biomedical and health research regulation bill.

Further information
Chairperson and Secretariat
Dr P. N. Tandon
Chairman
Central	Ethics	Committee	on	Human	Research	(CECHR)
Indian Council of Medical Research
New Delhi -110029
INDIA

Contact details
Dr Vijay Kumar
Scientist	F	and	Member	Secretary,	CECHR
Indian Council of Medical Research
AIIMS Campus, Ansari Nagar
New Delhi -110029
INDIA
Telefax +91 1126589791
E-mail: kumarv@icmr.org.in; vijayprabhakar@yahoo.com

46 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

MEXICO

The National Bioethics Commission of Mexico

Manuel	H.	Ruiz	de	Chávez,	MD,	MSC,	FRCP

The following text presents the most relevant actions in 10 main areas undertaken by the National Bio-
ethics Commission during the 2009–12 period, which will allow a thorough evaluation of its journey and 
also to envision what needs to be done in the future, while identifying new challenges and perspectives 
that will guide the institutional chores for both the short and the long term towards its central mission: to 
promote the bioethics culture in Mexico.

1.  An institution with a 20-year continuous evolution

The National Bioethics Commission (Conbioética), since its creation in 1992 until its constitution as 
a	deconcentrated	agency	of	the	Secretariat	of	Health,	with	technical	and	operational	autonomy	(2005),	
has been working non-stop, with the mission of promoting a bioethical culture in Mexico with a plural 
and inclusive scope and a secular outlook, based on the respect for human rights and the protection of 
living beings and the environment.

In	2012	we	celebrated	the	first	20	years	of	the	national	commission,	and	for	this	20th	anniversary	many	
activities took place: the inauguration of the new seat; the signature of collaboration agreements with the 
National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM) and the National Council for Science and Technol-
ogy	(CONACyT);	the	first	exhibition	of	the	former	chairmans	of	Conbioética;	the	issue	of	a	commemora-
tive postal stamp; a bioethics book expo; the edition of a commemorative lottery ticket from the National 
Lottery; and the exhibition ‘Bioethics and social responsibility’. Also during these events, the seventh 
national meeting of statal bioethics commissions took place, and we also celebrated the 10th anniversary 
of	 the	 international	 award	 Manuel	 Velasco	 Suárez	 for	 excellency	 in	 bioethics,	 a	 joint	 effort	 between	
the	Pan-American	Health	and	Education	Foundation	(PAHEF),	the	Pan-American	Health	Organisation	
(PAHO)	and	Conbioética	as	part	of	the	Secretariat	of	Health.

2.  Conbioética is now projected from a new seat

Since January 2012, Conbioética has been designated to a new seat, which has encouraged its job, espe-
cially since the Centre of Bioethical Knowledge (Cecobe) has been strengthened by these new modern 
facilities. The proposal for the new building has taken into account bioethical criteria in its design, like 
easy access to people with disabilities according to federal regulations and environmentally friendly use 
of energy, among others, so that Mexico, as many other countries in the world, has an adequate space to 
work on bioethics. This will be completed with a seminar unit that will be used for the development of 
human resources and academic and diffusion activities.

3. Conbioética: national reference

Conbioética	is	a	reference	of	actions	made	in	Mexico	in	the	bioethical	field,	as	a	normative	and	con-
sulting multidisciplinary organism, and also because of it governing nature in bioethics in the country, 
which is why it has been trusted with the task of formulating and expressing technical opinions and 
pronouncements regarding legislation and public policies in bioethics from the executive, legislative and 
judicial branches, either federal or local.

Conbioética has been encouraging the proper integration of the bioethics infrastructure throughout the 
country, which is led by the statal bioethics commissions, collective organisms that promote the foun-
dations and the application of the existing regulations in bioethics and also foster public debate around 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

47

bioethical issues in the local scene, especially regarding healthcare, medical research and the protection 
of the environment.

4.  Conbioética: international reference, Mexico, world host in 2014

Mexico, through Conbioética, has been designated as host of the 10th Global Summit of National Bio-
ethics	Commissions,	which	is	sponsored	by	the	World	Health	Organisation,	and	the	12th	World	Congress	
of Bioethics of the International Bioethics Association. Both events are to take place in 2014.

These events are of the utmost relevance in their type and are trendsetters in the development of bio-
ethics in the international context, which is why 2014 will be the Year of Bioethics in Mexico.

The commission enjoys enough prestige and international recognition, which is why it will be able to 
communicate with consulting organisms from different countries, especially in the American region, 
as a result of the meeting hosted by Conbioética during 2011, which summoned the representatives of 
consulting bodies of 10 countries of the American region. Also, during the ninth meeting of national 
committees on research ethics, which took place in Carthage, Tunisia, in 2012, Conbioética presided 
the  international  working  group  of  research  ethics.  The  commission  is  constantly  collaborating  with 
the	main	international	organisations	and	institutions	on	bioethics	as	well,	such	as:	the	Ethics	and	Health	
Division,	WHO/PAHO;	Global	Summit	of	National	Bioethics	Advisory	Bodies,	WHO;	Committee	on	
Bioethics	(DH-BIO),	Council	of	Europe;	International	Bioethics	Committees	Unesco	and	its	Ethics	Divi-
sion; Latin American and Caribbean Federation of Bioethics Institutions (FELAIBE); European Com-
mission’s	International	Dialogue	on	Bioethics	(BEPA);	Nuffield	Council	on	Bioethics,	United	Kingdom;	
and the International Association of Bioethics (IAB).

5.	 Conbioética:	an	institution	with	scientific	and	technologic	development	recognition	nationwide

In	2011,	Conbioética	became	a	part	of	the	National	Registry	of	Scientific	and	Technological	Institutions	
and Enterprises (RENIECyT), which helps to identify the institutions that carry out activities related 
to	research,	and	scientific	and	technological	development	in	Mexico.	This	registration	allows	the	par-
ticipation in federal incentive and support programmes in order to undertake new tasks and projects. 
As a result of this, Conbioética has received a donation in order to strengthen the Centre of Bioethical 
Knowledge, with the establishment of a virtual library and a telebioethics system.

6.  Mandatory research ethics and clinical bioethics committees

Conbioética	supported	the	reformation	of	the	General	Health	Act,	in	order	to	establish	as	mandatory	
the existence of clinical bioethics committees and research ethics committees in every healthcare and 
research institution in Mexico, which must observe the guidelines and criteria established by the com-
mission. Therefore, Conbioética issued these regulations regarding the registration and integration of 
these	 committees,	 which	 have	 been	 published	 through	 an	 agreement	 from	 the	 Secretary	 of	 Health,	
strengthening its normative function.

7.  Bioethics: closer to society

The National Bioethics Commission, and generally the institutions that form the national bioethics infra-
structure in the country, are an important support for the protection of human rights and dignity, because 
of their leading role in the decisions and management of bioethical issues, especially those immersed in the 
context of healthcare and research, both from the individual and collective point of view. Its performance 
has	influence	on	the	improvement	of	life	quality,	which	results	in	direct	benefits	for	the	whole	population.

8.  Creation and scope of the Centre of Bioethical Knowledge 

The Centre of Bioethical Knowledge (Cecobe) started to operate as part of the main activities of Con-
bioética.  Its  function  is  to  collaborate  in  order  to  increase  the  impact  on  the  promotion  of  bioethics 

48 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

culture	specifically	through	two	synergic	actions:	the	searching,	gathering	and	updating	of	specialised	
information	in	the	field	of	bioethics	(physical	and	virtual	library),	and	the	development	of	a	dissemina-
tion programme regarding the main topics of this discipline, and of course of the advances and perspec-
tives of the commission.

The  library  offers  free  information  services  to  the  general  population  and  also  students,  specialists, 
academics and researchers in bioethics, through printed and digital publications, and diverse databases 
which are completely avant-garde nationwide and worldwide. With this, Cecobe pretends to become one 
of	the	most	complete	and	specialised	information	centres	in	the	field	of	bioethics.	As	for	the	dissemina-
tion strategies, we can mention many books, pamphlets, posters and publications of many sorts, as well 
as the development of a social communication and education programme about the main topics in bio-
ethics through different communication media. Until today, Cecobe has formalised numerous collabora-
tion and exchange agreements with several libraries and information centres, which increases its pos-
sibilities to offer services of the utmost quality.

9.  Strategic agreements and alliances

During 2012, the commission formalised collaboration agreements with UNAM and CONACyT. These 
agreements are meant to establish the foundations and mechanisms of the collaboration between the 
institutions	involved,	and	therefore	carry	out	specific	actions	that	may	contribute	to	the	improvement,	
development and encouragement of the academic activities, research and dissemination of bioethics, 
and also to begin designing mechanisms to strengthen bioethics and ethics in science, technology and 
research.

Additionally, the commission has managed to formally establish other alliances with institutions such as 
the general hospital of Mexico (Dr Eduardo Liceaga), the National Academia of Medicine of Mexico, and 
the Council for Ethics and Transparency of the Pharmaceutical Industry (Cetifarma), in order to engage 
joint activities regarding bioethics. It also maintains a close relationship with its peers worldwide, such as 
the Comité Consultatif National d’Éthique pour les Sciences de la Vie et de la Santé of France; the Com-
mission de l’éthique en science et en technologie (CEST), from Quebec, Canada; and of course Unesco 
in order to address the different issues that bioethics care for, and to strengthen the development of this 
discipline not only in Mexico, but all over the world, participating in their forums and working groups.

10.  Strengthening of the national commission as a decentralised organism of the Secretariat of 
Health

The commission is a national institution, with a plural, inclusive and secular scope, and technical and 
operational autonomy. It is directed by a council, which is integrated by a president and six members who 
are designated carefully in order to preserve a balance of different professions, gender and perspectives, 
with	wide	recognition	in	their	field	of	knowledge.	Their	essential	tasks	include	analysing	and	discussing	
bioethical issues for public debate and expressing their opinions, and also being familiar with different 
points of view.

During the past few years, the consolidation of the legal framework of Conbioética has consolidated its 
leading and normative roles and performance as a consulting organism for the establishment of public 
policies,	especially	in	the	field	of	public	health,	regarding	bioethics.	Additionally,	Conbioética	partici-
pates	actively	in	the	National	Health	Council	and	the	staff	meetings	of	the	Secretary	of	Health.

Epilogue

Without being exhaustive, this report constitutes a summary of the universe of current and potential 
activities that are a part of our new vision and our new challenges in order to have a sound perfor-
mance and impact towards reaching the main goal of Conbioética: to promote bioethical culture in our 
country.

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

49

Further information
Manuel H. Ruiz de Chávez, MD, MSC, FRCP
Chair of the Board

Address
National Bioethics Commission of Mexico 
Calz. Arenal 134
Col. El Arenal Tepepan
Deleg. Tlalpan
14610 México, D.F.
MEXICO 
Tel.  +52 5556301046
+52 5554879964

E-mail: manuelruizdechavez@gmail.com; manuel.ruizdechavez@salud.gob.mx
Website: http://www.conbioetica-mexico.salud.gob.mx

50 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

 
RUSSIA

Russia under new healthcare legislation

V. Vlassov, MD, President, Society for Evidence-Based Medicine

In	the	last	3	years,	Russia	has	introduced	new	legislation	spanning	the	whole	field	of	healthcare,	with	
new laws on healthcare, on the marketing of drugs and on mandatory healthcare insurance. Cementing 
a number of post-Soviet reforms, these laws have incorporated new initiatives introduced since 2000.

The Russian healthcare law has inherited the Soviet-era Physician’s Oath, which it enshrines in Article 71. 
It	 retains	 some	 of	 the	 substance	 of	 the	 modified	 versions	 of	 the	 Hippocratic	 Oath	 popular	 in	 western	
universities,	but	not	the	style.	From	the	first	post-Soviet	healthcare	law	(1993),	the	new	law	has	kept	the	
declaration of access to healthcare as a human right and the basic principle of informed consent to medical 
intervention. Unfortunately, this principle is not adhered to rigorously. With regard to the treatment of 
patients with severe conditions, the law deprives them of the right to withhold consent to treatment, in the 
way it forbids euthanasia (Article 45). The law describes the euthanasia very inclusively, as ‘hastening the 
death	of	a	patient	at	his	request	by	any	action	or	inaction	or	means,	including	stopping	artificial	means	of	
supporting the life of a patient.’

Aspects of healthcare for the dying are not well developed in Russian legislation. Brain death is described 
in the law (Article 66), but the vegetative state (the death of the brain stem) is not recognised. There is 
some progress: the new legislation refers to the possibility to abstain from cardiorespiratory resuscita-
tion. Unfortunately, even this progress is doubtful, because neither consent to these procedures nor the 
concept of the living will is recognised by Russian lawmakers.

All these omissions and misinterpretations were discussed by medical professionals before the draft law was 
sent	to	the	Duma	(Russian	parliament).	But,	because	of	a	specific	misunderstanding	of	state	power	as	a	pos-
sibility	to	ignore	public	views	and	scientific	evidence,	these	proposals	and	criticisms	were	mostly	ignored.

In the law on the marketing of drugs, the Russian government designed and lawmakers voted for a spe-
cific	model	of	drug	approval.	In	this	model,	clinical	trials	are	part	of	the	drug	registration	procedure.	To	
receive	permission	to	begin	a	trial,	the	sponsor	needs	first	to	apply	for	a	marketing	authorisation.	Then	
permission for the trial will be given as part of the registration process. The only body which may give 
permission	for	a	drug	trial	is	the	national	Ministry	of	Health,	which	manages	drug	registration.	The	only	
entity which may apply for permission for a trial is the sponsor, i.e. the drug’s owner. This is probably the 
only legislation in the world that allows only the drug owner to test the drug. The process is further cen-
tralised by giving the power to check the ethics of trial protocols to only one ethics committee — in the 
national	Ministry	of	Health.	Rather	frivolously,	Russian	lawmakers	inserted	a	rule	in	the	drug	market-
ing law that only drugs tested in trials in Russia may receive a marketing authorisation. By design, this 
requirement is bound to increase the number of trials in Russia. Naturally, this requirement is leading to 
delays in marketing authorisation for drugs not yet tested in Russia.

National centralisation is also the main theme of the new law on mandatory healthcare insurance. Under 
the new law, all Russian citizens are insured not by medical insurance companies, but by a national (fed-
eral) mandatory insurance fund. The medical insurance companies act only as fund transfer agents. The 
declared intention of the legislators was to make it simpler for Russian citizens to obtain access to health-
care anywhere in the country. Unfortunately it does not work, as is clear now, after 2 years under the 
new legislation. The main problem of Russian healthcare continues to be underfunding and the mismatch 
between the generous promise of the Constitution and the limited funding. In these conditions, access to 
healthcare is limited not by law but by available resources.

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

51

European Commission

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

53

European Commission, Bureau of European 
Policy Advisers’ Ethics Sector

On 22 March 2011, the President of the European Commission requested the European Group on Eth-
ics in Science and New Technologies (EGE) to issue an opinion on the ethical implications of infor-
mation communication technology (ICT). Following the last Competiveness Council on the Euratom 
programme, the Commission also asked the EGE to contribute to the debate on a sustainable energy mix 
in Europe by issuing an opinion on the ethical impact of research on different energy sources on human 
well-being.	The	EGE	is	an	independent	advisory	body	with	a	status	defined	in	several	EC	legal	docu-
ments (e.g. Directive 98/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 1998 on the legal 
protection of biotechnological inventions).

Actions  undertaken  to  implement  the  above  Commission  goals  included  (in  chronological  order)  the 
following.

On 15 and 16 January 2013, the EGE held its monthly meeting in Brussels. On 16 January, the group 
adopted its Opinion No 27: An ethical framework for assessing research, production and use of 
energy.  The  opinion  has  been  transmitted  to  President  Barroso  and  will  be  presented  at  the  Euro-
pean Commission Symposium on Nuclear Fission Research for a Low-Carbon Economy, taking place 
on 26 and 27 February 2013 in Brussels. In its opinion, the EGE proposed an ‘integrated ethics approach’ 
for the research, production and use of energy in the EU seeking for an ‘equilibrium’ between four crite-
ria — access rights, security of supply, safety and sustainability — in the light of social, environmental 
and economic concerns.

On 11 and 12 December 2012, the EGE held its 22nd meeting in Brussels. The group worked on the 
finalisation	of	Opinion	No	27.

On  20  and  21  November  2012,  the  EGE  held  its  monthly  meeting  in  Brussels  aimed  to  complete 
the opinion on the ethics of the energy mix. During this session, the EGE also adopted its position 
on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and the Council on clinical trials. 
On 19 November 2012, the EGE held its rapporteurs’ meeting in Brussels. Discussions centered around 
the	finalisation	of	the	EGE	opinion	on	the	ethics	of	energy	mix	in	Europe.

On 4 and 5 October 2012, the EGE together with the EU national ethics councils (NECs) forum, gather-
ing the chairs of the EU-27 NECs, met in Nicosia, Cyprus. The joint event was organised by the Bureau 
of European Policy Advisers (BEPA) and the Directorate-General for Research and Innovation (RTD), 
in collaboration with the Cypriot Council Rotation Presidency.	The	meeting	touched	upon:	the	Hori-
zon 2020 programme, the function of NEC forums as dialogue platforms on science within the EU, the 
adopted EGE Opinion No 26 on ethics and ICT as well as the forthcoming EGE Opinion 27 on ethics 
of the energy mix in Europe. In the afternoon of 4 and 5 October, the EGE held its working meeting in 
parallel to the NEC forum meeting.

On 3 October 2012, the EGE met the Cyprus National Bioethics Committee in Nicosia for a bilateral 
meeting. The afternoon session comprised an EGE working group meeting.

On 18 September 2012, the EGE Secretariat organised an open round table on ethical aspects of the 
energy mix in Europe (100 participants). The round table was aimed at promoting a transparent dia-
logue between relevant stakeholders. Among participants, the EGE Secretariat welcomed members of the 
scientific	community,	industry,	civil	society,	policymakers,	media	and	the	general	public.

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

55

On 19 September 2012, the EGE Secretariat held its 17th meeting in Brussels. On 16 and 17 July 2012, 
the EGE Secretariat organised a rapporteurs’ meeting in Rome, Italy. On 18 to 20 June 2012, under the 
auspices of the Danish Council Rotation Presidency, the EGE, the Danish National Ethics Commit-
tee, the International Dialogue on Bioethics (clustering the chairs of G20 NECs and the forum of the 
EU-27 NECs) met in a 3-day event which took place in Copenhagen.

On 18 June, the EGE had its working meeting on its approaching opinion on ethics of the energy mix. 
The members worked on the structure of the current opinion.

On 19 June, the fourth meeting of the European Commission International Dialogue on Bioethics 
(IDB) took place; an event organised by the European Commission under the auspice of the Danish 
Rotation Council Presidency. Invited participants included members of the EGE, the chairs of 15 non-
EU NECs, and the chairs of the EU-27 NECs and Croatia, Norway, Serbia and Switzerland (46 coun-
tries). The non-European countries represented this year included: Argentina, Canada, China, Egypt, 
India, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, the Philippines, Russia, South Africa and COPAB (Pan-African Bio-
ethics	Congress).	Representatives	of	the	bioethics	sector	within	Unesco,	the	WHO	and	the	Council	on	
Health	Research	for	Development	(Cohred)	also	made	a	speech.	The	topic	discussed	this	year	was	‘The 
governance of large research and medical databases in clinical and research multi-centre trials’, as 
proposed by the Chief	Scientific	Adviser,	Prof.	Anne	Glover.

On 20 June 2012, the EGE and the Danish NEC organised a bilateral meeting, focusing on the previous 
Danish opinions on climate change and food security and the Danish debate on renewable energy.

On  15  and  16  May,  the  EGE  held  its  14th  meeting  in  Brussels.  The  16th  ISG  meeting  took  place 
on 31 May,	topics	addressed	include	ICT	governance,	Horizon	2020,	revision	of	the	clinical	trials	direc-
tive (9), the European Strategy and Policy Analysis System (ESPAS), the inter-institutional debate on 
energy	mix,	etc.	Fifteen	Commission	services	confirmed	their	participation	and	their	attendance	to	the	
meeting  (Secretariat-General;  DG  Communication;  Bureau  of  European  Policy  Advisers;  DG  Enter-
prise and Industry; DG Competition; DG Energy; DG Environment; DG Research and Innovation; Joint 
Research Centre; DG Communications Networks, Content and Technology; DG Maritime Affairs and 
Fisheries;	DG	Education	and	Culture;	DG	Health	and	Consumers;	DG	Home	Affairs;	DG	Justice;	DG	
Trade; Research Executive Agency; and European External Action Service). On 17 and 18 April, the 
EGE held its 13th meeting in Brussels.

On 20 and 21 March, the EGE started working on its new opinion on ethics of energy requested by 
President Barroso on 19 December 2011. The opinion will contribute to the debate on a sustainable 
energy mix in Europe by studying the ethical impact of research on different energy sources on human 
well-being. The EGE also had a meeting with Vice-President Neelie Kroes in order to discuss the con-
tent of its Opinion No 26: Ethics of Information and communication technologies. Vice-President 
Kroes welcomed the EGE opinion and underlined that the Commission will now take inspiration from 
the proposed recommendations to further foster societal and ethical considerations in the construction 
of the European digital society. On 21 and 22 February, the EGE adopted its Opinion 26: Ethics of 
information and communication technologies.

On 18 and 19 January, the EGE held its 10th meeting in Brussels. The group worked on the completion 
of the opinion.

(9)  Directive 2001/20/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 April 2001 on the approximation of the laws, 
regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the implementation of good clinical practice in 
the  conduct of clinical trials on medicinal products for human use.

56 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

General information 
on activities of the 
international organisations

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

57

Council of Europe

Decision-making process regarding medical treatment in end-of-life situations

The	Committee	on	Bioethics	(DH-BIO)	(10) has been continuing its work on the decision-making process 
regarding medical treatment in end-of-life situations following the symposium held on this theme at the 
end of 2010. On the basis of the symposium’s conclusions, a drafting group was entrusted with the task 
of preparing a preliminary draft guide on the decision-making process regarding medical treatment in 
end-of-life situations. This guide aims to facilitate the implementation of the principles laid down in the 
Convention	on	Human	Rights	and	Biomedicine	including	the	principle	set	out	in	its	Article	9	concerning	
previously expressed wishes.

The	preliminary	draft	guide	was	examined	by	the	DH-BIO	at	its	December	plenary	meeting,	which	
agreed to make it public for consultation as a working document in February 2013. The purpose of this 
consultation	is	to	elicit	comments	from	the	different	fields	concerned	which	will	be	taken	into	account	
when	finalising	the	guide.	The	consultation	is	foreseen	until	the	end	of	April	2013.

Predictivity, genetic testing and insurance

The public consultation on a document on predictivity, genetic testing and insurance was completed in 
May 2012 and the replies have been published on the website (http://www.coe.int/bioethics). An analysis 
of these replies was examined by the Committee on Bioethics at its second plenary meeting in Decem-
ber	2012.	On	the	basis	of	a	number	of	points	identified	in	this	analysis,	the	Secretariat,	in	consultation	
with experts having participated in the previous working party, was entrusted with the task of prepar-
ing proposals with a view to the possible preparation of a non-binding legal instrument on predictivity, 
genetic testing and insurance.

Symposium on biobanks and research on biological materials of human origin 
(19 and 20 June 2012)

A symposium on biobanks, organised by the Committee on Bioethics, was held on 19 and 20 June 2012 in 
Strasbourg, with the objective of providing a basis for the re-examination of Council of Europe Recom-
mendation (2006) 4 on research on biological materials of human origin. In the light of the presenta-
tions	and	discussion	at	the	symposium,	the	drafting	group	on	biobanks	identified	possible	issues	for	the	
re-examination of the instrument regarding consent and information; governance; ethics review; data 
protection;	access	and	trans-border	flow;	and	some	additional	issues.	At	its	December	meeting,	the	DH-
BIO exchanged views on these issues and entrusted the drafting group to prepare proposals for the re-
examination of the recommendation to be discussed at its meeting in May 2013.

New additional protocol on the protection of the dignity and fundamental rights of persons with 
mental disorders

The  Committee  on  Bioethics  will  begin  its  work  on  the  preparation  of  an  additional  protocol  to  the 
Oviedo  convention  on  the  protection  of  the  dignity  and  fundamental  rights  of  persons  with  mental 
disorders	with	regard	to	involuntary	treatment	and	placement.	The	first	meeting	of	the	drafting	group	
entrusted with the task of preparing proposals is foreseen for the end of March 2013.

(10)  On 1 January 2012, following the reorganisation of intergovernmental bodies at the Council of Europe, the Committee 
on	Bioethics	(DH-BIO)	has	taken	over	the	responsibilities	of	the	Steering	Committee	on	Bioethics	(CDBI)	for	the	tasks	
assigned	by	the	Convention	on	Human	Rights	and	Biomedicine	as	well	as	for	the	intergovernmental	work	on	the	protection	
of	human	rights	in	the	field	of	biomedicine.	The	reorganisation	results	also	in	creating	a	closer	link	between	the	DH-BIO	
and	the	Steering	Committee	for	Human	Rights	(CDDH).

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

59

Prenatal sex selection

Following  the  response  of  the  Committee  of  Ministers  to  Parliamentary  Assembly  Recommenda-
tion 1979 (2011), the Committee on Bioethics was entrusted with the task of conducting a comparative 
study on prenatal sex selection and considering, where appropriate, the preparation of guidelines and 
good	practices	in	the	context	of	Article	14	of	the	Oviedo	convention.	As	a	first	step,	the	DH-BIO	pre-
pared a questionnaire which was addressed to its delegations in order to gather information for an initial 
overview of the situation in the Member States.

Genetic tests for health purposes

In order to facilitate the implementation of Article 20 of the additional protocol concerning genetic test-
ing for health purposes, the Council of Europe has produced a brochure for the general public on genetic 
testing	with	the	support	of	the	European	Society	of	Human	Genetics	and	EuroGentest.	It	provides	gen-
eral objective information on genetic tests, including their nature and the potential implications of their 
results. The brochure is available online (http://www.coe.int/bioethics) and is currently being translated 
into some 20 European languages.

60 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

Unesco

1. Work of the International Bioethics Committee of Unesco and the Intergovernmental Bioethics 
Committee 

Through	its	advisory	bodies	in	the	field	of	bioethics,	Unesco	continues	to	offer	a	unique	platform	for	
reflection	and	debate	based	on	its	interdisciplinary,	multicultural	and	pluralist	approach.	The	Interna-
tional Bioethics Committee (IBC) and the Intergovernmental Bioethics Committee (IGBC) build on the 
universal	values	enshrined	in	the	Universal	Declaration	on	Bioethics	and	Human	Rights	to	ensure	that	
progress in science and new technologies serve all human beings, in particular those who are the most 
vulnerable.

The Unesco headquarters in Paris was the venue, from 10 to 14 September 2012, of the 19th session of 
the IBC, as well as the joint session of the IBC and the IGBC, and the special session of the IGBC to elect 
its bureau. The events attracted approximately 110 participants from 47 different countries, gathering 
representatives of Member States as well as representatives of international organisations, NGOs and 
other external partners.

The IBC discussed the draft report on traditional medicine and its ethical implications, and opened up the 
deliberation to include the voices and opinions of Unesco’s sectors of culture and natural sciences, as well 
as	the	WHO,	various	international	NGOs	and	other	external	partners.	Based	on	the	input	received	on	the	
draft,	a	working	group	set	up	by	the	IBC	on	this	topic	will	revise	and	finalise	the	document	before	the	20th	
session	of	the	IBC	in	2013,	scheduled	to	take	place	in	June	(the	exact	dates	and	location	are	being	finalised).

The IBC also prepared a preliminary document on the principle of non-discrimination and non-stigmati-
sation,	as	set	forth	in	Article	11	of	the	Universal	Declaration	on	Bioethics	and	Human	Rights.	This	topic	
will	serve	as	a	‘conceptual	umbrella’	under	which	the	IBC	will	reflect	upon	and	transversally	analyse	
issues	such	as	access	to	drugs,	biobanks,	HIV/AIDS,	nanotechnologies,	neuroscience	and	organ,	tissues	
and	cell	transplantation,	and	trafficking.

The seventh session of the IGBC, which is comprised of 36 Member States whose representatives meet 
at least once every 2 years to examine the advice and recommendations of the IBC, will be convened in 
Paris	during	the	summer	of	2013	(the	exact	dates	and	location	are	being	finalised).

2. The assisting bioethics committees project

Although the bioethics committees have assumed an indispensable role in addressing bioethical chal-
lenges in various countries, they are mostly absent from the picture in the developing countries, contribut-
ing to a serious handicap of these societies to confront important ethical questions that put at risk millions 
of	vulnerable	persons.	Member	States	of	Unesco	have	recognised	the	significance	of	supporting	such	
committees by dedicating a separate article to this issue in Unesco’s Universal Declaration on Bioethics 
and	Human	Rights	(2005),	which	calls	for	the	establishment	and	support	of	independent,	multidisciplinary	
and pluralist ethics committees at the appropriate level. As a response, the bioethics programme designed 
the assisting bioethics committees (ABC) project to offer Member States a comprehensive capacity-build-
ing assistance for a period of 3 years. After graduating from ABC, the newly established committees will 
have undertaken three separate training modules, established a working partnership with a long-standing 
committee and developed independent internal capacity to carry on its important mandate.

The project is characterised by its depth of engagement with the participating Member States — it makes 
a concerted effort to holistically develop capacities of the committees in order to make sure that they can 
stand on their feet independently and address the bioethical challenges, both substantively and procedur-
ally, after being weaned off the project.

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

61

In	2012,	the	ABC	programme	made	significant	progress	on	building	capacities	for	managing	bioethical	
dilemmas, primarily by conducting trainings with a special focus on Africa. The trainings for the newly 
established  national  bioethics  committees  were  held  in  Chad,  Côte  d’Ivoire,  Gabon,  Ghana,  Guinea, 
Malawi and Togo. Moreover, Oman and Malaysia have recently set up their national bioethics commit-
tees and will soon commence their collaboration with Unesco. Argentina is currently negotiating with 
Unesco to join the ABC project.

3. The ethics education programme

Unesco’s ethics education programme (EEP), much like the ABC activity, stems from the Universal Dec-
laration	on	Bioethics	and	Human	Rights,	the	Article	23	of	which	requests	to	‘foster	bioethics	education	
and training at all levels as well as to encourage information and knowledge dissemination programmes 
about bioethics’. The EEP is designed to respond to the request of Member States for Unesco to initiate 
and	support	teaching	ethics	in	all	relevant	scientific	and	professional	modules	of	education.

In recent times, ethics has become an important part of the higher education curricula in various dis-
ciplines — not only in medical sciences but also in law, social sciences, public policy, philosophy and 
others. In order to gain a clear picture of the state of the art in ethics teaching around the world, Unesco 
is mapping existing ethics teaching programmes in its Member States. To date, 235 ethics teaching pro-
grammes	have	been	identified	and	entered	into	the	global	ethics	observatory	of	Unesco	(GEObs)	for	easy	
public access. Teachers interested in launching or strengthening ethics teaching programmes in their 
institutions	can	consult	the	database	to	find	suggestions	and	ideas	from	the	existing	programmes.

The bioethics core curriculum is yet another tool created by Unesco in order to promote bioethics educa-
tion around the world. The core curriculum, which was developed by a special group of experts from 
diverse cultural backgrounds, is based on the declaration and is designed to introduce the bioethical prin-
ciples	of	the	declaration	to	university	students.	It	therefore	does	not	impose	a	particular	model	or	specific	
view	of	bioethics,	but	articulates	ethical	principles	that	are	shared	by	scientific	experts,	policymakers	and	
health professionals from various countries with different cultural, historical and religious backgrounds. 
In	 order	 to	 ensure	 a	 flexible	 application	 of	 this	 tool,	 the	 curriculum	 invites	 teachers	 and	 students	 to	
expand its contents and approaches based on the local context. The curriculum has already been success-
fully integrated into university programmes in many countries around the world.

While practical educational tools, such as the GEObs database and the bioethics core curriculum are 
helpful, the quality of ethics education also depends on the substantive and pedagogic competencies of 
the teachers. In other words, an effective ethics teacher should be knowledgeable about how to teach, 
as well as what to teach to the students. The ethics teacher training courses (ETTC) project, designed 
to target the young generation of experts and educators who are engaged in teaching ethics at various 
academic faculties and institutions around the world, complements the practical ethics teaching tools 
developed by Unesco by focusing on the methodology and pedagogy behind ethics education.

In the past, the ethics teacher training courses have been held in Bucharest, Romania (2006); Egerton 
University  Njoro  Campus,  Kenya  (2007);  Bratislava,  Slovakia  (2007);  Riyadh,  Saudi  Arabia  (2007); 
Minsk, Belarus (2008); Dubrovnik, Croatia (2010, 2011); and  Belgrade, Serbia (2011).

In 2012, Unesco organised four ETTC sessions in Baku, Azerbaijan; Dubrovnik, Croatia; Vilnius, Lithu-
ania; and Windhoek, Namibia, to train close to 70 ethics teachers from a wide variety of countries (Azer-
baijan, Belarus, Canada, Croatia, Egypt, Kenya, Latvia, Lithuania, Mexico, Namibia, Nigeria, Portugal, 
Russia, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, South Africa and Tanzania). The bioethics core curriculum of Unesco was 
a central focus of the trainings, with an aim to promote it as an education tool and to facilitate its broad 
dissemination around the world.

62 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

World Health Organisation (WHO)

Public health ethics

a.  Ethics of tuberculosis prevention, care and control

After	the	publication	of	the	WHO	guidance	on	ethics	of	tuberculosis	(TB)	(http://whqlibdoc.who.int/
publications/2010/9789241500531_eng.pdf) at the end of 2010, a series of implementation activities have 
been	organised	at	regional	and	country	level.	Over	400	Ministries	of	Health	officials,	public	health	spe-
cialists and TB doctors have participated in these events, including in Azerbaijan, Benin, China, Greece, 
Guatemala,	Malaysia	and	the	Netherlands.	The	document	is	available	in	the	six	official	WHO	languages.

b.  Cholera

There has been an ongoing debate over the utility and feasibility of establishing a stockpile of chol-
era vaccines for use in cholera epidemics. A number of ethical issues need to be taken into account in 
the decision-making processes and the management of a potential stockpile. Since the supply would, at 
least at the start, not meet the demand, the fair distribution and equitable access to this vital but scarce 
resource poses a number of ethical questions which have been addressed in several international consul-
tations over the last months.

c.  Ethics in public health crises in disasters

Following the recommendations of an expert meeting, a virtual working group has been constituted to 
develop	a	training	course	on	ethical	issues	to	address	in	public	health	crises	and	disasters.	The	WHO	
sponsored a session on ethics in public health crises and disasters at the World Congress in Bioethics in 
Rotterdam, 27 June 2012.

d.  HIV/AIDS

The	 use	 of	 antiretrovirals	 (ARVs)	 for	 treatment	 and	 for	 prevention	 of	 HIV	 is	 a	 dynamic	 and	 rapidly	
evolving	field.	Important	new	evidence	has	emerged	demonstrating	the	benefit	of	earlier	initiation	of	
ARV	for	the	HIV-positive	individual	to	prevent	onward	transmission	to	their	HIV-negative	partner	and	
oral	as	well	as	topical	ARV	pre-exposure	prophylaxis	(PrEP)	for	the	HIV-negative	individual	to	prevent	
HIV	acquisition.	The	fact	that	ARVs	cannot	only	be	used	for	treatment,	but	also	for	prevention,	poses	
ethical dilemmas in terms of priority setting and fair allocation of resources. These ethical questions are 
being	addressed	in	a	joint	WHO/UNAIDS	project.	An	international	consultation	on	the	ethics	of	PrEP	
and early initiation of ARVs for prevention was held in Geneva on 10 and 11 October 2012, in order to 
help countries with their decision-making processes.

Research ethics

a.  International clinical trial registry platform

Following	the	resolution	adopted	by	the	World	Health	Assembly	in	2005,	the	International	Clinical	Trial	
Registry  Platform  (ICTRP)  was  established  to  promote  transparency  in  health  research  activities.  In 
March 2012, the EU Clinical Trials Register (EU-CTR) became a data provider to the ICTRP search por-
tal. The ICTRP database now contains more than 200 000 records of clinical trials and collects data from 
data providers globally (more information is available on http://www.who.int/ictrp/en/index.html). The 
standards	adopted	by	the	WHO	primary	registries	contribute	to	harmonising	procedures	and	to	ensuring	
the quality of data collection.

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

63

b.  H5N1 and dual-use research

H5N1	avian	influenza	is	an	infectious	disease	of	birds	that	can	be	spread	to	people,	but	is	difficult	to	
transmit	 from	 person	 to	 person.	 Researchers	 have	 recently	 succeeded	 in	 creating	 H5N1	 viruses	 that	
are  more  transmissible  in  mammals  than  those  that  occur  naturally.  This  has  raised  concerns  about 
the	 risks	 and	 safety	 of	 such	 research	 and	 the	 WHO	 was	 asked	 to	 convene	 a	 technical	 consultation	
on 16 and 17 February 2012. The participants at this meeting reached consensus on two urgent issues 
related	to	the	newly	created	H5N1	influenza	viruses:	extending	the	temporary	moratorium	on	research	
with	new	laboratory-modified	H5N1	viruses	and	recognition	that	research	on	the	naturally	occurring	
H5N1	influenza	virus	must	continue	in	order	to	protect	public	health.	An	international	consultation	is	
being planned to take place in Geneva on 26 to 28 February 2013, in order to review the status quo and 
show the way forward in this area.

c.  Standards for research ethics committees

Following the publication of the ‘Standards and operational guidance for the ethics review of health-
related  research  with  human  participants’  (http://www.who.int/ethics/publications/en),  the  ethics  and 
health unit is developing a set of indicators that should be used for the oversight of the research ethics 
committees at country level.

d.  Online course on research ethics

The	WHO	is	currently	developing	an	online	research	ethics	course	for	its	staff	members.	Once	it	is	tested	
and	made	available	to	all	WHO	staff,	open	access	will	be	considered.

e.  Pan-African Clinical Trial Alliance

The	ethics	and	health	team	works	in	close	collaboration	with	the	WHO	vaccine	department	on	the	over-
sight  of  clinical  trials  in  Africa.  This  project  aims  to  strengthen  ethics  review  systems,  improve  the 
coordination between research ethics committees and national regulatory authorities and promote the 
registration of all clinical trials.

Global partnership

a.  Global network of WHO collaborating centres for bioethics

The	fourth	meeting	of	the	global	network	of	the	WHO’s	collaborating	centres	for	bioethics	was	hosted	
by Columbia University, in New York, on 14 and 15 June 2012, to agree on a joint work plan in the area 
of public health ethics, clinical ethics and research ethics. Further collaborating centres, in particular in 
lower-middle-income countries (LMICs) are to be designated in the near future.

b.  Ninth Global Summit of National Ethics Committees 

The Global Summit of National Ethics Committees (NECs) is an initiative taken by NECs, since 1996. 
The	Ethics	and	Health	Unit	serves	as	the	permanent	Secretariat	of	the	summit,	as	such	it	provides	techni-
cal support to working groups of NECs established to address priority ethical issues and works in close 
collaboration with the local organisers. A database of NECs was developed to provide access to opin-
ions published by NECs (see http://apps.who.int/ethics/nationalcommittees); this tool should facilitate 
exchange between NECs on issues of common interest.

The	Ninth	Global	Summit	of	National	Ethics	Committees	was	hosted	by	the	Tunisian	Ministry	of	Health	
and the Tunisian NEC in Carthage, Tunisia on 26 to 28 September 2012. Thirty-eight countries were 
represented  with  a  total  of  more  than  100  participants  including  observers  and  representatives  from 
Unesco,	the	Council	of	Europe,	and	the	WHO	headquarters	and	regional	offices.	Before	the	summit,	four	

64 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

background papers were developed by groups of NECs from all around the world on the following issues, 
identified	during	the	previous	summit:

•	 biobanks;

•	

•	

research ethics committees;

infectious	diseases	(TB,	HIV,	malaria);

•	 organ, tissue and cell transplantation.

These topics were discussed during the summit as well as other emerging topics and ongoing activities 
in the different NECs.

The 10th summit will take place in Mexico in June 2014.

c.  Collaboration with NGOs

•	 The	WHO	is	part	of	the	review	process	of	the	Council	of	International	Organisations	of	Medical	

Sciences (CIOMS) guidelines on biomedical research.

•	 The	WHO	is	part	of	a	working	group	on	the	use	of	placebos	in	biomedical	research	established	by	
the	World	Medical	Association	(WMA)	for	the	update	of	the	Declaration	of	Helsinki	on	ethical	
principles for medical research involving human subjects.

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

65

EGE Secretariat

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013 

67

Secretariat

Address 
European Commission
Berl 8/362
1049 Brussels
BELGIUM
Fax +32 229-94565
E-mail: BEPA-ETHICS-GROUP@ec.europa.eu

Maurizio SALVI 
MBA, MBS, PhD, D. Biotech.
European Commission
Head	BEPA	Ethics	Sector
Head	of	the	EGE	Secretariat
General Secretary EC IBD
Berl 8/359
1049 Brussels
BELGIUM
E-mail: maurizio.salvi@ec.europa.eu

Kim Hoang Le
European Commission
EGE Secretariat
Berl 8/362
1049 Brussels
BELGIUM
Tel. +32 229-99228
E-mail: Kim-hoang.le@ec.europa.eu

Adriana Sorina Oltean
European Commission
EGE Secretariat
Berl 8/362
1049 Brussels
BELGIUM
Tel. +32 229-93016
E-mail: adriana-sorina.oltean@ec.europa.eu

Website: http://ec.europa.eu/european_group_ethics/index_en.htm

68 

Ethically speaking 17, January 2013

HOW TO OBTAIN EU PUBLICATIONS

Free publications:

•	
•	

via	EU	Bookshop	(http://bookshop.europa.eu);
	at	the	European	Union’s	representations	or	delegations.		
You	can	obtain	their	contact	details	on	the	Internet	(http://ec.europa.eu)		
or	by	sending	a	fax		to	+352	2929-42758.

Priced publications:

•	

via	EU	Bookshop	(http://bookshop.europa.eu).

Priced subscriptions (e.g. annual series of the Official Journal of the European 
Union and reports of cases before the Court of Justice of the European Union):

•	

	via	one	of	the	sales	agents	of	the	Publications	Office	of	the	European	Union		
(http://publications.europa.eu/others/agents/index_en.htm).

ISSN 1725-5562

Ethically
speaking

A newsletter providing information on the 
activities of the national ethics committees 
compiled by the Secretariat of the European 
Group on Ethics in Science and New 
Technologies to the European Commission

Issue 17 — January 2013

K
A
-
A
I
-
1
3
-
0
0
1
-
E
N
-
C

E
t
h

i
c
a

l
l
y

s
p
e
a
k
i

n
g

I
s
s
u
e

1
7
—

J
a
n
u
a
r
y

2
0
1
3

 
 
 
 
 
 
