EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES 

Statement  
on the formulation of a code of conduct for research integrity  
for projects funded by the European Commission 

The  EGE  welcomes  the  importance  of  all  European  Commission  actions  to  promote  the 
highest  standards  of  scientific  integrity  in  all  research  that  is  funded  through  its  own 
programmes. 

The  EGE  will  not  be  directly  involved  in  the  formulation  of  a  Code  of  Good  Scientific 
Practices,  but  it  believes  that  the  following  considerations  provide  a  set  of  elements  that 
should be addressed in any such code. 

1.  The EGE recognises that to define Good Scientific Practice for participants in European 
projects is important and especially complex due to the large number of participants in 
most  research  projects  sponsored  through  the  Horizon  2020  programme  and  other 
research initiatives of the European Union due to their multi-national character. 

2.  A way to make explicit the commitment of all partners to these standards could be to 
require adherence to a Code of Good Scientific Practice and Research Integrity defined 
in the contracts of the research projects. 

3.  Codes of Conduct for Scientific Research exist in many European countries and research 
institutions. They respond to the needs of particular disciplines, to the legal system of 
each country or to specific traditions. It may be useful to have a general reference for 
European contracts. A possible example may be the one proposed by ESF-ALLEA on an 
European Code of Conduct for Research Integrity: 
http://www.esf.org/fileadmin/Public_documents/Publications/Code_Conduct_Research
Integrity.pdf 

4.  European  funded  projects  are  unusual  in  that  they  often  involve  many  actors  from 
different  institutions,  including  universities,  research  institutions,  small  and  medium 
sized enterprises and large companies. In addition, many of the projects involve actors 
from multiple countries, including both EU member states and other countries. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.  These  organisations  may  have  widely  different  cultures.  Integrity  in  relation  to  the 
manner in which the research is conducted (and its results disseminated) may therefore 
be of even greater importance than for other forms of funding. 

6.  Scientific  misconduct  is  a  matter  of  concern  for  all  the  actors  involved  in  research.  A 
procedure  devoted  to  the  analysis  of  any  indication  of  misconduct  and  to  the 
identification of the participants responsible for irregular behaviour should be put into 
practice.  That  system  should  include  specific  protection  of  whistle-blowers.  The 
institutions  that  are  the  contractors  with  the  European  Commission  have  a 
responsibility to act to ensure integrity 

7.  Academic freedom within academic institutions has been an important cornerstone for 
the  furtherance  of  research  and  scholarship  for  centuries.  It  is  important  that 
researchers have the freedom to question and test received wisdom and to put forward 
new  ideas  and  controversial  or  unpopular  opinions  without  placing  themselves  in 
jeopardy  of  losing  their  jobs  or  the  privileges  they  may  have'.  It  is  crucial  that  the 
freedom  to  conduct  research  and  scholarship,  teach,  speak,  and  publish  without 
interference or penalty is respected and maintained.  
a.  It is important that the freedom to conduct and interpret research that forms part of 
the  culture  of  universities  and  research  institutions  is  not  compromised  by  their 
association with industry or commerce or any other grouping where priorities may  
b.  Contracts  should  specify  what  curtailment  if  any  is  imposed  on  openness,  the 
reasons for this curtailment, and timeline during which some curtailment is deemed 
necessary. This timeline should not be excessive 

c.  All  data  that  forms  the  basis  of  any  publication  must  be  available  to  all  those 

involved and named as authors of the publication. 

d.  Negative results must, at the very least, be considered for publication and where a 
decision  is  made  not  to  publish,  the  reasons  must  be  part  of  the  report  to  the 
Commission on the progress of the funded project 

e.  Enough information about research should be published or placed in repositories to 

enable those skilled in the particular discipline to reproduce published results. 

8.  Any code of practice should consider the manner in which it affects inter alia:  

a.  Institutions  at  which  research 

is  undertaken,  and  who  have  contractual 

responsibility for the research conducted by researchers within the institution 

b.  Principal  researchers  and  their  responsibilities  to  their  institution  and  for  their 
colleagues and all staff working in the ‘unit’ for which they exercise responsibility 
c.  Junior or other members of staff who are responsible to the principal researchers 
and may have responsibilities for the mentoring of students, research scientists and 
others that work with them 

d.  The relationships between research in an institution and other academic institutions 

at which work is undertaken in relation to multi-institution projects. 

2 

 
 
 
 
e.  The relationship between research in an institution and private companies at which 
work is undertaken in relation to any projects partially or wholly funded by private 
organisations. 

f.  Responsibilities  of  students  in  developing  data  and  the  responsibilities  of  their 

mentors to assure that they are properly supervised and recognised. 

9.  All  participants  in  the  project  should  acknowledge  their  compliance  with  existing 

regulations and practice regarding scientific practice in relation to: 
a.  Human subjects and materials from human origin, in particular where clinical trials 

are part of the project. 

b.  Data regarding humans: Where appropriate, researchers, institutions and consortia 
must  define  policies  relating  to  the  confidentiality  of  data  including  assuring  the 
including  where  necessary  the 
anonymity  of  any  human  research  subjects, 
encryption of personal data. Appropriate action must be taken to protect the safety 
of participants and researchers. 

c.  Experiments with animals 
d.  Activities that involve the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms. 
e.  Any  other  regulation  existing  in  the  Member  State  where  the  work  will  be  carried 

out.  

f.  Where  research  funded  by  the  European  Union  is  undertaken  in  a  non-member 
state, all the regulatory requirements must at the very least conform to the norm set 
by Europe, and must also meet the requirements of the State in which the research 
is carried out 

g.  Transfer  of  material  between  non-member  states  and  member  states  must  be 

undertaken according to EU norms 

h.  Data transferred between member states and non-member states must conform to 

EU data protection requirements  

10. The responsible conduct of research includes the proper management and retention of 

the research data.  
a.  All researchers, institutions and consortia must have a formal procedure for ensuring 
the retention of data and for defining the ownership of such data, including policies 
to  ensure  retention  of  data  in  the  event  of  researchers  leaving  the  institution  or 
consortium. 

b.  Data  and  materials  produced  from  European  projects  should  be  available  to  any 
other  scientists  wishing  to  reproduce  the  results  obtained.  Specific  conditions 
regarding confidentiality of commercial use may exist. 

c.  Whenever  this  is  feasible,  raw  data  from  European  projects  should  be  kept  for  a 

specified period after the completion of the project. 

d.  Where the culture of a participating organisation is more hierarchical than may be 
normal within an academic institution the  contract should specify how data are to 

3 

 
 
 
be  disseminated  and  ensure  that  enough  is  placed  in  the  public  domain  to  ensure 
that the conclusions may be justified. 

11. Results  from  European  projects  should  be  the  object  of  publication  in  an  open  and 
accurate manner avoiding over-interpretation of results. Scientific publications follow a 
number of conditions that have to be fulfilled in all cases. 
a.  The authors of the publications have to correspond to those that have a material or 
intellectual contribution to the results published without any improper omission or 
inclusion of authors. The order of authors has to be agreed and it has to correspond 
to the normal uses of the field. 

b.  Possible  conflicts  of  interest  and  sources  of  funding  for  the  publications  have  to 

accurately be described in the publications 

c.  Publication of results must not be unduly delayed, given the rules of the contracts or 

to preparation of applications for intellectual property protection 

d.  All those involved in the development of intellectual property must be named in any 

application for protection. 

12. The  Code  of  Conduct  should  also  include  a  description  of  what  it  is  considered  to  be 

proper research procedures. It includes 
a.  Rules for proper design and execution of projects 
b.  Ways of proper managing of resources 
c.  Avoidance of any misconduct as manipulation or fabrication of data or plagiarism. 

13. All  Institutions  (individually  and  collectively)  participating 

in  European  research 
programmes should adhere to the Human Resources Strategy defined by the European 
Union. 

14. Rules of procedure that would apply in cases of scientific misconduct must form part of 
any  contract  approved  under  the  Horizon  2020  programme.  In  addition,  a  list  of 
sanctions  must  be  available  to  the  participants  that  would  eventually  be  found 
responsible  for  them.  These  could  include  restrictions  to  future  access  to  research 
projects calls, and any sanctions that might be relevant within an academic institution or 
within a company. Frameworks for resolving possible breaches of the code within one of 
the funded organisations for both the institution and the research group, between such 
organisations,  and  in  particular,  amongst  institutions  with  differing  managing  and 
responsibility  structures  should  be  provided.  Analysis  of  different  cases  of  misconduct 
should  take  into  consideration  the  traditions  of  different  scientific  disciplines  and  the 
legal  systems  of  different  countries.  When  analysing  specific  cases  of  misconduct  the 
European Commission may consider creating its own office and working in connection 
with  the  offices  already  existing  in  different  countries  organized  in  ENRIO  (European 
Network of Scientific Integrity Offices). 

___ 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
