T

h

e

e

t

h

i

c

a

l

i

m

p

l

i

c

a

t

i

o

n

s

o

f

n

e

w

h

e

a

l

t

h

t

e

c

h

n

o

l

o

g

i

e

s

a

n

d

c

i

t

i

z

e

n

p

a

r

t

i

c

i

p

a

t

i

o

n

B

r

u

s

s

e

l

s

,

1

3

O

c

t

o

b

e

r

2

0

1

5

OPINION NO. 29 OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON  
ETHICS IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES

The ethical 
implications of new

health technologies

and citizen

participation

Brussels, 13 October 2015

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The ethical implications 
of new health 
technologies and citizen 
participation

Brussels, 13 October 2015

Jim Dratwa
Chief Editor

29

Opinion No

Europe Direct is a service to help you find answers 
to your questions about the European Union.

Freephone number (*):
00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11

(*) 

 The information given is free, as are most calls (though some operators, phone boxes or hotels 
may charge you).

More information on the European Union is available on the internet (http://europa.eu).

Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2016

PDF 
Print 

ISBN 978-92-79-50351-1 
ISBN 978-92-79-50352-8 

doi:10.2872/488735 
doi:10.2872/633988 

ES-01-15-554-EN-N
ES-01-15-554-EN-C

© European Union, 2016
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.
Photo © Gstudio Group

Printed in Luxembourg

Printed on elemental chlorine-free bleached PaPer (ecf)

OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS IN SCIENCE 
AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION

The ethical implications of new 
health technologies and citizen participation

  No 29 

13/10/2015 

Reference: 
Rapporteurs: 

Request from the President of the European Commission 
Andrzej Górski, Ritva Halila, Laura Palazzani and Marie-Jo Thiel

THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES (EGE),

Having regard to the Treaty on European Union, and in particular Article 6 of the common 
provisions concerning respect for fundamental rights and Article 11 providing for citizen 
participation,

Having regard to the Treaty on the functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 
16 concerning the right to the protection of personal data, Article 168 concerning public health, 
and Article 169 concerning consumer protection,

Having regard to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, and in particular 
Article 1 (Human dignity), Article 3 (Right to the integrity of the person), Article 7 (Respect for 
private and family life), Article 8 (Protection of personal data), Article 11 (Freedom of expression 
and information), Article 13 (Freedom of the arts and sciences), Article 21 (Non-discrimination), 
Article 35 (Right to Healthcare), Article 42 (Right of access to documents) (1),

Having regard to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in particular Articles 7, 8, 11, 12 
and 13, 19, 20, 21, 25 and 27 (2),

Having regard to the European Convention of Human Rights (ECHR), in particular Article 5 ‘Right 
to liberty and security’ and Article 8 ‘Right to respect for private and family life’, Article 10 ‘right 
to freedom of expression’ and Article 14, ‘Prohibition of discrimination’ (3),

Having regard to the European Social Charter, in particular Article 11 on the right to protection 
of health (4),

Having regard to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), 
in particular Article 15 (5),

Having regard to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, in particular Articles 
14, 17, 18, 19, 25 and 26 (6),

Having regard to the Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights (2005) (7),

(1)  Official Journal C 364 of November 2000, pp. 1-22.

(2)  http://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights

(3)  http://www.echr.coe.int/Documents/Convention_ENG.pdf

(4)  http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Treaties/Html/035.htm

(5)  http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CESCR.aspx

(6)  http://www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/ccpr.aspx

(7)  http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=31058&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html

3

 
 
 
 
 
Having regard to Article 6 of the seventh framework programme of the European Union for 
research, technological development and demonstration activities (2007-2013), which states 
that ‘All the research activities carried out under the seventh framework programme shall be 
carried out in compliance with fundamental ethical principles’,

Having regard to the Council of Europe Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine, signed 
on 4 April 1997 in Oviedo (8),

Having regard to Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 Oc-
tober 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and 
on the free movement of such data (9),

Having regard to Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 
2002 concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic 
communications sector (Directive on privacy and electronic communications) (10),

Having regard to Directive 2011/62/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 
2011 amending Directive 2001/83/EC on the Community code relating to medicinal products 
for human use, as regards the prevention of the entry into the legal supply chain of falsified 
medicinal products (11),

Having regard to Directive 2007/47/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 Sep-
tember 2007 amending Council Directive 90/385/EEC on the approximation of the laws of the 
Member States relating to active implantable medical devices, Council Directive 93/42/EEC 
concerning medical devices and Directive 98/8/EC concerning the placing of biocidal products 
on the market (12),

Having regard to Directive 2004/23/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
31 March 2004 on setting standards of quality and safety for the donation, procurement, test-
ing, processing, preservation, storage and distribution of human tissues and cells (13),

Having regard to Directive 2011/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 
2011 on the application of patients’ rights in cross-border healthcare (14),

Having regard to Directive 2010/84/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
15 December 2010 amending, as regards pharmacovigilance, Directive 2001/83/EC on the Com-
munity code relating to medicinal products for human use (15),

Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 141/2000 of the European Parliament and of the Council 
of 16 December 1999 on orphan medicinal products (16),

(8)  http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Treaties/Html/164.htm

(9)  OJ L 281.

(10)  OJ L 201.

(11)  OJ L 174/74.

(12)  OJ L 247/21.

(13)  OJ L 102/48.

(14)  OJ L 88/45.

(15)  OJ L 348/74.

(16)  OJ L 18/1.

4

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationHaving regard to Regulation (EU) No 1235/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Coun-
cil of 15 December 2010 as regards pharmacovigilance of medicinal products for human use, 
authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and on 
advanced therapy medicinal products (17),

Having regard to Regulation (EU) No 536/2014 of the European Parliament and the Council of 
16 April 2014 on clinical trials on medicinal products for human use (18),

Having regard to the Commission Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of 
the Council on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and 
on the free movement of such data (General Data Protection Regulation) (19),

Having regard to the European Commission White Paper Together for Health: A Strategic Ap-
proach for the EU 2008-2013 (20),

Having regard to the European Commission Green Paper on mobile Health (‘mHealth’) (21),

Having regard to the European Commission Green Paper on citizen science: citizen science for 
Europe — towards a better society of empowered citizens and enhanced research (22),

Having regard to the Commission Communication of 4 November 2008 entitled ‘Telemedicine 
for the benefit of patients, healthcare systems and society’ (23),

Having regard to the European Commission guidelines (2012) on the qualification and classifi-
cation of stand-alone software used in healthcare within the regulatory framework of medical 
devices (24),

Having regard to the European Parliament resolution of 14 January 2014 on the eHealth Action 
Plan 2012-2020 — Innovative healthcare for the 21st century (25),

Having regard to the Riga Roadmap ‘Investing in Health and Wellbeing for All’ adopted in Riga 
under the auspices of the Latvia Presidency of the Council of the EU on 29-30 June 2015.

Having regard to the Council of Europe Recommendation No R (97) 5 of the Committee of 
Ministers to Member States on the protection of medical data (26),

(17)  OJ L 348/1.

(18)  OJ L 158/1.

(19)  2012/0011 (COD).

(20)  COM(2007) 630.

(21)  COM(2014) 219.

(22)  http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/news/green-paper-citizen-science-europe-towards-society-em-

powered-citizens-and-enhanced-research-0

(23)  COM(2008)0689.

(24)  http://ec.europa.eu/health/medical-devices/files/meddev/2_1_6_ol_en.pdf

(25)  2013/2061(INI).

(26)  Adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 13 February 1997 at the 584th meeting of the Ministers’ 

Deputies (http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/standardsetting/dataprotection/EM/EM_R(97)5_EN.pdf).

5

Having regard to the WHO Report on ethical considerations for use of unregistered interven-
tions for Ebola viral disease (27),

Having regard to the WHO Report ‘Health 2020. A European policy framework and strategy for 
the 21st century (2013)’,

Having regard to the World Medical Association (WMA) Declaration of Helsinki — Ethical Prin-
ciples for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects, adopted by the 18th WMA General 
Assembly, Helsinki, Finland, June 1964,

Having regard to the Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, Opinion 02/2013 on apps on 
smart devices,

Having regard to the Warsaw declaration on the ‘appification’ of society of the 35th International 
Conference of Data Protection and Privacy Commissioners held on September 2013,

Having regard to the EGE Opinion (1999) on Ethical issues of healthcare in the information 
society,

Having regard to EGE Opinion No 20 (2005) on Ethical aspects of ICT implants in the human 
body,

Having regard to the EGE Roundtable on the Ethics of Citizen Involvement in Health held in 
Brussels on 22.10.2014,

Having regard to the contributions from the EGE open consultation on the ethical implications 
of citizen participation and new health technologies,

Having heard the EGE Rapporteurs, Andrzej Górski, Ritva Halila, Laura Palazzani and Marie-Jo 
Thiel,

HEREBY ADOPTS THE FOLLOWING OPINION:

(27)  WHO/HIS/KER/GHE/14.1.

6

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationCONTENTS

Opinion of the European Group on Ethics in Science and 
New Technologies to the European Commission 

Introduction 

New ethical complexities of citizen participation in health 

EU policy relevance 

Scope of the Opinion 

Chapter 1  A paradigm shift in health technologies and 

citizen participation 

1.1. 

Health technologies 

3

11

11

11

12

13

13

1.1.1.  Omics, ‘personalised’ medicine and data intensive medicine  13

1.1.2.  Remote medicine: mHealth, e-health and online 

health resources 

1.2. 

‘Citizen science’ and active involvement 

1.2.1.  What is citizen science? Analysis of a new concept 

1.2.2.  Recent phenomena of citizen participation in health 

1.3. 

Summarising new opportunities and challenges in health: 

19

23

23

25

Prevention, prediction, personalisation, participation and precision  29

Chapter 2  Emerging ethical tensions 

31

2.1. 

2.2. 

Evolving notions of the self: abstraction versus ‘personalisation’? 

31

Transformation of the doctor–patient relationship: 

responsibility versus responsibilisation? 

2.3. 

Active engagement versus ‘passive participation’ in health 

and medical research: consequences for empowerment, 

exploitation and scientific integrity 

2.4. 

2.5. 

Social transformations 

Challenges to justice and solidarity 

34

36

38

41

Chapter 3  The human rights and regulatory framework 

45

3.1. 

A (European) human rights approach to citizens as ‘active 

actors’ of their lives and health 

3.1.1.  The European Convention on Human Rights and 

Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR) 

3.1.2.  The International Covenant on Economic, Social and 

Cultural Rights (ICESCR) 

3.1.3.  Citizen participation in the EU governance framework 

3.2. 

Regulating new health technologies: new challenges 

3.2.1.  Big health data 

3.2.2. mHealth 

3.2.3. Telemedicine 

3.2.4.  Direct to consumer genetic tests 

3.3. 

Further avenues for regulating citizen participation in health 

3.3.1.  Transparency, clinical trials and drug development 

3.3.2. Regulating self-experimentation and compassionate use 

3.3.3. Ownership of data 

Recommendations 

Recommandations 

Empfehlungen 

45

45

47

49

49

50

53

57

57

58

58

58

60

61

67

73

OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS IN SCIENCE 
AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES TO THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION

The ethical implications 
of new health 
technologies and  
citizen participation

Reference: Request from the President of the European Commission 

Rapporteurs: 

 Andrzej Górski 

Ritva Halila 

Laura Palazzani 

Marie-Jo Thiel

Edited by Jim Dratwa 

and Joanna Parkin

Opinion No29

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed a wave of innovation in 
health technologies driven by new medical break-
throughs, novel scientific approaches and the rise of 
digital health technologies. Pioneering methods of 
drug development and disease diagnosis, the rise of 
‘big health data’, and new means of providing net-
worked care have led to predictions that European 
health systems are on the cusp of transformation. While 
much of the promise held in these technological in-
novations remains to be fully realised, the rise of new 
health technologies are accompanied by a profound 
set of shifts in the way individuals — whether as pa-
tients, citizens or consumers — engage with matters 
of health.

From the consumer who orders a genetic testing kit 
online to the patient receiving genetically customised 
medication; from the diabetic monitoring her blood 
sugar level with a smartphone, to rare-disease patients 
who mobilise online communities of sufferers to run 
a DIY clinical trial; individuals and collectives are partici-
pating in new and unprecedented ways in the conduct 
of health research, health policy, and health practice.

The ‘participatory turn’ in health offers a number of 
new roles to citizens, whether as experimenters, stake-
holders, purveyors of data, research participants, or us-
ers. It covers not only the gathering and volunteering of 
data, and the involvement of non-experts in scientific 
experimentation and analysis, but also the lobbying ef-
forts of interest groups, public input into research and 
funding, as well as in the formulation and regulation 
of policies. Citizen involvement manifests at different 
stages in the process — from upstream interventions 
in priority setting, and influencing funding decisions to 
a more direct downstream involvement of citizens and 
patients in the use and application of medical knowl-
edge and information. It covers both those active, in-
formed participants who engage from a position of 
agency as well as those unaware of their contribution.

New ethical complexities of citizen participa-
tion in health

The implications of growing citizen involvement in 
healthcare and health research are complex and poten-
tially transformational. The benefits could be substan-
tial: more informed, empowered patients, taking great-
er control of their own health, in more effective health 
systems, driven by medical research that harnesses the 
power of big data. Certain European governments have 

already signalled the above-described innovations as 
a key means to make healthcare more efficient and 
the solution to preserving European health budgets 
against a backdrop of population ageing, rationing of 
care, and rising pressures on the price of drugs, medical 
devices and services.

Yet the multifaceted nature of participation poses 
a complex set of new ethical considerations for policy-
makers, practitioners and participants. Even as trends 
offer the realisation of greater autonomy on the part of 
individuals, the potential for empowerment is nuanced 
by a set of tensions or risks: voluntary involvement can 
become an obligation to participate; empowerment 
can be joined by demands that individuals take greater 
responsibility for their health; and citizen participation 
in health research can come to resemble instrumentali-
sation, even exploitation.

Terms such as ‘citizen science’, which are applied to 
new phenomena of citizen involvement, embody these 
inherent ambiguities. ‘Citizen science’ is often used as 
a supposedly self-evident notion, with a set of implied 
positive connotations. But it is an ambiguous expres-
sion, with many possible meanings, which need a sys-
tematic conceptual reflection in order to move beyond 
the ‘rhetoric’, demythologise the expression and under-
stand the diverse meanings with a critical awareness.

As a deeper consequence of these scientific and tech-
nological developments and upsurge in citizen partici-
pation, the traditional assumptions and institutional ar-
rangements surrounding science (including medicine) 
have become the object of discussion on a conceptual, 
social, ethical and juridical level. How does the increas-
ing individualisation and consumerism in healthcare 
alter principles of solidarity which underpin European 
health systems? How is the doctor–patient relationship 
being transformed and where do sources of legitimate, 
trusted medical authority now lie? As we witness an 
increasingly dynamic citizen engagement in medi-
cal science and research, at which point does willing 
participation become a manipulation of the notion of 
consent?

EU policy relevance

Such questions are likely to become increasingly per-
tinent, not only for national health providers, but also 
for European policymakers. Precision or ‘personalised 
medicine’ has gained growing prominence at EU level 

11

INTRODUCTION

while e-health forms a pillar of the EU’s digital agenda; 
EU funding for research and innovation is channelled 
towards mHealth start-ups and citizen science-based 
projects and an EU big data industrial policy is in the 
offing to exploit the potential presented by growing 
quantities of health data.

Furthermore, EU and international policy approaches 
reflect increasing recognition of the importance of 
participation, in a shift from what might be termed 
a ‘health for all’ approach to one of ‘all for health.’ In-
deed, the health dimension of the Europe 2020 strategy 
has been titled ‘Together for Health’ and the WHO’s 
European Health 2020 Strategy emphasises political, 
professional and civil society engagement to improve 
health within what it calls a ‘whole-of-society and 
whole-of-government approach.’

In recognition of the important shifts underway and 
their growing EU relevance, the EGE was requested by 
the President of the European Commission to produce 
an Opinion on the ethical issues arising from the devel-
opment of new health technologies and particularly, 
from the dimension of citizen participation.

Scope of the Opinion

This Opinion explores the transformations that citizen 
participation in health and medicine induces across 
different domains together with the resulting ethical 
implications. Trends and implications of citizen involve-
ment are examined in light of new technologies that 
have been developed and that are emerging in the do-
main of health, as well as wider cultural, societal and 
political shifts, which are transforming the context in 
which health and healthcare are perceived, organised 
and delivered.

It does not attempt to give an exhaustive account of 
health technologies, rather it scrutinises citizen partici-
pation via a selection of case studies of scientific and 
technological innovation, chosen because they em-
body a broader set of shifts in health and medicine. 
These shifts include, first, evolving understandings of 
health and illness and associated changing perceptions 
of the self and the body; second, changing notions of 
what it means to be a patient in a modern health con-
text; and third, the increasingly diverse roles performed 
by citizens/individuals and patients in the production 
of knowledge and innovation on health.

12

Chapter 1 of this Opinion examines the principal health 
technologies which are most central to the shifts out-
lined above, including data-intensive medicine, omics, 
‘personalised’ medicine as well as so-called ‘remote’ 
forms of medicine such as e-health, mHealth, telemedi-
cine and online health resources. The chapter then 
traces the emergence of the phenomenon of citizen 
science and citizen participation with specific regard 
to healthcare and medical research. It critically analyses 
the diverse meanings and functions of these terms be-
fore outlining recent examples of citizen participation 
in the domain of health.

Chapter 2 of this Opinion sets out the ethical implica-
tions of the paradigm shift (or set of shifts) identified in 
Chapter 1. In unpacking both the promise and potential 
challenges associated with citizen participation in health, 
the chapter identifies five sets of considerations: first, the 
implications of new health technologies and new modes 
of involvement on perceptions of the ‘self’, of person-
hood and of the body in a medical context; second, the 
implications of potential transformations in the patient–
physician relationship; third, the implications of citizen 
involvement in the research endeavour and the tensions 
between empowerment, engagement and exploitation; 
fourth, the implications of new health technologies and 
citizen involvement on societal understandings, princi-
ples and structures governing health; and fifth, implica-
tions for notions of solidarity and justice.

Chapter 3 of this Opinion examines the adequacy of 
current governance arrangements, and identifies new 
questions and gaps presented by the nexus between 
new health technologies and new practices of citizen 
participation. It undertakes, first, an examination of the 
legal landscape pertaining to participation, charting 
the rights and protections enshrined in international 
human rights treaties and jurisprudence which estab-
lish the entitlements of citizens to participate in, and 
enjoy the results of, science and technology. It then 
identifies potential gaps in the regulatory framework in 
relation to new health technologies and the suitability 
of existing oversight mechanisms to cover new prac-
tices of knowledge generation and innovation engag-
ing the individual.

Chapter 4 of this Opinion puts forward a set of recom-
mendations, aimed at EU and national-level policymak-
ers, industry and other stakeholders, which aim to max-
imise the benefits and minimise the harms associated 
with new health technologies and citizen participation 
in health policy, research and practice.

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationA PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION | CHAPTER 1

Chapter 1  A paradigm shift in health technologies and citizen participation

The rapid development of new health technologies 
is one aspect of a wider upheaval in medicine and in 
society more broadly, which is witnessing a transfor-
mation of practices, of the way we behave and act on 
the world and in our understanding and relationship to 
knowledge, to the status of information and to the way 
science is elaborated, shared, constructed, renewed, or 
transformed.

The result is a paradigm shift in health, which is both 
driving and in turn being shaped by, new technolo-
gies, and which consists of at least three fundamental 
dimensions:

First, are the evolving understandings of health and 
their associated potential for re-altering perceptions 
of the self and the body. Innovative and increasingly 
pervasive means for mapping the human body from 
technologies which chart an individual’s genome (DNA 
databases, omics) and those which monitor vital signs 
and biological processes (mHealth) to the spread of 
health informatics (electronic health records) are pro-
ducing a gamut of medical information and driving 
a shift towards a new model of data-intensive medi-
cine. This brings increased diagnostic power but also 
impacts on the very concept of health, the self, and of 
the way that individuals understand themselves.

These technologies bridge both the individual and 
collective. The potential for perceiving one’s selfhood 
through the lens of biological data is particularly acute, 
given the direct engagement of patients — and citi-
zens more broadly — in producing and analysing this 
data: not merely bystanders or recipients, but active 
contributors and participants in the transition to a da-
ta-centred understanding of health.

A second fundamental transformation relates to what 
it means to be a patient in a modern health context, 
where the dividing line between those who cure and 
those who are cured can appear increasingly blurred. 
Together with wider societal shifts, new technologies 
are protagonists in the destabilisation of traditional 
structures of power and knowledge underpinning 
medical practice. Technologies such as telemedicine 
are moving patient–physician interactions outside of 
classic clinical settings, while online health resources 
and mHealth apps are complementing, disrupting or 
supplanting traditional sources of medical advice, with 
the advent of the ‘expert patient’ perhaps the starkest 
example of the re-allocation of medical authority.

Third, and closely related to the two above-described 
trends, is the multitude of roles performed by citizens/
individuals and patients when engaging with the do-
main of health, which are increasingly varied, fluid and 
overlapping. Digital technologies are enabling citizens 
not only to access new sources of health information, 
but to contribute data, and even (co) design and (co) 
lead research experiments. Patients are not only receiv-
ing medical care but in turn offering their own exper-
ience and advice to fellow sufferers (via virtual, net-
worked communities), the medical establishment and 
policymakers. While lay persons have long participated 
in medical (self) experimentation and innovation, the 
degree of crossover or blurring between roles is new.

1.1.  Health technologies

A set of technological innovations, cutting across catego-
ries of diagnosis, therapy, treatment and prevention, are 
at the frontier of the three, above-described transitions 
in health. The following section presents a snapshot of 
such technologies via a selection of case studies, chosen 
for the potential they possess to redefine the relationship 
between an individual and their health. They represent 
innovations which, in the words of Andrew Webster, are 
‘not simply extending the medical repertoire and the in-
struments available to it but are transforming it.’ (28). In so 
doing, they are changing established understandings of 
illness and disease, and bringing about shifts in shared 
conceptions of health, medicine and the body.

1.1.1.  Omics, ‘personalised’ medicine 

and data intensive medicine

Rapid technological developments since the Human 
Genome Project (HGP) sequenced the first human ge-
nome have seen a shift from characterising genomes 
to developing personalised genomic analysis. In com-
bination with the development of other omics tech-
nologies, such advances are enabling the profiling of 
thousands of molecular components in individuals. The 
development of complex computational methods to 
process and model such quantities of new data holds 
the promise of a more precise, personalised medicine 
that could transform the treatment and prevention of 
disease.

(28)  Webster, A. (2002), ‘Innovative Health Technologies and the 
Social: Redefining Health, Medicine and the Body’, Current 
Sociology, Vol. 50, pp. 443-457.

13

CHAPTER 1 | A PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION

Human genome and the new generation 
sequencing technologies

The goal of the Human Genome Project, initiated in 
1990, was to sequence and read the human genome, 
with an ultimate aim to better understand the function 
of detected genes (29).

Since the publication of the project’s first results, 
the development of new technologies such as new 
generation sequencing have made whole genome 
sequencing easier, faster and cheaper (30). Today the 
whole genome sequencing of one individual costs less 
than EUR 1 000. Genome sequencing produces huge 
amounts of data that have only partially been ana-
lysed (31). Rapid development in bioinformatics tools 
and the significant increase in the capacity and speed 
of computers have provided new opportunities for 
data analysis and management.

Recent progress in genomic technology has enabled 
the analysis of the foetal genome using a small sample 
of the mother’s blood (32). This opens the possibility for 

(29)  The Human Genome Project started in 1990, with the full se-
quence of the human genome published in April 2003. This 
project revealed that the 3 billion base pair human genome 
consisted only of 20 500 genes, compared to earlier esti-
mates ranging from 50 000 to 140 000 genes (http://www.
genome.gov/12011238); More than 90 % of DNA is non-cod-
ing, regulatory or repetitive areas, or of unknown function. 
Around 0.5 % of sequences differ between healthy individu-
als — explaining mostly variability in phenotypes, i.e. ap-
pearance, hair, eye and skin colour, etc., or they are in repeti-
tive, non-coding regions. Further intensive studies based on 
the data produced in this project has succeeded in identify-
ing the molecular basis of many rare, inherited diseases and 
also detecting the so-called risk genes for common diseases 
such as cancer, diabetes, mental disorders or autoimmune 
diseases. Cohen, J., ‘The Human Genome, a Decade Later: 
Ten years after scientists finished mapping our DNA, they 
have many unanswered questions’, MIT Technology Review, 
21 December 2010 (http://www.technologyreview.com/
featuredstory/422140/the-human-genome-a-decade-later).

(30)  van Dijk, E. L., Auger, H., Jaszczyszyn, G. and Thermes, C. 

(2014), Trends in Genetics, 30(9):418-426.

(31)  The whole genome contains about 3 billion base pairs, 
of which only 3 % codes for RNA. 85 % of clinically signifi-
cant mutations are in this region, i.e. exons of the genes. 
Whole-exome sequencing analyses only all coding regions 
of the human genome. See Rabbani et al., ‘The promise of 
whole-exome sequencing in medical genetics’, Journal of 
Human Genetics (2014) 59, 5-15.

(32)  Fan, H. C., Gu, W., Wang, J., Blumenfeld, Y. J., El-Sayed, Y. Y. 
and Quake, S. R., ‘Non-invasive prenatal measurement of the 
foetal genome’, Nature 487, 320-324.doi:10.1038/nature11251.

obtaining information as early as in the first trimester 
of pregnancy, not only about the sex and possible risks 
of inherited diseases that the parents may carry, but 
also may provide a pathway to determine the risks of 
developing acquired diseases. Genome analyses have 
become commercially available, often referred to as 
‘direct-to-consumer’ (DTC) testing.

Today an individual can take a sample, send it to a labo-
ratory and receive a genomic analysis, including details 
of inherited health risks (33). Many of these commercial-
ly available tests are based on individual variation and 
risk gene alterations. Tests used by different companies 
have given variable results, which has raised concerns 
and caused interventions by public authorities (34).

The Personal Genome Project

In 2005, the Personal Genome Project (PGP) was es-
tablished at Harvard University to shed light on the 
human genome and the interplay between genetic 
and environmental factors in influencing individual 
traits.

The project is based on the principle of public par-
ticipation and seeks volunteers willing to donate 
biological samples and personal data to become 
a public resource, urging ‘willing participants to 
publicly share their personal data for the greater 
good’ (35). Participants are asked to input their medi-
cal histories alongside their genome sequences. Par-
ticipation is based upon an ‘open consent’ frame-
work that purposefully excludes promises about 
privacy and requires participants to demonstrate 
comprehension prior to enrolment (in order to enrol, 
each participant must pass a series of short online 
tests to ensure that they are providing informed 
consent.) (36). The project initially aimed to collect 
genomic information from 100 000 members of the 
public, and has plans to expand into a global net-
work of personal genome projects.

(33)  Su, P., ‘Direct-to-Consumer Genetic Testing: A Comprehen-
sive View’, Yale J. Biol Med. Sep 2013, 86(3): 359-365, published 
online 20 September 2013.

(34)  For instance, a US enterprise 23andMe had offered health-re-
lated genomic information for less than USD 100; however, 
after a critical letter from the US Food and Drug Administra-
tion the company ceased to provide health information to its 
customer (http://www.fda.gov/ICECI/EnforcementActions/
WarningLetters/2013/ucm376296.htm).

(35)  PGP website (http://www.personalgenomes.org).

(36)  ‘Participants in Personal Genome Project Identified by Pri-

vacy Experts’, MIT Technology Review, 1 May 2013.

14

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationA PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION | CHAPTER 1

The PGP is open source and based around the prin-
ciple of data sharing. All data will be placed within 
the public domain and made available over the in-
ternet so that researchers can test various hypoth-
eses about the relationships among genotype, en-
vironment and phenotype.

The project styles itself as an example of ‘partici-
patory public research’ and puts an emphasis on 
aspects of participant communication and access 
to data, as well as the building of a collaborative 
participatory research community (37).

Scientific developments concerning the function of 
genes have raised expectations for gene editing, includ-
ing the correcting of gene defects. For example, the 
CRISPR-Cas9 tool, a technology that allows modification 
of even germline cells (the reproductive cells which al-
low genes to be passed from generation to generation) 
has opened significant new debates within the scientific 
community including calls for a moratorium (38).

Omics

Omics refers to the collective technologies used to 
explore the functions, relationships, and actions of 
the various types of molecules that make up the cells 
of an organism. The above-described development 
of large-scale DNA sequencing and the subsequent 
bioinformatic analysis are included under the general 
term of ‘genomics’. The methods for massive analysis of 
data have advanced in other directions. DNA sequenc-
ing can be applied to the cDNA synthesised from RNA 
extracted from a given tissue producing information 
of the DNA that is transcribed in it. These data, and 
those coming from other equivalent approaches such 
as microchips, for instance, are commonly known as 
transcriptomics. Massive data analysis of proteins that 
are present in a given tissue has been termed ‘pro-
teomics’. Other types of massive analysis include the 

(37)  Ball, M. (2014), ‘Harvard Personal Genome Project: lessons 
from participatory public research’, Genome Medicine, 6:10 
doi:10.1186/gm527.

(38)  See Baltimore, D., Berg, P. et al., ‘A prudent path forward for 
genomic engineering and germline gene modification’, 
Science, April 2015, Vol. 348 issue 6230, pp. 36-38; Lanphier, 
E., Urnov, F. et al., ‘Don’t edit the human germ line’, Nature, 
Vol. 519, 26 March 2015 (Macmillan Publishers), pp. 410-
411. A Chinese team run by Huang, J. et al., University of 
Sun-Yat-sen, Canton, published in Protein & Cell, in 18 April 
2015, the results of their attempt to modify the genome of 
human embryos, reigniting the debate over human gene 
modification. 

identification of metabolites through different chro-
matographic methods (metabolomics) and some other 
techniques (the lipidome, the interactome, etc.) that all 
together have been termed as ‘omics’.

One of the challenges of the different methods of mas-
sive analysis of biological data is to integrate and to 
correlate them with observations coming from phe-
notypic analysis or from methods that analyse genetic 
variability. This analysis has produced a new discipline 
known as Systems Biology, which aims to study living 
systems taking into account their intrinsic complexity, 
as revealed by omics analysis. Very often the interpre-
tation of this type of massive collection of results re-
quires the construction of models that are based on 
algorithms. The use and limitations of such approaches 
has been previously discussed by the EGE. This is espe-
cially relevant when they are applied to the study of 
human health and to human behaviour.

Another  promising  field  of  research  dealing  with 
the determinants of health and utilising advances in 
metagenomics and whole genome sequencing is that 
dealing with the ‘microbiome’ — the microbes of the 
human body (39). There are at least 10 times as many 
bacteria as human cells within an individual and new 
generation techniques have revealed that healthy in-
dividuals host thousands of bacterial types, the mouth 
and gut having the largest diversity. Bacteria residing 
on the skin and in respiratory areas protect the body 
against other pathogens; in the large intestine bacte-
ria take part in various processes important for normal 
body function such as metabolism, energy production 
from food, immunomodulation contributing to toler-
ance as well as the fluid balance of the body. The Hu-
man Microbiome Project (40), spearheaded by the Unit-
ed States’ National Institutes of Health, is one of several 
international efforts designed to take advantage of 
large-scale, omics analyses to study the microbiome 
in human health and to provide insights into how the 
microbiome and human host interact to support health 
or to trigger disease. Building on the foundation of this 
research, open access, open source projects such as the 

(39)  A microbiome is ‘the ecological community of commen-
sal, symbiotic, and pathogenic microorganisms that literally 
share our body space — see Lederberg, J. and McCray, A. T., 
‘Ome Sweet’ Omics — a genealogical treasury of words’, 
Scientist 2001, 15:8 (http://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.
view/articleNo/13313/title/-Ome-Sweet--Omics---A-Gene-
alogical-Treasury-of-Words).

(40)  See the NIH Human Microbiome Project website: (http://

commonfund.nih.gov/hmp/overview).

15

CHAPTER 1 | A PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION

‘American Gut Project’ have emerged. This project re-
quests a donation of USD 99 to support the project’s 
scientific research in return for a home sampling kit, 
and an analysis of the bacteria in your sample (41).

In order to identify the diversity of risk factors determin-
ing the susceptibility of an individual to disease, it is nec-
essary to analyse huge quantities of genomic, lifestyle 
and environmental data comparing healthy and ill indi-
viduals. In doing so, progress in the knowledge achieved 
from ‘omics’ and especially genomics research opens the 
way to more individually tailored personalised medicine 
and to innovation for new types of tests and therapies. 
This points the way to new approaches to conduct-
ing medical research. Instead of testing many possible 
therapeutic or diagnostic candidates, new molecules for 
diagnostics and therapies are created de novo in confor-
mity with the molecular profile of the relevant disease. 
Target groups are also tailored according to the molecu-
lar profile, which means that the way new medicines are 
tested (clinical trials) and also how the medicines will be 
used in future are likely to change.

Precision/‘Personalised medicine’

Precision medicine — also known as personalised, 
individualised or stratified medicine — the terms are 
often used interchangeably — aims to deliver the right 
treatment for the right patient at the right time. By inte-
grating genetic, physiological, behavioural and environ-
mental data, preventative and interventional strategies 
could be targeted to patients most likely to benefit. The 
US National Academy of Sciences in their 2011 report 
‘Towards Precision Medicine’ (42) drew an analogy be-
tween this field of study and Google Maps. In order to 
help us get from A to B, Google Maps integrates data 
drawn from a number of diverse sources into a compre-
hensive set of instructions. Likewise, accessing, integrat-
ing and synthesising data from large patient cohorts 
and healthy populations in order to determine disease/
protective mechanism, should lead to more ‘precise’ 
health advice, diagnosis and treatment. The success or 
otherwise of this endeavour is to a large extent depend-

(41)  Visit the American Gut Project website: (http://humanfood-

project.com/americangut).

(42)  National Research Council, Toward Precision Medicine: Build-
ing a Knowledge Network for Biomedical Research and a New 
Taxonomy of Disease (National Academies Press, Washington 
DC, 2011) available at: http://www.nap.edu/catalog/13284/
toward-precision-medicine-building-a-knowledge-net-
work-for-biomedical-research, accessed on 17 September 
2015.

ent on the willingness of citizens to share health and 
other personal data with scientists and doctors.

The concept of precision medicine is not new but 
recent advances in genome sequencing, health in-
formatics and wireless/mobile technologies and the 
convergence of biomedical science and technology 
has placed a renewed focus on the potential benefits 
offered by precision medicine.

In 2012 the European Alliance for Personalised Medicine 
(EAPM) was established with the aim of accelerating the 
development and delivery of personalised healthcare 
to European citizens. The EAPM has pointed to the rela-
tively slow uptake of personalised medicine in Europe 
and has identified low levels of awareness and a lack 
of involvement of patients in their own healthcare as 
key barriers to personalised medicine (43). The Euro-
pean Science Foundation in their 2012 report on per-
sonalised medicine has recommended that healthcare 
professionals ‘work with citizens and patients to define 
what they need from their relationship with healthcare 
professionals within the framework of personalised 
medicine’ (44). In October 2013, the European Commis-
sion published a working document (45), detailing the 
opportunities and challenges for healthcare systems 
posed by the advent of personalised medicine and 
committed to monitor developments in the field. Dur-
ing the period 2007-2013 the EU committed EUR 1 bil-
lion in funding to research projects underpinning the 
development of personalised medicine through its sev-
enth framework programme for research (46). A budget 
of EUR 659 million has been allocated for personalised 

(43)  European Alliance for Personalised Medicine, ‘Barriers to Ac-
cess in Personalised Medicine’ 2014, http://euapm.eu/pdf/
EAPM_Barriers_to_Access_in_Personalised_Medicine.pdf, 
accessed on 17 September 2015.

(44)  European Science Foundation, ‘Personalised Medicine for the 
European Citizen Towards more precise medicine for the di-
agnosis, treatment and prevention of disease (iPM)’, 2012, p. 50, 
http://www.esf.org/index.php?eID=tx_nawsecuredl&u=0&g=
0&t=1452007758&hash=74aefb48bb7f7a0cd35aac2ec9429a20
fa1b87d8&file=fileadmin/be_user/CEO_Unit/Forward_Look/
iPM/FL_2012_iPM.pdf,accessed on 17 September 2015.

(45)  Commission Staff Working Document, ‘Use of “-omics” tech-
nologies in the development of personalised medicine’, 
Brussels, 25.10.2013 SWD(2013) 436 final, http://ec.europa.
eu/health/files/latest_news/2013-10_personalised_medi-
cine_en.pdf, accessed on 17 September 2015.

(46)  http://ec.europa.eu/health/human-use/personalised-med-
icine/index_en.htm, accessed on 17 September 2015.

16

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationA PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION | CHAPTER 1

medicine under the European Commission Horizon 
2020 programme, due to launch in 2016 (47).

In  January  of  2015,  President  Obama  announced 
a USD 215 million research initiative in precision medi-
cine (48). The initiative is particularly relevant in the con-
text of citizen science as the entire enterprise hinges on 
the engagement and collaboration of citizens in open 
data sharing of their health and personal data. Initially 
efforts will be directed towards developing custom-
ised cancer treatments but the longer-term goal of the 
research is to generate a cohort of 1 million American 
citizens to contribute and share their health data, with 
at least some data coming from existing cohorts (49). 
This may allow the insights gained through precision 
medicine in the oncology field to be expanded to other 
spheres of medicine. Data will be derived from analysis 
of biological material and behavioural data all of which 
will be linked to an individual’s electronic health data. In-
terestingly, the National Institute for Health (NIH) which 
is leading on this initiative have committed to engage 
with individuals, as research partners rather than the 
more traditional construct of research participants. Data 
subjects will play an integral role in the cohort’s gover-
nance through direct representation on committees es-
tablished to oversee cohort design and data collection, 
use, management, security, and dissemination. In order 
to ensure active participant engagement, an ongoing 
dynamic consent process will also be put in place.

Safeguarding the large amounts of information cen-
tral to this endeavour will be a significant challenge. In 
March 2015, the White House convened an inter-agen-
cy working group to develop a set of privacy princi-
ples (50). Recognising that multiple tiers of data access 
would be required for the optimal use of the data, 
the group recommended that a robust Data Security 
Framework should be developed in consultation with 
experts in data science, security, Health IT, and ethics.

(47)  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-15-5832_en.htm.

(48)  President Obama State of the Union Address, 30 January 
2015, https://www.whitehouse.gov/precision-medicine, ac-
cessed on 17 September 2015.

(49)  Collins, F. S. and Varmus, H., ‘A New Initiative on Precision 

Medicine’, New Engl. J. Med., 2015;372(9):793-795.

(50)  Precision Medicine Initiative: Proposed Privacy and Trust 
Principles, https://www.whitehouse.govbennedd/sites/
default/files/docs/pmi_privacy_and_trust_principles_
july_2015.pdf, accessed on 17 September 2015.

The promise of precision medicine extends beyond 
treating those who are already ill and includes the 
capability to identify healthy individuals at increased 
risk of developing disease, thereby holding out the 
possibility of instituting preventative measures. Fran-
cis Collins of the NIH has stated that this initiative will 
‘pioneer new models for doing science’ and will ‘pro-
pel our understanding of diseases — their origins and 
mechanism, and opportunities for prevention and 
treatment (51). The significant investment in precision 
medicine is not however without its critics. Bayer and 
Galea (52) argue that if the goal is to produce healthier 
populations, investments in addressing health inequali-
ties rather than in precision medicine should be the 
priority. It has long been acknowledged that health has 
been unevenly distributed among social groups and 
that there is a social gradient of health, i.e. the lower 
a person’s social position, the worse their health (53). 
There are concerns that the focus on precision medi-
cine could signal an opportunity cost for public health 
measures at the population, rather than the individual 
level which are required to achieve heath equity.

If there is to be a just and equitable distribution of the po-
tential benefits of precision medicine, those contributing 
data to build large cohorts of patients and healthy indi-
viduals will have to be drawn from diverse backgrounds 
across the socioeconomic spectrum. There is also the 
question of if and when therapies do become available 
will they be cost effective and whether the focus will be 
placed on treatment or prevention? There are varying 
opinions on whether precision medicine will in fact result 
in cost savings to the healthcare systems. On the one 
hand it is argued that tailored effective treatment with 
less side effects will result in better health outcomes and 
overall treatment costs will fall. On the other hand, it is 
argued that developing treatments for small groups of 
patients will increase the costs of drugs because devel-
opmental costs will be borne by fewer patients taking 
them. This is reflective of the current debate about the 
cost of novel therapeutics. If precision medicines be-
come routinely available, this will likely drive a change 
in reimbursement policies which many argue will mean 
that such medicines will become more financially viable 
for both patients and pharmaceutical companies.

(51)  Collins, F. S. and Varmus, H., ‘A New Initiative on Precision 

Medicine’, New Engl. J Med. 2015, 372(9): p. 795.

(52)  Bayer, R. and Galea, S., ‘Public Health in the Precision-Medi-

cine Era’, New Engl. J Med. 2015, 373(6):499-501.

(53)  Marmot,  M.,  Friel,  S.,  Bell,  R .  et  al.,  Lancet  20 08, 

372(9650):1661-1669.

17

CHAPTER 1 | A PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION

If precision medicine is to become part of routine 
healthcare practice, we will require a workforce that is 
able to interpret and translate the information it gener-
ates into clinical care. There is a current knowledge gap, 
which will have to be addressed through undergradu-
ate and postgraduate training aimed at increasing data 
literacy skills.

Precision medicine targeting cystic fibrosis

One of the most successful examples of a precision 
medicine approach is the use of the drug Ivacaftor, 
the first of a new class of drugs that target the un-
derlying protein defect in cystic fibrosis. The drug 
was approved by the US Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA) in 2012 and is aimed at patients who have 
a specific gene mutation (G551D CFTR-mutation), 
approximately 3 % of the cystic fibrosis population. 
While the patient population that can be helped by 
the drug is small, the cost of the drug is high: about 
EUR 275 000 per patient, per year. In July 2015, the 
FDA approved a combination drug for cystic fibrosis, 
which contains Ivacaftor and Lumacaftor and targets 
genetic mutations seen in approximately half of all 
cystic fibrosis patients. The cost of the new drug is 
estimated to be USD 259 000 per patient per year.

Data intensive medicine

Big data refers to the massive amount of information 
collected from different sources (conventional data, 
molecular and cellular data, imaging, demographic, 
social and environmental data, etc.). Many branches of 
science have a long history of dealing with large quanti-
ties of data. However, the methods and technologies 
developed to gather and process data are new. Advanc-
es in biology together with development in bioinfor-
matics and computational technologies, give scientists 
the possibility to generate and analyse large databases, 
on a scale which was previously impossible. Using these 
technologies and combining relevant biological, social 
and/or environmental information, big data may show 
correlations and interactions of complexities in health 
and disease that could not be detected before, or at 
least were far more difficult to study. In many cases it is 
no longer necessary to first establish a hypothesis and 
then collect data around it. Data are sent to scientific 
research centres and health information companies to 
manage large-scale studies on hundreds of thousands 
or even millions of individuals in order to stratify dis-
ease and measure and correlate different parameters 
using appropriate algorithms.

Big data brings both new challenges and opportunities 
linked to the management of large quantities of diverse 
types of information, the conversion of these data into 
hypotheses about health and disease and their trans-
formation into usable knowledge. The key challenge 
centres around transforming biological–social–envi-
ronmental information into predictive abstract models 
(‘predictive models’ and ‘actionable models’).

The collections of large databases enable scientists to 
ground their analyses on different aspects of the same 
phenomenon. In this sense big data can provide a com-
prehensive and general perspective on a phenom-
enon in its complexity, without needing to focus on 
specific or homogeneous details or under controlled 
conditions.

As explored in the EGE Opinion on the ethical impli-
cations of security and surveillance, large amounts 
of data from disparate sources can be organised and 
analysed, facilitating the discovery of previously un-
known relationships amongst the data (54). Datasets 
can be compared in order to identify common features 
or trends. Such techniques have been used to iden-
tify adverse drug events in the post-approval period 
to improve patient safety (55). The EU–ADR project is 
a European Commission-funded project which mines 
clinical data from biomedical databases and electronic 
healthcare records (EHRs) of over 30 million patients 
from several European countries for the purposes of 
the early detection of adverse drug reactions (56). It has 
also been suggested that mining electronic health re-
cords has the potential to further medical research as 
well as clinical care, for instance through monitoring 
treatment adherence (57). Linking genetic data with 
electronic health records allows for mapping of geno-
typephenotype correlations. One such study identi-
fied genetic variants associated with an increased risk 
of thromboembolism in patients with breast cancer 
treated with Tamoxifen (58). Recently data mining has 
also been employed for epidemic surveillance (59). 
Researchers have shown, for example, that ‘mining’ 

(54)  EGE Opinion on the Ethical Implications of Security and 

Surveillance, 2013.

(55)  Harpaz, R. et al., Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 2012, 91(6):1010-1021.

(56)  Coloma, P. M. et al.,  Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2011, 

20(1):1-11.

(57)  Jensen, P. B. et al., Nature Rev. Gen. 2012, 13:395-405.

(58)  Onitilo, A. et al., Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 2009, 115:643-650.

(59)  Kofod-Petersen, A., Med. J. Aust. 2012, Mar. 19, 196(5):301.

18

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationA PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION | CHAPTER 1

of Twitter postings can be used to track and predict 
outbreaks of influenza with approximately 90 % accu-
racy (60). Mayer-Schönberger and Cukier state that ‘the 
correlations may not tell us precisely why something is 
happening, but they alert us that it is happening. And 
in many situations this is good enough’ (61).

Consequently, there has been a shift from knowl-
edge-intensive systems (where experts use a knowl-
edge base to solve complex problems) to data-inten-
sive systems. Large amounts of data are continuously 
accumulating, e.g. derived from constant monitor-
ing of physiological parameters of individuals (e.g. 
mHealth), genome analyses, electronic health records 
and so on. This explosion of information requires tools 
to obtain a reliable evaluation of change in clinical 
parameters to preserve high standards of healthcare. 
In this regard, artificial intelligence may be helpful to 
achieve this goal: computerised patient records may 
be analysed by appropriate programs constructed to 
yield important clinical information or construct algo-
rithms helpful in diagnosis, prognosis and monitoring 
therapy. This approach may be useful, for example, in 
intensive care units where monitoring of critically ill 
patients produces a flood of data while appropriate 
patient care requires extensive interpretation and a se-
lective assessment of many parameters. Thus, knowl-
edge-based modules are essential tools to determine 
what is relevant in a given stage of a patient’s clinical 
course (62).

This new approach requires a cross-disciplinary inter-
action of biologists, chemists, physicists, physicians, 
mathematicians, engineers and computer scientists.

Crowdsourcing clinical trials

How new computational approaches may be suc-
cessfully applied to analyse large datasets with 
a clear patient benefit is well illustrated by a recent 
crowdsourced analysis of clinical trial data to predict 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) progression. An 
open access platform was created that contained 
the merged data from as many ALS clinical trials 
as possible (> 9 600 patient dataset) and — using 
a crowdsourcing approach — the solvers were asked 
to use 3 months of individual patient-level clinical 
trial information to predict that patient’s disease 
progression over the subsequent 9 months. Thir-
ty-seven unique algorithms were received and two 
most promising ones were identified. Importantly, 
the winning algorithms predicted disease progres-
sion better than both a baseline model and clini-
cians using the same data. This approach allows for 
a substantial reduction in the size of a clinical trial 
evaluating drug effectiveness and may uncover new 
clinical parameters relevant for disease progression 
while shedding new light on the pathophysiology 
of ALS (63).

The rise of mobile and wireless technologies targeting 
health behaviour (mHealth) has ushered in a new era of 
health research based on the constant stream of data 
supplied by users. As mHealth and wider e-health in-
novation are also allowing individuals to monitor and 
regulate their health outside of clinical settings, they 
are further addressed in section 1.1.2. below.

1.1.2.  Remote medicine: mHealth, e‑health 
and online health resources

The  development  of  ICT  has  been  revolutionary 
for citizen involvement in health, providing a set of 
ICT-based tools which assist prevention, diagnosis, 
treatment, health monitoring and lifestyle manage-
ment, as well as new means for linking citizens with 
medical research. Programs that enable users to ana-
lyse genomic sequences are available to anybody using 
home computers and cloud computing (64). Ever larger 
numbers of people are using mobile phones, watches 

(60)  Lampos, V. et al., Proceedings of the 2nd IAPR workshop on 
cognitive information processing IEEE Press 2010:411-416.

(61)  Mayer-Schönberger, V. and Cukier, K. (2013), Big Data: A Revo-
lution That Will Transform How We Live, Work and Think, 
London, John Murray Publisher.

(63)  Kuffner, R., Zach, N., Norel, R. et al., ‘Crowdsourced analysis 
of clinical trial data to predict amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
progression’, Nature Biotech 2014, doi 10.1038/nbt 3051, 2015, 
33, 51-57.

(62)  Horn, W., ‘Artificial intelligence in medicine on its way from 
knowledge-intensive to data-intensive systems’, Art. Intel 
Med. 2001, 23,5-12. EGE Opinion No 26 on Ethics of Informa-
tion and Communication Technologies.

(64)  Mell, P. and Grance, T., The NIST Definition of Cloud Comput-
ing, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2011 
(http://faculty.winthrop.edu/domanm/csci411/Handouts/
NIST.pdf).

19

CHAPTER 1 | A PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION

and radio frequency identification devices (RFID) in 
health and physical activity monitoring and recording 
in everyday life and such devices are increasingly used 
to collect data in research. E-health solutions, through 
the roll-out of health information networks, electronic 
health records, telemedicine services and health por-
tals, are providing health authorities with novel means 
to organise their health delivery systems. The corollary 
is bringing ‘health’ outside of the traditional clinical 
care context and into people’s homes and workplaces, 
integrating the concern for bodily wellbeing into the 
fabric of individual’s everyday lives.

mHealth

The  European  Commission  defines  mobile  health 
(mHealth) as covering medical and public health prac-
tices supported by mobile devices, such as mobile 
phones, patient monitoring devices, personal digi-
tal assistants (PDAs), and other wireless devices and 
their applications (apps) (65). mHealth solutions cover 
(amongst others) heart rate, blood glucose level, blood 
pressure, body temperature and brain activities mea-
surements. Some mobile phones have apps where their 
users can store their personal health data (for instance, 
the Apple Health App (66) and many other examples on 
Android and IOS platforms (67)) and apps can be used 
as communication, information and motivation tools, 
such as medication reminders or tools offering fitness 
and dietary recommendations (68).

mHealth has been touted as a means to contribute 
to a more patient-focused healthcare, to support the 
shift towards prevention and facilitate the delivery of 
high-quality healthcare by enabling more accurate 
diagnosis and treatment. Mobile apps can encourage 
adherence to a healthy lifestyle, resulting in more ‘per-
sonalised’ medication and treatment. Through sensors, 
medical, physiological, lifestyle, activity and environ-
mental data can be collected, even automatically, and 
this data can be used for research. Individuals may also 

receive ‘tailored’ advice according to the information 
they provide. In addition, the availability of satellite 
navigation technologies in mobile devices provides 
the possibility to improve the safety and autonomy 
of patients, which in turn may enable a more efficient 
delivery of health services.

E‑health including electronic health records

E-health refers to the application of ICT-based tools and 
services for prevention, diagnosis, treatment, monitor-
ing and management of health. In its broadest defini-
tion, e-health covers a range of functions in the health 
sector, including mHealth and telemedicine. However, 
e-health also serves as a common shorthand for a nar-
rower set of tools aimed at data sharing between 
healthcare providers and between providers and their 
patients, in particular electronic health records.

E-health is understood to hold the potential to em-
power patients by providing them with easier access 
and control over their health information. The storage 
and transfer of patient records electronically has also 
been found to lead to fewer clinical errors and improve 
patient safety and can feed into health research (69).

Consequently, while the implementation of ICT in 
healthcare is a competence of EU Member States, the 
European Commission has since 2004 been develop-
ing targeted policy actions aimed at fostering e-health 
throughout the EU, citing the economic, efficiency 
and health benefits of tools such as electronic health 
records, and their promise to deliver a more ‘person-
alised, citizen-centric healthcare’ (70).

Although all the EU Member States make use of elec-
tronic health records, variations exist in the formats and 
standards applied, security, quality controls, etc. (71). 
Directive 2011/24/EU on patients’ rights in cross-bor-
der healthcare calls for Member States to provide, on 
a voluntary basis, compatible database systems that 

(65)  European Commission Green Paper on Mobile Health, April 

2014.

(66)  http://www.livescience.com/48132-apple-health-app-ex-

plained.html

(67)  http://heavy.com/tech/2013/08/top-best-health-and- 

fitness-apps-for-android-2013

(68)  European Commission: Green paper on mobile Health 
(‘mHealth’), SWD(2014) 135 final, COM(2014) 219 final. Brus-
sels, 10.4.2014 (http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/news/
green-paper-mobile-health-mhealth).

(69)  Report of the eHealth Stakeholder Group, Patient access to 

electronic health records, June 2013.

(70)  Commission Communication on an e-health action plan 
2012-2020:  Innovative  healthcare  for  the  21st  century, 
COM(2012) 736, 06.12.2012; see also Kierkegaard, P., ‘Elec-
tronic health record: Wiring Europe’s healthcare’, Computer 
Law & Security Review, Volume 27, Issue 5, September 2011, 
pp. 503-515.

(71)  Overview of the national laws on electronic health records in 
the EU Member States (http://ec.europa.eu/health/ehealth/
projects/nationallaws_electronichealthrecords_en.htm).

20

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationA PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION | CHAPTER 1

would allow patients to access their own health data, 
and to facilitate the transfer of patient data between 
Member States (72). However, current implementation 
of the directive reflects a wide disparity in the level of 
access currently granted by different Member States 
to patients wishing to access their health records. For 
instance, while in Germany a patient may access and 
even edit their own health records, in many other Mem-
ber States access by individuals to their own health 
data is considerably more limited (73).

Telemedicine/remote provision of care

Telemedicine is the use of telecommunication and in-
formation technologies in order to provide healthcare 
at a distance (74). This can encompass a range of appli-
cations covering both consultations, monitoring and 
treatment between doctor and patients, as well as the 
soliciting and pooling of expertise between medical 
professionals. The most common type of telemedicine 
is specialist consultation within a certain hospital dis-
trict or national area. Doctors with specific questions 
concerning the diagnosis or care of a patient may call 
on consultants located elsewhere to give their expert 
advice. The remote analysis of imaging data has be-
come part of everyday medical care in Member States 
today.

Telemedicine has spawned sub-categories such as 
teleradiology, teledermatology and telepsychiatry 
and has progressively widened its spectrum with the 
development of new technologies. It is now possible 
for instance to carry out distance surgery through the 
use of robotics and high speed data connections (75).

Telemedicine can be of benefit to patients living in re-
mote regions. It saves travelling time for patients, and 
reduces the time spent in outpatient clinics where 
individuals are susceptible to spreadable infections. 

Telemedicine can also facilitate education and learning 
and share best practices more easily, as well as imply 
important efficiency savings. The use of telemedicine 
has been shown to reduce costs for example, in derma-
tology consultations (76). Remote analysis of imaging 
data (X-rays, MRI, ultrasonic scans) or specific data (such 
as cardiovascular surveillance elements) may, however, 
be beneficial to ensure expert interpretation.

On the other hand telecommunication needs equip-
ment, technical training, and it entails a potential de-
crease in interaction between healthcare personnel 
and the patient.

Online health resources

Internet-based resources are becoming increasingly 
important sources of health advice. According to an 
EU-wide survey, six out of 10 Europeans now go on-
line when looking for health information (with this 
figure rising to eight out of 10 among the under-40 
population) (77).

Online health information appears in a variety of forms. 
These can include general information websites run by 
governments or health authorities such as the UK’s NHS 
Choices site in which users respond to questions about 
their symptoms and receive advice about the appro-
priate course of action (78). They can take the form of 
sites set up by commercial or private initiatives, such 
as pharmaceutical companies or special interest sites 
run by patients groups focusing on particular diseases. 
Or they can manifest as online forums of an interac-
tive nature, established by individuals or communities 
of interest to enable users to share symptoms, advice 
and diagnoses. Social media and internet forums have 
also proved a popular means of verifying the quality of 
healthcare, with users reviewing and ranking services 
and treatments (79).

(72)  Directive 2011/24/EU of The European Parliament and of the 
Council of 9 March 2011on the application of patients’ rights in 
cross-border healthcare (http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/
LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:088:0045:0065:EN:PDF).

(73)  Report of the eHealth Stakeholder Group, Patient access to 

electronic health records, June 2013.

(74)  According to a World Health Organisation (WHO) definition 
in 1997, telemedicine is a medical act conducted remotely 
via information and communication technologies.

(75)  Marescaux, J. et al. (2002), ‘Transcontinental Robot-Assisted 
Remote Telesurgery: Feasibility and Potential Applications’, 
Annals of Surgery, Vol. 235, No 4, 487-492.

(76)  Pak, H. S., Datta, S. K., Triplett, C. A., Lindquist, J. H., Gram-
bow, S. C. and Whited, J. D., ‘Cost minimisation analysis 
of a store-and-forward teledermatology consult system’, 
Telemed J. E. Health,  2009  Mar,  15(2):160-5.  doi:10.1089/
tmj.2008.0083.

(77)  Flash  Eurobarometer  404,  European  Citizens’  Digital 
Health  Literacy,  November  2014  (http://ec.europa.eu/
public_opinion/flash/fl_404_en.pdf).

(78)  http://www.nhs.uk/aboutNHSChoices/Pages/NHSChoic-

esintroduction.aspx

(79)  Eurobarometer on quality of healthcare, 2013.

21

CHAPTER 1 | A PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION

The rising popularity of the internet as a source of med-
ical advice has brought with it the challenge of veri-
fying the accuracy or intelligibility of the information 
made available. While a majority (90 %) of Europeans 
polled report that the use of online health information 
has helped them to improve their knowledge about 
health-related topics, nevertheless, approximately 
40 % do not think that the information they have used 
came from a trustworthy source (80). To remedy the risks 
associated with inaccurate or misleading information, 
the European Commission has published quality criter-
ia for websites offering health-related information to 
citizens (81). Several Member States make use of certifi-
cation or accreditation schemes to help users identify 
high-quality health information, however misleading 
information and misinterpretation by lay people of on-
line medical advice remains an enduring challenge (82).

Challenges of reliability also affect the use of online 
pharmacies and the increasing frequency with which 
people purchase medication over the internet. Medica-
tion can be bought from regulated online pharmaceu-
tical suppliers, allowing a convenient and often more 
cost-effective means to access medication. However 
studies suggest that over 50 % of medicines purchased 
from unregulated websites are either falsified, counter-
feit or sub-standard (83).

The EU’s directive on falsified medicines for human use 
(Directive 2011/62/EU) aims to strengthen the protec-
tion of consumers and patients by preventing such 
medication entering the legal supply chain. To address 
internet sales, the directive introduces an obligatory 
logo intended to appear on the websites of legally 
operating online pharmacies and approved retailers 
in the EU (84).

(80)  Flash  Eurobarometer  404,  European  Citizens’  Digital 
Health  Literacy,  November  2014  (http://ec.europa.eu/
public_opinion/flash/fl_404_en.pdf).

(81)  Commission communication on eEurope 2002: Quality cri-

teria for health-related websites, COM(2002) 667.

(82)  Nuffield Council on Bioethics (2010), ‘Medical profiling and 
online medicine: the ethics of “personalised healthcare” in 
a consumer age’.

(83)  http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.jsp?curl=pages/
special_topics/general/general_content_000186.jsp

(84)  Clicking on the logo links to the national regulatory author-
ity websites, where all legally operating online pharmacies 
and approved retailers in their respective countries will be 
listed (http://ec.europa.eu/health/human-use/eu-logo/
index_en.htm).

Converging practices of health participation

As the uptake of technologies enabling citizen in-
volvement in health become progressively embed-
ded in everyday health contexts, so their various 
uses steadily converge.

The advent of one technology, such as electronic 
health records, can find synergies with other tools, 
such as online pharmacies. This is the case for in-
stance in the United States, where the ‘Blue But-
ton’ initiative allowing patients to download their 
health information, including prescription data, is 
complemented by participating pharmacies offering 
online tools to allow clients to better manage their 
prescriptions.

Telemedicine can be mediated through mHealth 
devices, such as phone apps which offer consulta-
tions with qualified physicians, or online platforms 
such as the Spanish website ‘Qbaby’ (85) which en-
ables parents to open a virtual medical record for 
their baby, and submit enquiries to a personal pae-
diatrician of their choice. The internet has similarly 
brought developments in genomics testing within 
the reach of each and every consumer with websites 
offering Direct-to-Consumer genetic testing in re-
turn for a fee. In return, genome research projects 
are making use of online tools to find large numbers 
of volunteer participants.

Many of the above-described technologies serve 
a dual function of both permitting citizens and 
patients to take a more active role in the manage-
ment of their health while ‘providing’ the raw data 
that can drive new kinds of health research. Data 
produced from the use of apps, wearable devices or 
electronic health records, can be variously collected 
and used in business ventures as well as scientific 
studies, such as epidemiological analysis, evalua-
tion of healthcare procedures, pharmacovigilance. 
Some interactive health websites which allow us-
ers to share symptoms and gain advice from fellow 
sufferers, are simultaneously retaining this crowd-
sourced data for research purposes. One example 
is CureTogether, a website which encourages pa-
tients to share quantitative information about their 
medical conditions and symptoms, and which trans-
forms this data into rankings of treatments based on 
patient-reported effectiveness, with the claim that 
‘new research discoveries are made based on the 
patient-contributed data’ (86).

(85)  https://qbaby.qoolife.com

(86)  http://curetogether.com

22

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationA PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION | CHAPTER 1

1.2.  ‘Citizen science’ and active involvement

1.2.1.  What is citizen science? 

Analysis of a new concept

While the above-described technological innovations 
cut across different categories of healthcare (such as 
research, diagnosis, prevention, therapy), they share 
a common feature: a greater degree of engagement 
on the part of the individual in his/her own healthcare 
and a closer link between the citizen and the advance-
ments of health, knowledge and treatment.

To understand the dynamics at play, the development 
of these technologies and their implications must be 
placed in the context of shifts taking place in the pro-
duction of knowledge and innovation, which have seen 
the wider public increasingly involved in the research 
endeavour across a number of roles and functions.

One label associated with this phenomenon is ‘citizen 
science’. In its narrowest interpretation citizen science 
refers to the increasing propensity for citizens to act 
as researchers, to effectively supplement the role of 
scientists in designing, coordinating or carrying out 
research projects. Yet the term and the phenomena 
to which it refers are both much broader and more 
nuanced, and can cover a wide array of participatory 
actions, including the gathering and volunteering of 
data, the participation of non-experts in analysis and 
scientific experimentation, the lobbying efforts of in-
terest groups, public input into research and project 
funding, as well as in the formulation and regulation of 
policies. The ‘participatory turn’, its specific implications 
in the domain of health and the new roles it offers to 
citizens as experimenters, stakeholders, and purveyors 
of data, research participants, partners or even protag-
onists are in turn closely bound up with the growth of 
data-intensive science and open science (87). These new 
paradigms in the conduct of science are progressively 
bringing collaborative networks and dialogue between 
professional and non-professional participants to the 
core of the scientific enterprise and as such function 
as a major driver and enabler of citizen involvement 
in health.

Citizen involvement in health requires interrogating 
the terms and concepts associated with notions such 
as ‘citizen science’ as well as pulling apart the highly 
diverse actions and forms of participation that are 
brought together under this label.

A number of typologies have been developed to cat-
egorise citizen science — in the sense of citizen involve-
ment (88) — that may assist in bringing greater clarity 
to this discussion. One of the earliest such exercises (89) 
employed the conceptual model of a participation ‘lad-
der’, in which the level of citizen agency ranges from 
full ‘citizen control’ at the top of the ladder all the way 
down to ‘manipulation’. Intermediary steps include 
delegated power, through to partnership, placation, 
consultation, and informing. This approach has been 
further developed and nuanced (90) in five models of 
citizen involvement: contractual projects, where com-
munities ask professional researchers to conduct a spe-
cific scientific investigation and report on the results; 
contributory projects, which are generally designed by 
scientists and for which members of the public primarily 
contribute data; collaborative projects, which are gener-
ally designed by scientists and for which members of 
the public contribute data but also help to refine proj-
ect design, analyse data, and/or disseminate findings; 
co-created projects, which are designed by scientists 
and members of the public working together and for 
which at least some of the public participants are active-
ly involved in most or all aspects of the research process; 
and collegial contributions, where individuals without 
recognised scientific credentials conduct research inde-
pendently, with varying degrees of expected recogni-
tion by institutionalised science.

However, this is not the only possible classification. In-
deed this typology relates to a rather narrow definition 
of citizen science with a view of citizen involvement 
in the scientific endeavour restricted primarily to the 
practical implementation of scientific projects and 

(87)  Open Science refers to the movement which aims to trans-
form, open up, and make more accessible science and re-
search through ICT, in order to render science more efficient, 
transparent, and societally responsive. See Science as an 
open enterprise — The Royal Society Science Policy Centre re-
port 02/12, issued: June 2012, European Commission (http://
www.openscience.org/blog/?p=269;http://ec.europa.eu/
research/consultations/science-2.0/consultation_en.htm).

(88)  Other expressions used are: crowdsourced science; net-

worked science; civic science; community science.

(89)  Arnstein, S. R. (1969), ‘A Ladder of Citizen Participation’, Jour-
nal of the American Institute of Planners, Vol. 35, No 4, July 
1969, pp. 216-224.

(90)  Shirk, J. L. et al. (2012), ‘Public participation in scientific re-
search: a framework for deliberate design’, Ecology and So-
ciety 17(2): 29.

23

CHAPTER 1 | A PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION

experimentations (citizens/patients as experimenters in 
science). It therefore fails to grasp the various forms of 
citizen engagement ‘upstream’ in the knowledge- gen-
eration process, and the role citizens can play (whether 
in the form of interested individuals, interest groups, 
lobbies or other organised civil society stakeholders) in 
influencing the direction of policy, legislative changes 
and the programming and prioritisation of research 
funding.

A complementary typology might therefore focus on 
locating where in the knowledge-generation process 
citizen input takes place. Such a typology would de-
termine the degree to which citizens participate up-
stream as stakeholders: influencing agenda setting 
for research, defining research priorities and shaping 
decision-making on funding or generating funding 
themselves, as well as downstream, by taking into ac-
count the degree of citizen involvement in evaluation 
of outcomes, in accessing results and datasets, and 
deciding what happens to them.

Taking into account these two axes of citizen involve-
ment (degree of involvement and location of involve-
ment) can be determinant when identifying the ethical 
dilemmas at stake. It also sheds light on the multiple 
roles played by citizens in the knowledge-generation 
process. At first glance, three key roles can be identi-
fied: citizens as producers of knowledge: ‘citizens doing 
science’ (as evidenced by non-experts playing a direct 
role in health research and experimentation); citizens 
as contributors to the generation of knowledge (e.g. via 
individuals’ — willing or unwitting — contribution of 
health data; via the role of interest groups in influenc-
ing the direction of research programming; and via the 
participation of patients in the evaluation and assess-
ment of new medicines); citizens as users of knowledge 
(e.g. individuals engaging in online self-diagnosis, us-
ing apps to lead a healthier lifestyle and sending data 
through mobiles).

Embedded within debates on citizen involvement in 
health are a set of terms, labels and concepts which 
warrant further reflection, given the inherent associa-
tions and meanings they carry with them.

Who are the ‘citizens’ in ‘citizen science’?

The term ‘citizen’ in this context may not necessarily 
be synonymous with ‘citizenship’, yet it does invoke 
notions of rights, duties and the active participation 
of individuals as members of a given society (e.g. 
within the framework of the ‘citizenship-as-rights’ or 

‘citizenship-as-participation’ models). In parallel, this 
label can encompass a range of individual or organised 
actors: stakeholders, lay persons, patients and consum-
ers but also and in counterpoint, organised interest 
groups, lobbies and corporate bodies. Indeed, this term 
could prove misleading should it convert the spectrum 
of societal groups with differing and sometimes con-
flicting interests, into one homogenous block.

As a prime example, care should be taken when distin-
guishing between ‘citizens’ and ‘patients’ who may, if 
considered as distinct groups, be seen to be driven by 
very different sets of motivations (91).

Such a patient/citizen dichotomy may however risk ob-
scuring the complexity of the roles at stake. Consider 
the citizen who happens to be a patient and is active 
in spaces of public deliberation, or a patient whose 
citizens’ rights and responsibilities must be secured. 
Taking into account the context-dependent nature of 
these roles, and how quickly an individual may transi-
tion between them (i.e. from the citizen who happens 
to be a patient and is engaging in health policy deliber-
ations to the patient who suffers and is receiving care), 
this complexity may be more accurately understood 
by placing a line of continuity between these two con-
cepts. Such a continuum may also help nuance the tra-
ditional framing of the patient as one who suffers and 
receives care, being therefore intrinsically passive. We 
may also ask how these classic associations are being 
disrupted by recent trends to depict patients as clients/
consumers: how does the act of labelling the patient as 
‘consumer’ in itself reframe this role and its associated 
rights and responsibilities? How do we understand the 
notion of the expert patient? Moreover, at what point 
does a citizen become a patient?

In addition, the increasing propensity of citizens to en-
gage in ‘science’ requires an interrogation of this term. 
Can ‘science’ be conducted by ‘non-scientists’? Who 
do we mean by scientists when the scientific estab-
lishment implies a range of public institutions, private 
companies and international bodies?

(91)  For instance, while citizens may be wary of putting their data 
online, patients may be more willing to share their data if 
they believe it will help solve a chronic disease. One means 
of overcoming this discrepancy would be to separate out 
and draw a line between the individual ‘citizen’ on one side 
(together with the organised citizens’ NGOs and groups 
which form ‘civil society’) as distinct from the individual 
‘patient’ (and patient groups representing the organised 
manifestation of the latter’s various interests) on the other.

24

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationA PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION | CHAPTER 1

Value and risks of participation

Care should be taken when using terms such as citizen 
‘engagement’, ‘involvement’ and ‘participation’ given 
the positive associations of these terms with notions 
of inclusiveness, openness and democratisation. Such 
labels may function as a form of branding for activi-
ties or endeavours where alternative interests (e.g. 
financial) hold sway. In addition, participation in this 
context usually comes at a cost for the participants (92). 
An overriding focus on the empowering potential of 
engagement (while certainly warranting investigation) 
can draw attention from the double-edged nature of 
citizen involvement, which carries risks of exploitation, 
manipulation and control.

The latter warning raises a final inevitable question con-
cerning the rationales that are driving the turn towards 
citizen involvement and the functions that participation 
plays. Four conceptual tools familiar to scholars of partic-
ipatory democracy may provide an entry into this discus-
sion: the rationale of the normative democratic world-
view (that participation is essentially the ‘right thing to 
do’): the rationale of output legitimacy (that participa-
tion produces more effective outcomes); the rationale 
of input legitimacy (that the process itself is evaluated 
more favourably as a result of enabling a range of inter-
ests to enter the decision-making procedure); and the 
rationale of ‘buy-in’, which implies the fostering of com-
pliance (in a medical context, of following the doctor’s 
orders, taking medication as prescribed, etc. as opposed 
to ‘adherence’ which refers rather to a mutual agree-
ment on the prescribed course of action).

These tools should be accompanied by some caveats: 
first, is the question of whether we can impute a single 
rationale to organisations which employ participatory 
methods where multiple, heterogeneous approaches, 
interests and agendas are at play, and where an institu-
tional mimesis or path-dependency can be the domi-
nant dynamic that drives decision-making. Second, and 
relatedly, is the question of whether it is really possible 
to ascribe rationales to individuals as a means to under-
stand individual-level decision-making/actions within 
organisations. And third, justificatory discourses that 
are applied to initiatives of citizen involvement may 
have only a tenuous connection to the processes at 
play.

Nevertheless, calls for increased engagement and par-
ticipation might elicit some key questions: is it a sub-
stantive involvement or merely a procedural involve-
ment? Does the call for public engagement respond to 
a need for greater transparency, public accountability 
or legitimation? Does it function as a means to manage/
govern expectations, hopes and fears or to mediate 
accountability through shared responsibility?

Such considerations should not to detract from the 
value brought by participation, but can serve to nuance 
the so-called ‘rhetoric of participation’: the assumption 
that participation brings in itself solution or is an un-
qualified ‘good’.

That is not to deny the multiple benefits of participa-
tion. Participants can not only add value for research 
by providing experimental data, they may also raise 
new questions and co-create/create (in different pos-
sible ways) a new scientific culture. Volunteers acquire 
new learning and skills, and deeper understanding of 
the scientific work. As a result of this open, networked 
and trans-disciplinary scenario, science–society–pol-
icy interactions may be improved leading to a more 
participatory research based on evidence-informed 
decision-making (93).

1.2.2.  Recent phenomena of citizen 
participation in health

Several recent phenomena serve as examples of this 
new concept, applied to the specific field of health: 
with reference to citizens as experimenters (patients 
participating in various degrees in experimentation), 
as stakeholders (patient expert groups), and as purvey-
ors of data (citizens/patients sending data through ICT, 
mobiles, digital devices).

Participant‑led research

Increasing access to information technologies and use 
of social networks have enabled citizens to become 
more active and engaged, in various degrees, as indi-
viduals or as communities of individuals in the gover-
nance of health and conduct of health research.

(92)  Citizen Participation in Science and Medicine (CPSM) net-
work statement to the European Group on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies.

(93)  Green paper on Citizen Science for Europe: Towards a soci-
ety of empowered citizens and enhanced research (http://
ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/news/green-paper-cit-
izen-science-europe-towards-society-empowered-citi-
zens-and-enhanced-research-0).

25

CHAPTER 1 | A PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION

Participant-led research can take the form of self-ex-
perimentation, self-surveillance, self-reporting of data, 
analysis of genomic data, and the design and launch of 
health research projects including via crowdsourced 
approaches.

aggregated data to drive research (95). This saw a col-
laboration between patients as drivers of the research 
and researchers who provided the data analysis and 
a confirmation of the hypotheses formulated by the 
patients in clinical trials.

While the phenomenon can take a variety of forms, it is 
characterised by the active role played by the lay per-
son, with the citizen or patients providing the leading 
force in the conduct of research projects. These new 
phenomena stand, to a certain degree, in contrast to 
the existing infrastructure of research (scientist-driven), 
although the lines between the two are often blurred.

Patients may self-report the use of off-label pharma-
ceuticals or experimental drugs; in such cases, indi-
viduals may choose themselves the active treatment 
group and doses, recording and reporting the effects 
themselves. The outcome of self-reports may then be 
compiled and analysed, indeed reports are often freely 
accessible on the net. There are an evolving range of 
participant-centric initiatives that combine web-based 
informatics tools with new models of engagement and 
research collaboration. These emerging initiatives may 
become approaches to support large-scale and longi-
tudinal research studies.

A growing number of projects can be observed which 
involve patients wishing to take a more active role in 
treatment decisions. Whether these are patients with 
non-curable conditions who want to pilot new medi-
cal treatments or dissatisfied research participants 
who feel that research they have participated in has 
not been focused enough to patients’ needs.

A few of these participant-led research projects are 
published in scientific journals (94). In 2011 Nature Bio-
technology published a study conducted as a self-ex-
perimentation by a group of patients on the effects of 
lithium on amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) on the 
website ‘PatientsLikeMe’, a platform dedicated to shar-
ing information and disease experiences and using the 

(94)  Frost, J., Okun, S., Vaughan, T., Heywood, J. and Wicks, P., 
‘Patients-reported outcomes as a source of evidence in 
off-label prescribing: analysis of data from PatientsLikeMe’, 
Journal Med. Internet Res. 2011, 13, e6; Kaye J., Curren, L., An-
derson, N., Edwards, K., Fullerton, S. M. et al., ‘From patients 
to partners: participant-centric initiatives in biomedical re-
search’, Nat. Rev. Genet. 2012, 13, pp. 371-376.

26

CureLauncher is a crowd-funded platform designed to 
help patients to find new treatment options accord-
ing to their unique condition and to accelerate the re-
search, discovery and development of drugs and de-
vices (96). It helps citizens to find the right clinical trials 
and the treatment, even if not yet experimented or still 
within the experimentation phase: it is a free resource 
for patients and healthcare professionals.

There are relevant opportunities emerging from these 
new phenomena: Data can be collected more rapidly, 
accelerating the process of discovery and the participa-
tion is broader, even global, in the absence of commer-
cial motivation and providing opportunities for people 
to contribute to science. But ethical challenges arise, 
given the possible lack of scientific rigour and ethical 
oversight (see section 2.3).

Experimental care and therapy

In the context of the participant/patients-led research 
there are also examples of primarily internet-based ini-
tiatives for experimental care and therapy.

Experimental care and therapy falls into a number of 
different categories.

1. The so-called ‘compassionate use’ of drugs are the 
use of individual or group treatments for patients af-
fected by serious and often end-stage pathologies, 
without effective available alternatives of validated 
therapies, with the aim and hope to bring benefits 
to the patient’s living conditions and quality of life, 
reducing suffering and also improving research and 
experimentation. The expression ‘compassionate use’ 
refers to feelings of empathy towards seriously ill and 

(95)  PatientsLikeMe is a platform for sharing information and 
disease experiences; it enables patients to connect with pa-
tients of the same illness and encourages patients to share 
data and information. Members (300 000) may choose dif-
ferent privacy settings that may be changed in time: shared 
data are accessible to third parties, non-shared data not. The 
website reports aggregated data on symptoms and treat-
ments that may be useful to patients. It is founded on an 
‘openness philosophy’(https://www.patientslikeme.com).

(96)  http://www.curelauncher.com 

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationA PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION | CHAPTER 1

incurable patients: it indicates non-validated treat-
ments for personal and single use.

available and in conditions of emergency, for individual 
and social health.

In these circumstances, patients are often ready to try 
any kind of treatment that would help in their situation; 
some are even prepared to engage in self-experimen-
tation of new treatments under development or still in 
the clinical trial phase.

Generally compassionate care is not an alternative to 
the consolidated paths of pharmacological trial ap-
proved in the scientific community, but rather an ex-
ception, for particular situations. Its use can raise sen-
sitive questions with regard to scientific assessment, 
liability, the distribution of resources, and the evalua-
tion of informed consent.

Such experimental treatments need to demonstrate 
a reasonable scientific basis: data published in interna-
tional scientific journals, results on animals and prefer-
ably results from phase I clinical trials. The prescription 
requires an evaluation by a panel of experts, in condi-
tions of full transparency, absence of conflicts of inter-
est, publication of the products’ composition and the 
treatment’s results, detailed explanation to the patients 
of the potential dangers, and possible absence of ben-
efits and the drugs’ costs.

2. Off-label treatment indicates the use of treatments 
in a way (as regards indications, modalities of use) that 
differs from those authorised, with a scientific basis of 
efficacy and tolerability. It does not oppose traditional 
standards of experimentation and use of drugs, but 
allows, exceptionally, under medical control, the use 
of treatments not yet validated by healthcare regula-
tory authorities in cases where patients have a seri-
ous pathology without validated therapies or with 
validated therapies which are not effective (as regards 
therapeutic results with reference to the pathology 
and to quality of life). Validation is plausible but not 
concluded, with scientific bases but not yet authorised 
and licensed.

Investigational drugs can save or extend lives although 
they have not yet been proven through experimenta-
tion to be safe and effective. While new investigational 
drugs may be effective, they may also have unexpected 
serious side effects and unforeseen risks.

3. The ‘expanded access’ to treatments permits patients 
to have access to investigational drugs and vaccines 
in situations where no other effective treatment is 

The 2014 outbreak of Ebola in Africa is an example. In 
response to this challenge WHO convened a consulta-
tion to consider and address the ethical implications 
of the use of unregistered treatments (covered by ex-
panded use). The panel, taking into account that in the 
case of Ebola, not only individual health but also public 
health was at stake, concluded that it would be accept-
able on both ethical and evidential grounds to use un-
registered interventions that have shown promising 
results in the laboratory and animal models but have 
not yet been evaluated for safety and efficacy in human 
beings (97). It was stipulated that aside from scientific 
criteria, certain ethical criteria must guide the use of 
such treatment: transparency, informed consent, free-
dom of choice, confidentiality, respect for individuals, 
preservation of dignity, fair distribution and involve-
ment of the community. Furthermore, all scientifically 
relevant data from this intervention should be collect-
ed and shared to establish the safety and efficacy of 
the interventions. The panel has also identified ethical 
dilemmas which require more analysis: data gathering 
vs. promoting optimal care, criteria for prioritising the 
use of unregistered experimental therapies, and the 
criteria for determining the distribution of the grow-
ing number of investigational interventions unlikely to 
meet the demand.

This step towards broader use of experimental therapy 
is paralleled by recent developments and reforms in 
the USA where the US Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) has also expanded access to experimental medi-
cines. In fact, the growth of applications for FDA ap-
proval of expanded access has been remarkable in the 
past years. Some requests are also being made directly 
to biotech companies by licensed doctors on behalf 
of their patients. In May 2015, Johnson and Johnson 
established a panel to work on this topic and make 
decisions about patients’ requests for lifesaving medi-
cine (98). Several states in the USA have adopted ‘right 
to try’ laws allowing terminally ill patients to access 
experimental drugs directly from biotech companies 
without final FDA approval. Evidently, this ‘piecemeal 

(97)  ‘Ethical considerations for use of unregistered interventions 
for Ebola virus disease’, Report of an advisory panel to WHO, 
World Health Organisation, 2014.

(98)  http://www.jnj.com/news/all/Johnson-Johnson-Announc-
es-NYU-School-of-Medicine-Partnership-to-Evaluate-Com-
passionate-Use-of-Investigational-Medicines

27

CHAPTER 1 | A PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION

approach’ requires a reform of the FDA expanded ac-
cess programme. The following suggestions have been 
put forward: biotechnology companies should have 
clear and publicly accessible expanded access policies; 
each patient should know why a request for expanded 
access is denied; requests for expanded access should 
be tracked and reported to the FDA; a task force should 
be established to further improve the expanded access 
programme.

Similar processes are also being explored in Europe, in-
cluding under the guise of the so-called ‘right to hope’.

These phenomena — compassionate use, off-label 
treatments, expanded access to treatments — are dif-
ferentiated practices which nevertheless share similari-
ties: they are all an expression of the way in which both 
individuals and patient groups exert pressure to speed 
the pace of research, spearhead new research. The es-
tablished path of scientific experimentation within 
evidence-based medicine requires time: the urgency 
of individual and societal expectations and the pos-
sibility to be informed, through ICT, of new possible 
experimental care and therapy opens the door for new 
demands.

Patients and their families often search for new ways to 
experiment care and therapies through web and social 
networks, in order to directly connect with other pa-
tients or groups of patients in the same conditions, but 
also physicians and scientists in the field. In request-
ing to self-experiment treatments they reflect a wish 
to overcome the rigid protocols of research, to open — 
in specific conditions — new ways of experimentation 
of treatments, as expression of the right to health, to 
be cured and cared, to be free in health choices. That 
requires an ethical reflection of the conditions of com-
patibility of individual/groups request and the social 
need of fair distribution of resources (see section 2.5).

As regards the regulatory framework on experimen-
tal care and therapy, at international level the Helsinki 
Declaration, Article 37, allows a non-proven interven-
tion, under medical responsibility and accompanied by 
an expert opinion, when no other validated effective 
interventions exist.

Citizen veillance on health

‘Citizen veillance on health’ is a form of collaboration 
between citizens and health professionals in creating 
knowledge, a form of co-collaboration or ‘peer-produc-
tion’ of knowledge, generally motivated by personal, 

combined with shared social goals. ‘Citizen veillance’ 
has similarities to both epidemiology and surveillance 
of public health, but also has specific differences, that 
qualifies it as a form of ‘citizen science’.

A project spearheaded by the Sarroch municipality (Ca-
gliari, Italy) provides a case study of citizen veillance 
driven primarily by a local community (99). In 2006 the 
Sarroch municipality launched a project of epidemio-
logical investigations with the purpose of using science 
for policy with the aim of protecting the health of the 
citizens and the environment. All phases of the proj-
ect were discussed with the local community in order 
to raise civic awareness and co-produce knowledge, 
between citizens and scientists. The citizen-owned Sar-
roch Bioteca Foundation was established (and subse-
quently recognised in 2012 as a trusted entity) to gather 
biological samples donated by citizens to monitor ge-
netic changes as indicators of health. All citizens of the 
municipality could become members of the project, 
after registering their commitment (based on informed 
consent) to be enrolled in specific research.

‘Citizen veillance’ can serve both as a confrontation 
with institutions, or often as a way to underline the in-
efficiency of institutions, in order to compensate for the 
lack of adequate health protection, and also a lack of 
adequate legal tools. In this sense ‘citizen participatory 
veillance’ becomes a model for the normative imple-
mentation of scientific policies in the control of health 
and institutional implementation. And even more: ‘cit-
izen participatory veillance’ becomes an assessment 
and regulation instrument in the public sphere.

The fact that there is a strict connection between col-
lected, monitored and ‘veilled’ data and health poli-
cies (that may also be restrictive as regards freedoms, 
see infectious diseases), the direct, active and effective 
involvement, in the sense of participation and collabo-
ration of citizens/scientists in health, is a condition for 
democratic health choices. Democratising health and 
health policies may be the real motivation for phe-
nomena of ‘citizen participatory veillance’ of health 
and illness: the participation of citizens, patients, and 
experts–patients (patients that have acquired the skills 
and expertise on their illnesses) is not a guarantee of 

(99)  M. Tallacchini et al. (2014), ‘Emerging ICT for Citizens’ Veil-
lance’,  European  Commission,  JRC  Science  and  Policy 
Reports. 

28

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationA PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION | CHAPTER 1

democratisation (100), but a step towards efficacy and 
social acceptance of veillance and consequent policies.

developed by the EMA on when and how to involve 
patients in the evaluation of medicines (104).

Expert patients and patient interest groups

1.3.  Summarising new opportunities and 

Citizens and patients may have knowledge and compe-
tences which enhance and complete those of scientists 
and specialists. In the case of HIV/AIDS, gay communi-
ties and patients’ organisations have made a significant 
impact in drug research studies, successfully changed 
the protocols of clinical trials and managed to modify 
the name of the disease. Furthermore, groups of pa-
tient activists conducted a trial of Pentamidine (used 
to treat a type of pneumonia) when clinicians refused 
to do so. Later the drug was approved by the FDA, the 
first time a medicine has been authorised as a result of 
community-based experimentation (101).

Another example of patient-initiated research was pro-
vided by experiments on the use of lithium in patients 
with ALS. This study paved the way for a subsequent 
formal clinical trial that confirmed its results that lithi-
um had no effect on the progression of the disease. The 
outcome has been published by a peer-reviewed bio-
medical journal (102). In this way, patients organisations 
have become increasingly active in accelerating clinical 
discovery and assessing the effectiveness of drugs (103).

The European Medicine’s Agency (EMA), the body re-
sponsible for the scientific evaluation of medicines in 
the EU, provides an example of a regulatory authority 
which aims to benefit from patient experience and ex-
pertise. Patient representatives are members of several 
EMA scientific committees and patients are involved 
in regulatory processes. This includes participation in 
benefit/risk evaluations of medicines, with patients 
providing their direct perspectives of living with par-
ticular diseases and treatment options. The involve-
ment of patients in this way is based on a clear criteria 

(100)  EGE Opinion on the Ethics of Security and Surveillance Tech-

nologies, 2014.

(101)  Bucchi, M. and Neresini, F. (2008), ‘Science and public par-
ticipation’ in The handbook of science and technology studies, 
IIIrd edition, eds. Harkett, E. J., Amsterdamska, O. and Lynch, 
M., the MIT Press, London, pp. 449-471. 

(102)  Wicks. P., Vaughan, T. E., Massagli, M. P. and Heywood, J., ‘Ac-
celerated clinical discovery using self-reported patient data 
collected online and a patient-matching algorithm’ (2011).

(103)  Nature Biotechnology (2011, 29, 411-414).

challenges in health: Prevention, predic-
tion, personalisation, participation and 
precision

This chapter began by examining the key health tech-
nologies which are redefining the relationship between 
an individual and their health. It then analysed how 
citizens are becoming increasingly engaged in the 
production of knowledge and highlighted the new 
forms of citizen involvement in health driven by the 
confluence of technological development and chang-
ing social behaviours. What are the wider implications 
of these changes for medicine and healthcare?

According to certain scholars (105) the above-described 
technologies and practices carry the potential to trans-
form healthcare in a number of ways: from a ‘reactive’ 
to a ‘proactive’ approach to medicine, with a growing 
emphasis on ‘preventive’ or ‘predictive’ care, and deal-
ing with disease in a ‘personalised’ and ‘participatory’ 
way. The convergence of new health technologies and 
new analytical tools of information technologies is held 
by some to be transforming our current ‘reactive model 
of medicine’ (the cure and care of the patient), based 
on limited data, and ‘population-based’ statistics and 
averages to a preventive, predictive, personalised, and 
participatory medicine.

Such projections are in turn linked to the advocating of 
so-called ‘Systems Medicine’. This term refers to a glob-
al approach based on an integrative, interdisciplinary 
method applied to health and disease, understood in 
their complexity and encompassing the biological, so-
cial and environmental interactions of heterogeneous 
factors.

The diagnostic possibilities determined by ‘omics’ and 
novel biomarkers has raised expectations regarding 
the capacity of medicine to make an efficient predic-
tion of a person’s health condition and consequently 

(104)  Hearing  with  Dr  Noel  Wathion,  Chief  Policy  Advisor, 
EMA. See also: http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.
jsp?curl=pages/partners_and_networks/general/gener-
al_content_000317.jsp&mid=WC0b01ac058003500c

(105)  Hood, L. and Flores, M., ‘A personal view on systems medi-
cine and the emergence of proactive P4 medicine: predic-
tive, preventive, personalised and participatory’, New Bio-
technology, March 2012, pp. 1-12.

29

CHAPTER 1 | A PARADIGM SHIFT IN HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES AND CITI zEN PARTICIPATION

individualise prevention. The technological possibility 
to collect and analyse large amounts of data (genomes, 
bioinformatics) is the condition of the development of 
precision medicine, as a comprehensive approach to 
preventing, diagnosing, treating, and monitoring dis-
ease in order to anticipate and optimise — through 
a deeper insight into the disease mechanism — health-
care decisions. Intertwined with ‘personalisation’, are 
the expectations and potentials of participation: pa-
tients or healthcare consumers are involved passively 
(as providers of data, through genetic tests and the se-
quencing of the human genome, donation of biologi-
cal samples, digital consumers devices, such as health 
apps, measuring personal information besides biologi-
cal and environmental data, etc.) and encouraged to 
actively participate in their own healthcare by follow-
ing the correct lifestyle and increased awareness of 
disease (through social networks, virtual communities 
of patients led by physicians or by themselves, personal 
monitoring devices, etc.). Crowdsourcing of volunteers 
might extend and modify the way in which clinical trials 
are performed in the future.

In contrast to past evolutions in medicine, citizens and 
patients as consumers may be playing new roles in 
the realisation of new ways to understand and apply 

medicine through participation. Networked patients 
and consumers become actors managing and monitor-
ing their health, while at the same time providing in-
formation which promotes scientific advancement. The 
databases and networks can provide new knowledge 
on health and disease and be tailored to the condition 
and circumstances of the single individual. The pros-
pect is for predictive models of health and disease for 
patients that are actionable — i.e. which provide data 
that enable them to improve their health. Furthermore, 
this medicine is beginning to cross the boundaries of 
the traditional clinical setting, with new digital health 
devices and systems allowing patients and their family 
members to manage their health at home.

Potential benefits of this transformation include early 
and more accurate diagnosis, more selective and effec-
tive treatment, reduction of time, costs and failure rate 
of therapy and clinical trials, the change of focus from 
disease to wellness, and empowerment of the patient 
and physicians (106).

The acceleration of the transformation raises new so-
cietal and cultural challenges, which opens new op-
portunities, but also new possible challenges, tensions 
and issues from an ethical perspective.

30

(106)  Collins, F. S. and Varmus, H., ‘A new initiative on precision 
medicine’, New England Journal of Medicine, 2015, 30 January.

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationEMERGING ETHICAL TENSIONS | CHAPTER 2

Chapter 2  Emerging ethical tensions

The promises and potentials of new health technologies 
and the new avenues for citizen engagement are driving 
what we described in Chapter 1 as a paradigm shift (or 
set of shifts) in the way that health and healthcare and 
perceived, organised and delivered. These shifts bring 
a number of ethical challenges which are grouped ac-
cording to the following five sets of considerations:

First, the implications of new health technologies and 
new modes of involvement on perceptions of the ‘self’, 
of personhood and of the body in a medical context 
(section 2.1). While advances in the field of genetics, 
diagnostics and health informatics hold immense po-
tential for improved diagnoses and treatments, how 
can increasingly information-based approaches be rec-
onciled to patients’ lived experiences, in other words 
the day-to-day experience of patients in relation to 
their own bodies?

Second, the implications of potential transformations 
in the patient–physician relationship (section 2.2). Are 
new patterns of participation changing structures of 
knowledge and power in medical practice? How might 
such a transformation, together with increasing possi-
bilities for patient–physician interactions to take place 
outside of traditional clinical settings, impact upon pa-
tient empowerment, patient safety and quality of care?

Third, the implications of citizen involvement in the 
research endeavour (section 2.3). This draws attention 
to the ambiguity inherent in terms such as ‘citizen sci-
ence’ and ‘citizen participation’, in which notions of 
empowerment, engagement and exploitation are not 
always simple to disentangle. It also explores the ten-
sions between citizen involvement on the one hand, 
versus the quest for scientific integrity on the other.

Fourth, the implications of new health technologies 
and citizen involvement on societal understandings, 
principles and structures governing health (section 2.4). 
This draws attention to the potential for new forms of 
surveillance, responsibility shifting in the domain of 
health, and a potential extension of what some have 
labelled the ‘medicalisation’ of society.

Fifth, implications for notions of solidarity and justice 
(section 2.5). How might innovative health technolo-
gies make questions of access and inequality increas-
ingly acute? Another important consideration is how 
an increasingly dynamic engagement of citizens as 
patients and consumers, could make the arbitration of 

interests more complex, presenting challenges to the 
principle of solidarity as an overarching framework for 
European healthcare systems.

Consideration of these ethical questions will be under-
pinned by the following ethical principles:

•  Human dignity, serving as a basis for requirements 
of privacy, confidentiality and medical secrecy;

•  Autonomy, serving as a basis for requirements of 

self-determination and participation;

•  Beneficence and non-maleficence, serving as a ba-
sis for the attempts to weigh anticipated benefits 
against foreseeable risks;

• 

• 

Justice, serving as a basis for requirements of equi-
table distribution of limited resources;

Solidarity, serving as a basis of the right for every-
one to the protection of healthcare, with a special 
concern for vulnerable groups in society.

2.1.  Evolving notions of the self: abstraction 

versus ‘personalisation’?

The developments described in Section 1 may act on 
concepts of the individual or ‘self’ — as citizen, consum-
er, patient, or active participant in preventive, diagnostic, 
therapeutic or research-oriented health technologies. 
With the opening of a multitude of new roles for citizens 
as active participants in all aspects of health, from medi-
cal research to the organisation and delivery of health-
care, it is far from clear how they impact the individual’s 
self-concept: on the one hand, most of the technolo-
gies presuppose either an information-based approach, 
transforming the embodied experience of each of us into 
information that can be transmitted via new technolo-
gies, or a biological (physiological) approach that takes 
the biological dimension of human beings as the crucial 
target of prevention, diagnosis, or therapy.

On the other hand, however, one can observe the rising 
interest in health-related social media, which serve as 
an interactive forum for the narration and communica-
tive sharing of lived experiences: cyberspace welcomes 
both — life sciences as much as lived experiences. 
Individuals need both dimensions, the empirical (in-
formational, biological) and the experiential, in order 
to maintain self-identities, and it does not come as 

31

CHAPTER 2 | EMERGING ETHICAL TENSIONS

a surprise that the ‘active citizens’ strive to integrate 
their empirical data and their experiential narratives 
of health and illness into one ‘story’.

A possible challenge when it comes to the control of 
one’s well-being is whether, with the rise of a data-in-
tensive medicine, we first rely upon the data we collect, 
before we correlate them with our ‘sense of self’. And 
even though we share our experiences willingly and 
often eagerly with others, how they can (still) be part of 
medical encounters. If the patient becomes more and 
more active and engaged, it could well be that patients’ 
stories, traditionally part of the doctor–patient relation-
ship, will be more and more transferred to patients’ vir-
tual communities (see section 2.2. below).

Advances in the fields of genetics, diagnostics and 
medical informatics hold immense potential for the 
delivery and provision of effective healthcare and 
medical treatments. Yet while measurable and objec-
tive variables are important for delivering effective 
medical treatment, these are not capable of capturing 
the personal biographies of patients which are equal-
ly essential for their medical care (107). Whether using 
genetic testing, new diagnostic techniques such as 
neuroimaging, digital monitoring devices or mHealth 
applications, the wealth of ‘bio-information’ generated 
by these technologies may feed a progressive under-
standing of the self which potentially risks becoming 
detached from social and environmental factors and 
from the biographical subjectivity of the patient (108). 
This is certainly not integral to the technologies we are 
examining here, but will very much depend on how 
these technologies are used in diverse care contexts.

The rise of genetic information

The  above  questions  underlie  the  increase  of  ge-
netic knowledge through genome sequencing and 

(107)  Levin, N. (2014), ‘Making up “persons” in personalised medi-
cine with metabolomics’, Somatosphere: Science, Medicine 
and Anthropology (http://somatosphere.net/2014/02/mak-
ing-up-persons-in-personalized-medicine-with-metabo-
lomics.html).

(108)  Bio-identity is used in this context to denote a biologi-
cal-based sense of identification and affiliation, to the exclu-
sion of the social, environmental and biographic aspects of 
identity formation. The understanding of identity primarily 
in terms of ‘bio-identity’ is reductionist in a double sense: re-
ducing several identification categories into one, and reduc-
ing the identity of the self to the identification of someone 
by these categories. For the distinction between ‘ipse’ and 
‘idem’ (self and sameness) cf. Ricoeur, P., Oneself as Another, 
Chicago 1996.

genome-wide analysis and the increasing interest in 
the use of genetic tests which have become faster and 
cheaper and which open new diagnostic possibilities. 
The idea that genetic information is a way to gain de-
terminate knowledge of a person’s health conditions 
and susceptibility to illness (the-so called phenomenon 
of ‘geno-centrism’) is scientifically and philosophically 
problematic, as every person is the result of a complex 
interaction of genes and environment; a person is more 
than the sum of the parts and non-reducible to them: 
we ‘are’ our genes, but also ‘beyond’ them. Genetic 
information, while capable of delivering important in-
sights, cannot tell the whole story.

Overcoming the reductionist/determinist genetic para-
digm — in both the scientific and philosophical sense 
— is also important because genetic test results — are 
subject to a large degree of variability (109). The uncer-
tain nature of their results — and the fact that their 
predictive power relies on a weighing of probabilities, 
makes it important that patients obtain an official clini-
cal validation of the results and receive medical coun-
selling in order to interpret their implications.

The growth of genetic testing has also brought new 
ways of living with predictive diagnoses. There is a con-
crete possibility opened by the availability of diagnos-
tic techniques and monitoring devices, that consumers 
may become a new class of ‘patient’ within the world of 
medicine. They are not ‘patients’ in the classical sense, 
as they have no typical symptoms of illness; they are in-
dividuals who share genetic predispositions, or whose 
vital signs manifest abnormalities, who may live in the 
expectation of the appearance of some sign of disease, 
organise their lives around visits to the doctor or labo-
ratory tests, and end up feeling ill or even developing 
psychosomatic symptoms; they are healthy citizens 
becoming ill and patients anxiously waiting for the 
predicted probability of symptoms. Linked to this sce-
nario is the challenge of so-called ‘incidental findings’, 
unexpected or unsolicited results which emerge from 

(109)  The US Government Accountability Office (GAO) performed 
a retrospective study of results produced by private com-
panies regarding risk prediction for a number of diseases 
such as hypertension and prostate tumours: separately 
tested samples gave contradictory results that varied from 
below-average to average to above-average risk for a single 
sample. As well as a high error margin, this study also under-
lined inadequacies in communicating the results as well as 
the making of false claims regarding the predictive or cura-
tive properties of the tests. GAO, ‘Direct-To-Consumer Ge-
netic Tests: Misleading Test Results Are Further Complicated 
by Deceptive Marketing and Other Questionable Practices’, 
22 July 2010 (http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-10-847T).

32

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationEMERGING ETHICAL TENSIONS | CHAPTER 2

tests and which raise important questions concerning 
how and which results should be returned to patients, 
taking into account an individuals’ desire for such infor-
mation (right to be informed, right not to be informed).

At the same time, there are important positive impli-
cations which result from this increase in medical in-
formation and diagnostic power. Knowledge about 
one’s state of health allows to take action to address 
a problem. Even being informed about a predisposi-
tion to a chronic or fatal illness, while on the surface 
disempowering, can allow individuals to take informed 
decisions and make important life choices.

Yet the unprecedented power of new health technolo-
gies to track, map and classify the body and to define 
what is normal and abnormal, healthy and unhealthy, 
holds important consequences for our understand-
ing of — and the link between — the self, health and 
the body. It opens questions around the potential for 
post-genomics medicine to move towards a so-called 
‘systems medicine’ which examines the self as an inte-
gration of complex interactions among genes, behav-
iour and the environment (110).

The quantification of the self

Questions surrounding the link between the self, health 
and the body are brought to the fore by the growth in 
health-related self-monitoring and self-tracking. The 
transition of complex technologies into the intimacy of 
people’s lives, has allowed these technologies to pro-
vide information on the person — regarding both be-
haviour and biology — in a way that was previously not 
possible. Individuals can record and monitor specific 
aspects of their bodies’ functioning (e.g. heart rate, me-
tabolism, hormone levels) on a continuous basis, in or-
der to monitor the progress of and maintain health. This 
has given birth to an organisational movement — the 
‘Quantified Self’ movement — whose members strive 
for better self-understanding by collecting, quantify-
ing and comparing data about themselves, their way 
of life, consumption, nutrition, sports, health, aided by 
the use of connected body sensors such as bracelets, 
chips, watches, combined with mobile applications (111).

How do these technologies influence notions of the 
self, self-identity and the relationship with the body? 
Self-monitoring technologies have provided people 

(110)  Kamada, T., ‘System biomedicine: a new paradigm in bio-
medical engineering’, Front med. Biol. Eng. 1992: 4(1): 1-2.

(111)  http://quantifiedself.com

with extremely effective ways of understanding their 
bodily processes. From diabetics monitoring blood glu-
cose levels to bipolar patients engaging in mood-track-
ing, individuals can now gain direct insights into their 
body’s functioning. Do these technologies therefore 
herald a transition towards individuals reclaiming 
control over their bodies? May they help broaden the 
medical gaze beyond the effects of treatment on bodily 
parameters alone, situating bodies (and effects of med-
ical treatments) within the intricacies of daily lives (112)? 
Or are we in fact simply witnessing an extension of the 
clinical gaze, so that every individual assumes the task 
of monitoring their ‘body-object’? The answer may lie 
in what precisely is being quantified or measured (113). 
What kinds of information have value, and for whom?

In the CNIL report on this subject, Antoinette Rouvroye 
notes: ‘The phenomenon of the Quantified Self is part 
of a process not of measurement but of continuous 
quantification in real-time-contributing to the social 
production of standards of behaviour, performance 
and health, highly scalable ... and allowing the possi-
bility to visualise and possibly compare the progress 
by the users directly connected to the internet through 
sensors which ‘quantify it’ (114).

For certain observers, the notion of quantified self re-
flects a continuity of medicalisation trends of the last 
two centuries, characterised by a tendency to patholo-
gise previously unremarked human conditions, traits 
and problems. In the case of ‘quantified self’ move-
ments, medicalisation as driven by the medical pro-
fession finds synergies with citizen-driven movements 
around ‘healthism’, wellbeing and lifestyle change and 

(112)  Mol, A. and Law, J. (2004), ‘Embodied action, enacted bod-
ies: The example of Hypoglycaemia’, Body and Society, Vol. 
10 (2-3), pp. 43-62.

(113)  In his reflection on the quantification of the self movement, 
Alain Desrosières distinguishes it from the idea of measure-
ment. Quantifying, he writes, is to ‘express and give existence 
in a digital form what was previously expressed in words, 
not in numbers’ while ‘the idea of measurement implies that 
something exists in an already measurable form’. One can 
thus measure the size and weight of an individual at a par-
ticular moment. But the more or less good health does not 
allow measurement as such. To do so we should establish 
equivalence agreements. See Desrosières, A., Pour une soci-
ologie historique de la quantification: l’argument statistique I, 
Paris, Presses de l’Ecole des mines, 2008 (329 pages), pp. 10-11.

(114)  CNIL (Commission Nationale de l’Informatique et des Libertés), 
‘Le corps, nouvel objet connecté. Du quantified self à la M-San-
té : les nouveaux territoires de la mise en données du monde’, 
Cahiers IP, innovation & prospective N°02, mai 2014, p. 4.

33

CHAPTER 2 | EMERGING ETHICAL TENSIONS

feeds off individuals’ drive for self-improvement (115). It 
leads in its own way to the implementation of a health 
that is no longer a ‘state of complete well-being’ but 
a health in position ‘meta’, always beyond, pulling 
ahead. The quantified self is based on a voluntary use, 
but with essentially automated measurements. It col-
lects and circulates a large volume of personal data 
related to a body, but also ways of life. Most often it is 
initiated by people themselves, driven by leisure inter-
ests, the potential to manage a health condition and/
or a promise of mastering one’s self.

The digital technologies which enable a ‘quantified self’ 
are used by some simply as an amusing gadget, and by 
others as a highly valued tool for controlling an illness 
(e.g. diabetes patients measuring their blood glucose 
levels) or for providing useful insights into bodily states 
(e.g. women who use fertility apps). But looking be-
yond these everyday applications, involving the body 
in its intimacy means legal, ethical, socio-political, 
economic issues (further explored in section 2.4, and 
section 3). While the ethical assessment is difficult not 
only because the notion of quantified self implements 
heterogeneous practices, but it also uses a variety of 
tools and applications, the ethical and anthropological 
risk at stake here is one of fragmentation, of losing the 
global understanding of an individual’s health, which 
cannot be reduced to parts, measured and quantified.

‘Personalisation’: the challenge of 
a patient‑centred medicine

‘Personalisation’ holds the promise of overcoming the 
above-described fragmentation, in providing a tai-
lored, patient-centred healthcare product. Advances 
in the technologies driving precision or ‘personalised’ 
medicine are making use of ever more refined diag-
nostic testing, using the analysis of big data to take 
greater account of patient’s genetic and clinical histo-
ries to select the best treatments at the most effective 
doses. Many consider this the future of healthcare: an 
individually adapted medicine, better targeted, with 
fewer adverse effects and with potentially important 
cost savings for national health systems.

However, the very term ‘personalisation’ in this con-
text is potentially misleading. As J. C. Weber underlines, 
‘proposed treatments are generally not individualised, 
but categorised/stratified, they do not vary according 
to each individual, but according to some categories or 
sub-types: it is rather a stratified medicine than a per-
sonalised medicine. Their implementation in European 
healthcare systems requires a greater standardisation 
of the processes involved, from technological valida-
tion (which can be easily conceived) to informed con-
sent (which is more difficult to apprehend)’ (116).

The promise of ‘personalisation’ does not therefore offer 
an individual, tailored, nor an entirely person-centred 
treatment. Even if big data-based developments in ‘per-
sonalised’ medicine are allowing for ever more sophisti-
cated levels of stratification, the ‘person’ at stake is rath-
er a category, the parameters of which are established 
via the collection and analysis of large quantities of data. 
Precision medicine may also raise a degree of ambiguity 
over how physicians and healthcare professionals will 
balance data-based diagnoses and treatment options 
with considerations of the ‘experiential’ dimensions of 
a patient’s life. Movement in this direction may be un-
derway as new big data technologies begin to recognise 
the need not just for genetic data but also associated 
clinical, behavioural, physiological and environmental 
data. It would nevertheless be important to keep a focus 
on the contextualisation of a patient’s broader social, 
economic, cultural, or environmental context together 
with a consideration of a their empirical information.

Such considerations come alongside potentially impor-
tant ramifications of precision/‘personalised’ medicine 
for the solidaristic nature of Europe’s health delivery 
models as further explored in section 2.5.

2.2.  Transformation of the doctor–patient 
relationship: responsibility versus 
responsibilisation?

The impact of new forms of digital involvement of 
patients in medicine holds the potential to alter the 
traditional relationship between patients and health 
professionals, although the extent and nature of this 
change is as yet unclear.

(115)  Thiel, M.-J., La santé augmentée: réaliste ou totalitaire?, Paris, 
Ed. Bayard, 2014; Crawford, R., ‘Healthism and the medicali-
sation of everyday life’, Health Vol. 10, No 4, 401-420 (2006)); 
Skrabanek, P., ‘The Death of Humane Medicine and the Rise 
of Coercive Healthism’, Suffolk (UK): The Social Affairs Unit, 
1994; Rose, N., Powers of Freedom: Reframing Political Thought. 
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1999.

(116)  Weber, J.-C., ‘Personalised medicine, promises and expecta-
tions’, Lettre du CEERE (Centre Européen d’Enseignement et 
de Recherche de l’Université de Strasbourg), No 80, décem-
bre 2014, pp. 2-3.

34

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationEMERGING ETHICAL TENSIONS | CHAPTER 2

What is becoming more apparent however, are the 
ways in which the ‘democratisation’ of information are 
making access to medical knowledge no longer the 
sole preserve of medical professionals. Socio-techni-
cal trends have led to a surge in available health data 
and information, rapidly accessible to an increasingly 
connected public. While the abilities of individuals to 
interpret medical information will certainly vary, and 
physicians continue to be for the vast majority the most 
important source of medical advice, nevertheless to-
day’s citizens are becoming increasingly adept at find-
ing, filtering and interpreting this flow of information as 
part of their everyday lives: this has been characterised 
by some as a process of re-appropriating technical ex-
pertise by lay agents and part of a wider trend towards 
social reflexivity (117).

As a consequence, the health sector may witness what 
could be characterised as a new step in the evolving 
relationship between physicians and their patients. 
The doctor–patient relationship has already seen an 
important shift over the last century. The paternalistic 
and asymmetrical relationship between a doctor and 
his patient (whereby the patient would describe their 
symptoms, and the physician provide a diagnosis and 
issue a set of instructions for treatment) has given way 
in the last 20 years to a so-called ‘partnership approach’. 
Although the degree to which this has been embraced 
across healthcare contexts varies substantially, it gen-
erally rests on the understanding that both the doctor 
and the patient share responsibilities; the relationship 
is consensual, not obligatory; and doctor and patient 
engage in shared decision-making (118). This shift from 
paternalism to contractualism in the doctor–patient 
relationship has been an essential part of realising the 
principle of patient autonomy in modern medical care.

With the rise of new, digital health technologies and 
availability of online health resources, comes a further 
possible decrease in the dependence of patients on 
the ‘authority/power’ invested in medical expertise. 
Patients can now research their symptoms and pres-
ent their physician with their own diagnosis of their 
illness. They may choose to bypass the doctor alto-
gether, crowdsourcing treatment options or ordering 

medication from online pharmacies. Patients in some 
Member States are no longer relying on general practi-
tioners to act as ‘gateways’ to specialist medical exper-
tise, but instead attempt to diagnose their symptoms 
and refer themselves directly to the appropriate (or not) 
specialist.

A parallel trend driven by new health technologies, 
but with no less important implications for the doc-
tor–patient relationship is the advent of telemedicine 
and remote care, which no longer obliges a physical 
interaction between patient and doctor in a clinical set-
ting, facilitating the virtualisation of patient/physician 
exchanges.

The benefits presented by these developments are 
potentially considerable. They may see a process of 
growing self-determination, self-actualisation and 
empowerment of patients/citizens. The increased tech-
nological autonomy can stimulate health awareness, 
encouraging an improvement in life style (calories and 
exercise control), motivating citizens/patients to follow 
medical advice and to participate actively in health is-
sues (e.g. continuously and digitally self-reporting 
data or symptoms to their physician). Communication 
between patients and physicians may be improved: it 
may become faster, easier, better on a quantitative and 
qualitative level. Those who previously experienced 
difficult in accessing doctors (e.g. individuals living 
in remote locations, with limited mobility or mental 
health problems) could find in telemedicine new pos-
sibilities for accessing care. The work of wider health 
professionals, such as community care providers, could 
also be significantly facilitated. Digital communication 
and monitoring devices may, for instance, assist elderly 
people or end-of-life patients to remain in their homes 
for longer with the help of digitally connected health 
visitors, rather than face hospitalisation. There could 
be subsequent and important efficiency gains and cost 
reductions for health systems. Indeed, the WHO and 
the EU have encouraged active participation of patients 
in decision-making so that the patient can contribute 
to improving the quality and efficiency of their own 
care (119).

(117)  Giddens, A., (1990), The Consequences of Modernity, Polity 

Press, Cambridge.

(118)  Kaba, R. and Sooriakumaran, P. (2007), The evolution of the 
doctor-patient relationship, International Journal of Surgery, 
Vol. 5, pp. 57-65; Truog, R. D. (2012), Patients and Doctors — 
The Evolution of a Relationship, M.D.N Engl. J. Med.

(119)  World Health Organisation 2013, Exploring patient participa-
tion in reducing healthcare-related safety risks; EU Council 
Recommendation of 9 June 2009 on patient safety, includ-
ing the prevention and control of healthcare-associated 
infections (2009/C 151/01).

35

CHAPTER 2 | EMERGING ETHICAL TENSIONS

However, ethical risks may emerge where technolo-
gies cause patients to lose critical contact with medical 
professionals when it counts. There now exists the pos-
sibility, for those who wish to avoid the traditional medi-
cal channels, to use new health technologies (health 
apps, and online resources) as a means to self-diag-
nose, self-medicate, and self-experiment, without any 
medical consultation; to buy and use genetic tests and 
pharmaceuticals online without any counselling, advice, 
prescription, information, or involvement of physicians. 
‘Self-patients’ means not only digitalisation of the rela-
tionship with a physician, but the potential for substi-
tution of the physician (see for instance the health app 
‘pocket doctor’). While there can be important benefits 
inherent within these trends, there are also risks of harm 
associated with inaccurate health information available 
on the internet, the use of unlicensed medication, and 
lack of medical oversight relating to mHealth devices 
and direct-to-consumer diagnostic kits and tests.

An additional, more fundamental question is whether 
this increasing role in patients’ own diagnosis and 
treatment could ultimately challenge traditional ex-
pectations of healthcare. The paradigm shift from 
paternalism (asymmetrical relationship of physician’s 
authority and patient’s vulnerability) and contractual-
ism (symmetrical relationship between physicians and 
patients, becoming autonomous), risks swinging in the 
opposite direction towards a ‘responsibilisation’ of pa-
tients, whereby the weight of responsibility falls on the 
individual to ensure, not only that they are healthy, but 
that they take proactive measures to monitor, control 
and interpret their health data and take the appropriate 
follow-up action (see also section 2.4.). Responsibilisa-
tion is not in itself a negative development, indeed 
a shared sense of responsibility between doctor and 
patient can be central to ensuring better health out-
comes. The challenge is to ensure the right balance, 
whereby the patient is empowered to exercise their 
autonomy, while not losing the crucial interpersonal 
exchange and necessary expert support in interpreting 
medical information and selecting treatment options.

A number of factors, besides technological progress, 
provide the backdrop to the evolving relationship be-
tween patients and health professionals. On the one 
hand, economic considerations are likely to influence 
the decision of certain individuals as to whether to 
consult a medical professional or resort to alternative 
(often free) digital health resources. Budgetary consid-
erations on the part of the state can also be factors 
influencing the roll-out of telemedicine and remote 
care by decision-makers (see section 2.4.).

But an important additional contextual element of this 
paradigm shift is the gap between what the citizen 
expects from medicine and what they receive; what 
a patient expects from physicians and what they re-
ceive. Medical and technological progress has raised 
expectations significantly around capacity of science to 
find a cure. Such high expectations may result in dissat-
isfaction and disillusion when medicine or physicians 
cannot provide the hoped-for solution (120).

This distrust and uncertainty may form at least part 
of the backdrop to citizen involvement in medicine 
such as self-diagnosis and sale of medication via the 
internet, demand for experimental and compassionate 
therapies, rise of patient groups and the phenomenon 
of the ‘expert patient’, even the trend of ‘defensive 
medicine’. An erosion of trust can also explain trends of 
non-compliance with medical advice that carry signifi-
cant public health considerations, such as anti-vaccina-
tion movements and the threat of antibiotic resistance.

Maintaining and rebuilding trust between patients and 
medical authorities will be key in the evolving health-
care context. New technologies that support chang-
ing modes of patient–physician interaction should be 
geared towards enhancing the patient–physician rela-
tionship and the quality and availability of care provi-
sion from healthcare systems.

2.3.  Active engagement versus ‘passive 

participation’ in health and medical re-
search: consequences for empowerment, 
exploitation and scientific integrity

Citizen involvement in health and medical research can 
take many forms and intervene at different stages in 
the decision-making/knowledge generation/research 
application process (see section 1.2). Despite these nu-
ances in the notion of participation it is nevertheless 
helpful to distinguish on a methodological level two 
simplified models of citizens/patients participation in 
health: the top-down, ‘unwitting’ or ‘passive’ model of 
participation and the bottom-up, ‘active’ model. Each 
model is associated with specific opportunities and 
advantages as well as bringing its own set of ethical 
considerations. These tensions centre, in part, around 
ethical notions of empowerment and autonomy, versus 
the need to protect individuals from harm.

(120)  Lupton, D. (1994), Medicine as culture: illness, disease and the 

body in Western societies, London: Sage.

36

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationEMERGING ETHICAL TENSIONS | CHAPTER 2

The active or ‘bottom-up’ model of citizen participation 
in health or medical research is generally communi-
ty-driven by non-experts or amateurs, who can be either 
interested citizens, or individuals with a stake in advanc-
ing knowledge on a particular medical condition, includ-
ing ‘expert patients’. The passive (‘top-down’) model is 
expert driven: scientists and researchers design, lead 
and oversee the implementation of a project, counting 
on the participation of citizens/patients to volunteer 
data or biological samples, partake in trials or engage 
in narrowly circumscribed analytical tasks.

This first model foresees the active participation of 
citizens/patients and may open opportunities of ad-
vancement of science and of influencing research. By 
opening up scientific experimentation to new actors it 
can harness new sources of creativity and energy, and 
tap into the unique insights of individuals directly af-
fected by health conditions. Such participation serves 
as a means of empowering patients to become active-
ly involved in learning about and advancing medical 
knowledge on their condition.

However, the active, bottom-up model has raised con-
cerns surrounding issues of scientific validity, in particu-
lar the potential for activities to be carried out without 
a firm grounding in scientific competence and literacy, 
scientific methodology or qualified systematic analysis 
and peer review.

The rise of the ‘expert-patient’ and the ‘expert patient 
culture’ is based on the value of experiential knowl-
edge, not of scientific rigorous training. Moreover, ac-
tivities which are driven forward by amateurs, outside 
the institutional frameworks which govern medical re-
search bypass formal mechanisms of ethical oversight.

The  bottom-up  model  of  citizen  involvement  may 
therefore challenge the principles of evidence-based 
medicine (EBM) which applies strict criteria for validating 
medical research (including, inter alia, an appropriately 
qualified doctor as an investigator). Though EBM is not 
uncontested, it is generally understood as a process of 
systematically reviewing, appraising and using clinical 
research findings to aid the delivery of optimum clinical 
care to patients and it is presently the gold standard tool 
for commissioning and provision of healthcare, applied 
not only in pharmaceutical treatments but also increas-
ingly to surgical interventions, diagnostic tests and med-
ical devices (121). Interestingly, it has been recommended 

that the campaign for real EBM should include sharing 
decisions with patients and building a strong clinical–pa-
tient relationship (122). Indeed, there are some initiatives, 
such as those of the European Medicines Agency, that 
should be welcomed, which integrate this form of lay ex-
pertise into the process of evaluation and regulation (see 
section 1.2). In addition, citizen participation may have 
a role in peer review or in a process of ‘crowdsourcing 
ethics review’ (e.g. posting a research protocol on an on-
line platform inviting comments) (123). In this sense it be-
comes necessary to define what is science and scientific 
integrity. Science, in the modern experimental meaning, 
requires certain criteria and standards to be satisfied; it 
requires review mechanisms, an empirical proof of the 
theoretical hypothesis formulated. Experimentation in 
medicine requires compliance with protocols agreed by 
the international scientific community.

Does participating outside of the medical/scientific es-
tablishment imply a disregard of those standards and 
mechanisms? Not necessarily: but scientific oversight is 
important to guarantee the rigour of a project’s method-
ology and the relevance of its results. Are concerns over 
scientific integrity and evidence-based medicine shared 
by citizens — do citizens/patients care if a method, pro-
cess or output does not meet the criteria of science if 
it is perceived to work? The popularity of homeopathy 
may serve as one example in this context, as do prac-
tices of compassionate use or expanded access to thera-
pies (healthcare based on ‘the right to hope’ or ‘right to 
try’). Lay non-professional knowledge may contribute 
to science; the minimal requirement is that it should be 
validated with the scientific methodology (experimenta-
tion, peer review). Examples of non-conventional healing 
methods (124) provide just such examples of lay contribu-
tions which remain to be verified by scientific methods.

The ‘top-down’ model, while fulfilling requirements 
of scientific method, raises a different set of consider-
ations which centre around the degree of agency of 

(122)  Greenhalgh, T., Brit. Med. J., 2014, 348, g3725.

(123)  Crowdsourcing as a participative online activity, on a digital 
platform, in which individuals, institutions or organisations 
openly call for voluntarily undertaking a task: it may apply 
to health, generally it is a call to share data or call for ideas/
inventions useful for researchers. It is an increasingly dif-
fused phenomenon. Crowdsourcing is strictly connected 
to open data: the availability of vast amounts of accessible 
data helps the diffusion of crowdsourcing. It is a tool for 
both professional researchers and citizen scientists.

(124)  Also referred to as ‘alternative’, ‘traditional’, ‘complementary’, 

(121)  Balsey, J. (http://www.medicine.ox.ac.uk).

or ‘holistic’ medicines.

37

CHAPTER 2 | EMERGING ETHICAL TENSIONS

individuals involved and the delicate dividing line be-
tween empowerment and exploitation. The top-down 
model, in harnessing the data or crowdsourced con-
tributions of large numbers of participants, offers the 
potential for groundbreaking advances in medicine (see 
section 1). In addition, it holds important educational 
potential by enabling individuals to learn about new ar-
eas of science and research, with associated advantages 
for research transparency. Yet with data increasingly be-
coming a ‘tradeable good’, narratives that frame citizen 
involvement as a straightforward partnership between 
the public and the research community should also be 
treated with caution (125). An example is provided by the 
case of the direct-to-consumer genome testing compa-
ny, 23andMe. A commercial company that draws heav-
ily on the participatory rhetoric of citizen science, the 
company has been criticised for using the genetic data 
submitted by users to pursue its own profit-making 
goals. Its policy of transmitting amalgamated data to 
third parties and its links to Google, have also elicited 
privacy and surveillance-related fears (126).

As one of the core tensions they comprise, citizen in-
volvement initiatives can either subsume or aim to coun-
terbalance the notion of lay people as research ‘subjects’. 
At the extreme of the ‘top-down’ approach are projects 
which rely on only a passive participation of citizens — 
a resource from which data and samples can be extract-
ed but with little access to the outcomes of the study, 
or control over their data. In the case of data generated 
via the use of everyday devices (phone apps, wearable 
body monitoring devices), the risk is to normalise a situ-
ation in which everyone is a potential research subject 
(without the corresponding traditional framework of 
consent). Controversies surrounding the confidentiality 
of electronic patient records, legal challenges concerning 
certain wearables (e.g. the Apple watch), and evidence of 
the systematic breach of data protection rules by smart 
phone app providers illustrate the privacy, security and 
confidentiality concerns regarding citizen involvement 
and health (further explored in section 3.2).

(125)  Mueller, M., Tippins, D. and Bryan, L., ‘The future of citizen 

science’, Democracy and Education, Vol. 10, No 1.

(126)  Prainsack, B. (2014), ‘Understanding Participation: The “Citi-
zen Science” of Genetics’, in Prainsack, B., Werner-Felmayer, 
G. and Schicktanz, G., (eds) Genetics as Social Practice, Farn-
ham: Ashgate; Seife, C., ‘23andMe Is Terrifying, but Not for 
the Reasons the FDA Thinks’, Scientific American, 27 Novem-
ber, 2013.

38

2.4.  Social transformations

New societal drivers in health

Health has very real physical manifestations. But it is also 
a concept that is constantly being redefined in the con-
text of the economic and social developments around 
it. The wider political and economic landscape therefore 
determine how new health technologies will be shaped, 
taken up and applied. In turn, the apparatus of health, 
including new health technologies, can act upon and 
influence modern societies in important ways.

Economic forces, for instance, are playing a key role in 
driving the take-up of new health technologies. Since 
many of the devices, apps, and data-generating facili-
ties are new, there is a huge market for these innova-
tions; genome analysis is marketed as a commercial 
product and certain new health devices have become 
the latest ‘must-have’ items (e.g. Fitbit, Apple watch). In 
a break with traditional health technologies, these are 
often not aimed at the classic ‘patient’. Indeed, some 
of them may construct a social imagery of the active, 
capable, autonomous, and affluent consumer of health 
products, an agent rather than a patient, who willingly 
collects large amounts of data that companies may 
or may not use for their own purposes, and research 
teams may use for scientific trials.

While commercial actors are driving a rapid expan-
sion into the health technology sector (127), in paral-
lel public healthcare authorities, eager to reduce the 
costs of healthcare, often welcome the marketing focus 
on a healthy lifestyle and the imperative for citizens 
to take a greater hand in managing their health. Fur-
thermore, efficiency gains offered by technologies like 
electronic health records; or cost reductions promised 
by more effective, tailored treatments and preventive 
approaches to health are being progressively taken up 
by decision-makers as a solution to containing increas-
ing public health budgets.

(127)  This applies both to big pharmaceutical companies but 
also to technology firms which have begun within the last 
decade to identify health as the next important growth 
market. Giants such as Google, Apple and Samsung have 
made ventures into health, investing in genomics research, 
pharmaceuticals, and medical devices. Smaller-scale start-up 
companies have also proliferated in recent years as health 
technology entrepreneurs zero in on health as an emerging 
field of innovation and investment. See Ward, A., ‘Technology 
companies eye health market’, The Financial Times, 6 March 
2015; Stanley, A., ‘Tech companies see market opportunity in 
healthcare innovation’, The Financial Times, 5 May 2015.

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationEMERGING ETHICAL TENSIONS | CHAPTER 2

These two distinct set of drivers (commercial and politi-
cal) are, nevertheless, becoming increasingly difficult to 
separate as trends lead to a convergence between pub-
lic and private agendas. This is illustrated by the growing 
interest among insurers on the role of health monitoring 
devices to more precisely gauge individual risk.

Monitoring health, measuring risk: a new 
model of insurance?

New  monitoring  and  tracking  technologies  may 
hold the key to more effectively identifying poten-
tial health risks before they arise. Among the positive 
benefits this brings, such a development could also 
hold important implications for the insurance indus-
try. Until now, the difficulty of predicting who is likely 
to succumb to illness or misfortune means that the 
insurance model is broadly based on the principle 
that individuals pool their risks.

Data monitoring may herald a change in that model, 
by allowing insurers to price risk more accurately. It 
also encourages insurers to shift their activities away 
from simply paying out claims, to intervening in cli-
ents’ lifestyles. A number of recent developments 
show that insurers are already beginning to imple-
ment schemes to modify their customers’ behaviours. 
For instance, Discovery, a South African health insurer 
that has expanded to Europe and Asia, has 3 million 
policyholders who have opted for a scheme whereby 
they can earn discounts by showing that they are look-
ing after themselves, for example by wearing a device 
that monitors their fitness or by joining a gym. Oscar, 
a health insurer in New York, gives all its policyhold-
ers a fitness tracker; if they hit a set goal (e.g. walking 
10 000 steps in a day) they receive a refund of a dol-
lar. FitBit, the manufacturer of fitness trackers, is now 
working with a number of insurers and employers 
who want to keep tabs on their clients and staff (128).

More recent advances in technology point to arguably 
more invasive forms of monitoring. Research is cur-
rently underway on bio-monitoring implants that can 
keep track of how your body is performing internally. 
Such devices could enable insurers to offer discounts 
for a range of healthy behaviours, including dietary 
habits, stress levels and sleep patterns (129).

(128)  ‘Risk and reward: Data and technology are starting to up-
end the insurance business’, The Economist, 14 March 2015.

(129)  Ozimek, A., ‘Will body monitoring implants be the future of 

healthcare’, Forbes, 3 August 2013.

Such developments, as used by the insurance indus-
try, can provide a major incentive for healthy behav-
iour. However, they also raise questions. Given that 
many health problems are due to factors beyond 
an individual’s control, how to avoid the risk that 
clients are penalised or discriminated against, for 
instance, as a result of their genetic make-up. Insur-
ers may cherry-pick low-risk customers or refuse to 
cover those predisposed to health problems. This is 
complicated by the fact that disentangling lifestyle 
from other causes of disease (e.g. environmental, 
genetic) is less than straightforward.

In addition, the wider societal implications surround-
ing such surveillance-like monitoring by private com-
panies must be considered. Customers may feel com-
pelled to participate in the new culture of monitoring 
and tracking in order to receive the most financially 
advantageous insurance offers. Despite ostensibly 
having the freedom to ignore price incentives, finan-
cial penalties for non-participation or non-compli-
ance with doctors’ orders may act as a subtle form of 
social control. Participation may begin to appear less 
voluntary, while good health becomes an obligation 
that every citizen should strive to fulfil.

Together, these forces are spurring innovation and 
lend momentum to the long-promised digital revolu-
tion in health. Such a transformation could hold im-
mense benefits (see Chapter 1): more efficient ways of 
monitoring and managing people’s medical conditions; 
a shift towards prevention and early detection (130); 
huge advances in medical research leading to more 
tailored, accurate treatments; all of which could pave 
the way to healthier populations and important expen-
diture savings for national care systems.

Societal shifts in monitoring 
and managing health

Realising these benefits will, at the same time, require 
addressing a set of emerging challenges, obstacles and 
trends on a societal level. One challenge relates to the 
potential extension of a form of health surveillance 

(130)  Take, for instance, the case of a UK hospital under the Na-
tional Health System which developed an algorithm to pre-
dict which patients were at greatest risk of readmission and 
was subsequently able to target programmes to address it: 
community nursing programmes were put in place to edu-
cate patients on catheter use after data revealed a high level 
of urinary infections. Cited in Ward, A., ‘Society stands to be 
winner in race for digital health’, Financial Times, Wednesday, 
17 June 2015.

39

CHAPTER 2 | EMERGING ETHICAL TENSIONS

brought about by new health technologies such as 
body monitoring devices and implants, the sharing of 
intimate personal information on health websites or 
entered into mobile apps. Active care for one’s health, 
and active sharing of health information — for exam-
ple, by waiving privacy rights or granting companies 
access to internet fora, which are primarily dedicated to 
the communication among patients, are not necessar-
ily a sign of sovereignty over the use of one’s data. For 
instance, recent studies have found that nine of the top 
20 health-related apps transmit data to tracking com-
panies (FT source) while 80 % of apps are not compliant 
with data protection rules (131).

A second challenge relates to a potential shift in re-
sponsibility towards citizens as patients and consumers 
over the management of their health. There is a degree 
of ambiguity between positive processes of empower-
ment implying a new active citizenship, and increased 
expectations that individuals begin to take upon them-
selves obligations over their health that were previous-
ly the prime responsibility of public health authorities. 
According to this argumentation, achieving a state of 
good health becomes not only a goal, but a duty to 
fulfil and for which each person is accountable, part of 
a necessity to become more and more autonomous, to 
leave the passive state for an active participation at all 
levels. At the extreme end of this scenario, health moni-
toring and data sharing would become the norm to 
such an extent that it becomes less the voluntary act of 
an engaged citizen than a progressively obligatory re-
quirement on individuals. Such an avenue could bring 
important implications for the core principles that un-
derpin healthcare. It is not beyond imagining in such 
a context that considerations of lifestyle choices, or 
judgements as to whether an individual has engaged 
sufficiently in the management of their own health 
could begin to erode organising principles such as the 
pooling of collective risk or equal entitlement to care.

‘Medicalisation’, ‘healthism’ 
and the ‘health society’

While the above prospect remains remote in a European 
context, nevertheless the wider economic and political 
context sketched above may be compounding changes 
in how the notion of ‘health’ is evolving. Certain schol-
ars contend that the rise of digital health technologies 
and the new forms of participation they engender 
merely represents an evolution in the medicalisation 

process that began in the 18th century (132), and coin-
cided with the development of modern capitalism, the 
free market as well as new forms of security and surveil-
lance. Medicalisation is characterised by the extension 
of the sphere of competence of medicine, with a huge 
increase of knowledge and data. The diffusion of health 
information, together with the marketing of health as 
a ‘good’ contributes to a new understanding of disor-
ders and symptoms, but also, it may be argued, to the 
pathologising of normal everyday issues, dysfunctions 
or psycho-societal problems (such as addiction, obesity, 
violence, sexual problems, insomnia, and fatigue which 
are now medically treated). The existence of medical 
diagnoses and treatments for such conditions have pro-
vided immense relief for vast numbers of sufferers who 
previously were offered few explanations or solutions 
for their symptoms. Even so, the boundary between 
individual uniqueness and pathology, between ordi-
nary food and medicine, between health and illness has 
become blurred. Health has expanded into new areas 
of life and is arguably becoming integral to the codes, 
norms and principles which govern everyday life.

Some sociologists have grappled with these trends by re-
ferring to the literature within the Foucauldian tradition 
to understand normalising tendencies around health and 
medicalisation. In his analysis of modern society, Michel 
Foucault argues that the body is the target of discrete 
disciplining practices that seek to regulate its existence. 
This process of increased medicalisation and control, 
arises where there is ‘a spontaneous and deeply rooted 
convergence between the demands of political ideology 
and those of medical technology’ (133). Following Fou-
cault, Nikolas Rose draws on the notion of ‘healthism’ as 
a doctrine that links the ‘public objectives for the good 
health and good order of the social body with the desire 
of individuals for health and well-being’ (134). This trend 
acquires a self-disciplining dynamic: according to Rose, 
society no longer requires coercion since people wish 
to be ‘healthy’ and have internalised the message of 
healthism without the need for direct state intervention.

In the modern context, such explanations embedded in 
the paradigm of control and discipline may appear narrow 

(132)  Goubert, J.-P., ‘The Medicalisation of French Society at the 
End of the Ancien Regime’, in Stevenson, L. G., A Celebration 
of Medical History, London, 1982, pp.157-172. This author is 
one of the first to consider the question.

(133)  Foucault, M., Naissance de la clinique, ibid., p. 37.

(134)  Rose,  N.  (1999),  Powers  of  Freedom:  Reframing  Political 

(131)  Global privacy enforcement network and FT.

Thought, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

40

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationEMERGING ETHICAL TENSIONS | CHAPTER 2

or incomplete without taking into account recent devel-
opments such as the growing power of the market as 
a force in health or the newly established roles accorded to 
citizens in the health domain, which bring powerful new 
dynamics to the expansion and evolution of the health 
concept and the evolution of the ‘health society’ (135).

there is objectivity and not arbitrariness (subjectivity and 
relativity) in considering human beings and their needs.

New practices of citizen involvement in health are both 
challenging and reframing the application of these 
criteria.

Scholars argue that such dynamics are extending the 
accountability for health to all citizens. Their involve-
ment becomes a need, a duty, a way to be autono-
mous, to take part in the collective deliberation, a way 
to share responsibility. From an ethical standpoint, this 
process needs to be considered from the perspective 
of its societal hazards, such as those associated with 
the privatisation of risk, the spread of a new kind of 
health obedience, or even the downgrading of indi-
vidual rights in pursuit of the collective good (136). But 
it must also be assessed for its beneficial potential: the 
‘empowerment dimension’ that can occasionally lend 
modern forms of health promotion the character of 
social movements. Kickbusch contends that in assign-
ing a large role to citizens as social actors across the 
various domains of health (from public health, personal 
health, etc.), the modern ‘health society’ is premised on 
the principle that social change for health is possible 
and that systems can be transformed through radical 
engagement and collective action (137). Any ethical 
assessment of citizen participation in health and its 
impact upon key ethical principles needs to consider 
these dimensions in tandem, as part of a nuanced and 
complex new health landscape.

2.5.  Challenges to justice and solidarity

Justice: New forms of inequalities 
and issues of access

The problem of justice in healthcare is the definition 
of two elements: who is the subject to be included (or 
excluded) and what kind/which level of health must 
be guaranteed (to the subject included). The structural 
requirements of justice are: guaranteeing equity and 
avoiding discrimination. Equity should be guaranteed if 

Citizens/patients participation in 
orienting distribution of resources: 
the case of rare diseases

Orphan diseases which affect relatively small numbers 
of people can generate little or no direct research in-
vestment by industry. The same applies to health issues 
which could affect much larger numbers of people but 
in whom there is an uncertain prospect of economic 
gain, e.g. malaria, or the antibiotics resistance dilemma. 
Large pharmaceutical companies are focused primarily 
on diseases that drive their bottom line, meaning in most 
cases conditions that affect large or affluent population 
groups. In this context citizen involvement can be a fac-
tor in driving research in unprofitable areas such as rare 
diseases, i.e. acting as counterpoint to market forces.

The Longitude Prize

A striking example of citizen involvement in the al-
location of resources is provided by the ‘Longitude 
Prize’. The prize consists of a prestigious grant as-
signed to projects addressing the most pressing sci-
entific challenge of our times. In 2014 the prize drew 
on the help of British citizens to decide which scien-
tific problem should form the focus of the award. 
More than 100 leading scientists identified six major 
scientific challenges, and the public was invited to 
vote on which one should be selected for funding. 
Finally, the British public decided that a project 
addressing the challenge of antibiotics resistance 
should receive the award (GBP 10 million). Anyone 
from amateur scientists to the professional scientific 
community may submit entries and compete for the 
award. This example illustrates how citizen involve-
ment in distributing scarce science funds may serve 
the interests of society and — at least partially — 
eliminate conflicts of interest.

(135)  Kickbusch, I. (2007), ‘Health Governance: the Health Society’ 
in McQueen et al., (eds) Health and Modernity: The Role of 
Theory in Health Promotion, New York, Springer.

(136)  Arendt, H. (1951), The Origins of Totalitarianism, New York: 

Harcourt.

(137)  Kickbusch, I. (2007), ‘Health Governance: the Health Society’ 
in McQueen et al., (eds) Health and Modernity: The Role of 
Theory in Health Promotion, New York, Springer.

While citizen involvement opens new avenues for col-
lectivist action and shows potential for rebalancing 
structural inequalities that have long existed regard-
ing investment in medical research, it also questions 
the mechanisms of assessment and rationing that 
public healthcare systems have put in place to distrib-
ute health resources. Public decision-making over the 
allocation of treatment and research resources is not 

41

CHAPTER 2 | EMERGING ETHICAL TENSIONS

impervious to media and public campaigning. This 
presents a particular challenge where certain societal 
groups or categories of patients and their families 
(the well-organised, educated, wealthy and articulate) 
prove particularly adept at leveraging the new digital 
tools and networks to influence public and media de-
bates in favour of their demands. It also opens a further 
set of questions around new health technologies, the 
participation they engender and the digital divide.

New forms of solidarity

Solidarity is perhaps the most important organising 
principle underpinning healthcare in the European 
context. Broadly understood as a mutual obligation to 
assist one another based on a collective commitment 
to carry costs, it has served to justify a strong involve-
ment of state authorities in public health delivery (138).

New questions and challenges surrounding solidarity in 
healthcare are emerging (139), in part linked to increas-
ing financial pressures on public authorities, as well as 
debates around individual responsibility. There are now 
signs that changing practices of citizen engagement in 
health may also be generating new forms of solidar-
ity which diverge from traditional state-centric under-
standings. Interconnected networks which draw on the 
possibilities offered by new technologies, are encour-
aging people to engage in health projects, actions and 
initiatives, which often reflect strong solidaristic aims. 
Sharing health data, for instance, is often framed in soli-
darity terms, such as advancing human knowledge and 
helping to find cures for disease. Some crowdfunding 
initiatives also reflect strong solidarity-based objectives.

Such examples of solidarity in the health domain, facili-
tated by digital interconnectedness, are also emerging 
at the local level. For example, experiments regarding 
elderly people who are isolated and unable to take 
their medication: the prescription is sent to a pharma-
cy which engages to prepare the order in a short time 
period (30 minutes) and the person registered in the 
network passes both the pharmacy and the patient’s 
home, and drops off the medication. The request then 

disappears from the register. In some networks, this 
person could be credited with ‘solidarity points’ (140).

Such developments may serve to renew and reinforce 
the principle of solidarity in a health context, while in 
parallel presenting a number of new questions: one set 
of challenges centres around the regulation of these 
networking communities or structures, which tend 
to rely on a form of internal or self-regulation. While 
in some cases such informal governance models may 
prove sufficient, in others, they may leave participants 
open to vulnerability (141).

Second, is there a tendency for such solidarity move-
ments to substitute for the deficiencies of the state? 
Initiatives may develop where there is a perceived gap 
in the social safety net. Alternatively, their success may 
facilitate or justify the decision to reduce or withdraw 
certain publicly funded services. They may thus serve 
both as a symptom and a contributor to a shift in the 
shared understanding of solidarity, from a state-man-
aged process to one organised and driven by citizens.

Finally, there is an important public interest in forms 
of solidarity that advance health knowledge and treat-
ments, such as contributing biological data or samples. 
What is the risk that forms of solidarity which begin 
life as voluntary expressions of mutual assistance be-
come a new ‘obligation’ (whether formal, as enshrined 
in law or informal, in the shape of new societial norms 
around participation and sharing)? A hypothetical ex-
ample would be a compulsion to share health data in 
the service of public health goals, which would put at 
risk an individual’s right to bodily integrity, privacy.

Precision/‘Personalised’ medicine 
and implications for justice

Precision medicine could hold the promise of a juster 
healthcare system. Precision or ‘personalised’ medi-
cine means ‘tailoring’ medical treatment decisions to 
a specific individual’s genetic profile and may optimise 
patient cure and care, by assessing the personal risk 
and prescribing the treatments with a higher probabil-
ity of success. According to some proponents, preci-
sion medicine may result in cost savings, by avoiding 

(138)  Prainsack, B. and Buyx, A. (2011), Solidarity: Reflections on an 
emerging concept in bioethics, London: Nuffield Council on 
Bioethics.

(140)  See Giogino, P., La transition fulgurante. Vers un bouleverse-

ment systémique du monde, Bayard, 2014, p. 114.

(139)  ‘Justice & solidarity in priority setting in healthcare: Identify-
ing and discussing the ethical and societal issues in resource 
allocation’, Belgian Advisory Committee on Bioethics and 
the King Baudouin Foundation, June 2013.

(141)  Such has been the case with certain high profile (though 
non-health related) examples of the informal, sharing econ-
omy, for instance the car sharing service Uber, and the on-
line platform for holiday accommodation, Airbnb.

42

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationEMERGING ETHICAL TENSIONS | CHAPTER 2

the wasteful ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach and enabling 
a more effective cost/benefit analysis ahead of treat-
ment (142). Such costs savings could be particularly ef-
fective, if precision medicine focuses on prevention, 
above therapy. Analysis of large datasets (especially in 
the cancer domain) could offer the possibility to mea-
sure the effectiveness of an innovative treatment, track-
ing its impact over a longer time period, to determine 
the populations for which a treatment is ineffective, 
and adjustments for particular patients.

However, currently the transformative benefits of pre-
cision medicine are largely speculative. In addition, it 
must be acknowledged that the targeted approach 
of precision medicine, which is by nature specific to 
a small, select group of patients, will inevitably pro-
duce interventions that are much more expensive than, 
for instance, preventive interventions applied broadly 
across populations (143). This has led some experts to 
sound a note of caution, warning that ‘although pre-
cision medicine will almost certainly be used in niche 
applications, if widely implemented, it could be a dis-
traction from low-cost and effective population-wide 
interventions and policies’ (144). Precision medicine 
therefore presents public health policy with a challenge 
when setting priorities for investment in innovation and 
when balancing individual demands for expensive, 
high-tech or personalised treatments with wider social 
needs for essential/basic forms of healthcare.

A second justice-based challenge presented by preci-
sion medicine concerns the potential misuse of genetic 
information or the risk of ‘genetic discrimination’ … 
Thanks to genome-wide analysis, genomics is used to 
calculate an individual’s risk of developing complex dis-
eases. The use of individual genetic information may be 
the cause of new genetic indirect discrimination and in-
equitable access to care. From a medical perspective, the 
use of risk assessment to select patients for additional 
care is acceptable and justified. But this method may 
be discriminatory when applied to the general popula-
tion, in the context of its application across different age 
and ethnic groups. The efficacy of risk assessing models 
varies among different age and ethnic groups, with a re-
duced accuracy for patients under 40 years of age and 

(142)  Dzau, V. J. et al. (2015), ‘Aligning incentives to fulfil the prom-
ise of personalised medicine’, Lancet, 385, pp.  2118-2119.

(143)  Joyner, M. J. and Paneth, M. (2015), ‘Seven questions for per-
sonalised medicine’, JAMA, Published online 22 June 2015, 
doi:10.1001/jama.2015.7725.

of specific ethnicities, opening the possibility that some 
populations are excluded or overlooked.

If new precision medicine genetic technologies have 
the effect of inequitably excluding individuals, this rais-
es questions around the significant public investment 
underlying their development. Scientific advances un-
derlying precision medicine genetic-based technolo-
gies are the result of an enormous public investment 
in genomic sciences and research. For this reason it is 
justified that the citizens expect that these discoveries 
will translate into services accessible to all.

Access and the digital divide

New health technologies hold immense promise when 
it comes to tackling long-standing inequalities in access 
to healthcare. Innovations in the field of telemedicine 
for instance, are bringing new forms of medical access 
to patients in remote rural communities from France 
to India, as well as new forms of training and medi-
cal collaboration for health professionals in Africa (145). 
Nevertheless, an enduring ‘digital divide’ determined 
by factors such as age, gender, geographical location 
or socioeconomic status, mean that unequal access to 
digital technologies as well as highly divergent levels of 
online literacy persist. This comes alongside additional 
challenges related to access addressed above.

The growing uptake of new health technologies as 
part of individuals’ everyday healthcare could thus 
aggravate longstanding health inequalities between 
different societal groups and across different regions 
of the world. This would become an additional chal-
lenge should potential changes to the roles and re-
sponsibilities of patients as a result of new technolo-
gies that have been sketched out above, but which are 
as yet by no means certain, materialise. Any change 
in expectation that patients should shoulder greater 
responsibility for their care (e.g. patients taking greater 
control over their electronic health records, in the form 
of self-managing check-ups, prescriptions, etc. or pre-
suming a greater reliance on the part of citizens on 
internet-based health guidance) could potentially privi-
lege an active, informed and connected citizenry. The 
challenge would consist of reaping the full advantages 
of these technologies and new modes of engagement 
while putting the measures in place to ensure as far as 
possible that their benefits are spread evenly among 
populations.

(144)  Coote, J. H. and Joyner, M. J. (2015), ‘Is precision medicine 

(145)  Parizel, E. (2013), ‘La telemedicine en questions’, S.E.R., Vol.11, 

the route to a healthy world?’, Lancet, 385.

pp. 461-472.

43

THE HUMAN RIGHTS AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK  | CHAPTER 3

Chapter 3  The human rights and regulatory framework

The ethical challenges posed by citizen involvement 
in health, and by the proliferation of technologies 
re-fashioning the link between an individual and his/her 
healthcare, place the adequacy of current governance 
arrangements into question. An extensive and complex 
body of law and standards exists to regulate health tech-
nologies, developed both at national and supranational 
level (146). The following section does not seek to provide 
an exhaustive overview of this regulatory landscape, but 
rather to identify those new questions and gaps pre-
sented in particular by the nexus between new health 
technologies and new practices of citizen participation.

This requires, first, an examination of the legal land-
scape pertaining to participation: specifically, an explo-
ration of the rights and protections enshrined in inter-
national human rights treaties and jurisprudence which 
establish the entitlements of citizens to participate in, 
and enjoy the results of, science and technology.

Second, it requires an examination of potential gaps 
in the regulatory framework in relation to new health 
technologies and the suitability of existing oversight 
mechanisms to cover new practices of knowledge gen-
eration and innovation engaging the individual.

3.1.  A (European) human rights approach to 

citizens as ‘active actors’ of their lives 
and health

This section considers EU Member States’ obligations 
under the European Convention on Human Rights and 
under the International Covenant on Economic, Social 
and Cultural Rights, as well as modes of citizen partici-
pation in the EU governance framework.

3.1.1.  The European Convention on 

Human Rights and Fundamental 
Freedoms (ECHR)

The ECHR has been ratified by all Member States of the 
European Union. Citizen involvement and participation 
is not mentioned explicitly as a human right in the Con-
vention. However, in line with the idea that the Con-
vention is a living instrument that must be interpreted 
according to present day conditions by the European 

Court on Human Rights, its jurisprudence is relevant for 
some aspects of this Opinion.

(a)  Freedom to participate in discussions 
regarding matters of public health

Article 10 ECHR — the right to freedom of expression.

1. Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This 
right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to re-
ceive and impart information and ideas without interfer-
ence by public authority and regardless of frontiers. This 
Article shall not prevent States from requiring the licens-
ing of broadcasting, television or cinema enterprises.

2. The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with 
it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such 
formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are 
prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic 
society, in the interests of national security, territorial 
integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disor-
der or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for 
the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for 
preventing the disclosure of information received in 
confidence, or for maintaining the authority and im-
partiality of the judiciary.’

The European Court of Human Rights (ECrtHR) drew on 
Article 10 in the case of Hertel v Switzerland, in which 
Swiss courts had prohibited the applicant from stating 
that food prepared in microwave ovens was a danger 
to health and led to changes in the blood of those con-
suming it that indicated a pathological disorder and pre-
sented a pattern that could be seen as the beginning 
of a carcinogenic process and from using the image of 
death in association with microwave ovens. According 
to the ECrtHR, this prohibition violated Article 10: ‘the 
effect of the prohibition was to censor the applicant’s 
work and substantially to reduce his ability to put for-
ward in public views which have their place in a public 
debate whose existence cannot be denied. It matters 
little that his opinion is a minority one and may appear 
to be devoid of merit since, in a sphere in which it is 
unlikely that any certainty exists, it would be particularly 
unreasonable to restrict freedom of expression only to 
general accepted ideas’ (147). The (by then still existing 
European Commission for Human Rights) had concluded 
that ‘freedom of expression is of special importance for 

(146)  See for instance Flear, M. et al. (2013), European Law and New 

Health Technologies, Oxford University Press: Oxford.

(147)  Hertel v Switzerland, 25 August 1998.

45

CHAPTER 3 | THE HUMAN RIGHTS AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

free debate on matters of public importance for the 
community, such as public health’ (italics added).

(b) Freedom to carry out research

There are obvious similarities and links between the 
right to freedom of expression and a right to carry out 
research or seek information. Freedom to carry out 
research has often been seen as a part of freedom of 
thought and expression. However the freedom to carry 
out research is not expressly guaranteed in the ECHR 
although it might be derived by implication from the 
right to freedom of expression in Article 10. Also the Ex-
planatory Memorandum to the Charter of Fundamental 
Rights of the EU describes the right to freedom of sci-
entific research as being ‘deduced primarily from the 
right to freedom of thought and expression’.

(c)  The right to have access to information 

and to public participation in 
decisions related to (public) health

The ECrtHR remains reluctant to use Article 10 as the 
basis for a general right of access to information. Since 
Article 10 expressly imposes on the state a negative 
duty not to interfere with the freedom to receive and 
impart information, the Court has been reluctant to rec-
ognise that this provision guarantees a general right of 
access to information, including administrative data and 
documents (see Loiseau v France (dec.), no. 46809/99, 
ECHR 2003-XII (extracts)). It has consistently held that 
the freedom to receive information prohibits a govern-
ment from restricting a person from receiving informa-
tion that others wish or may be willing to impart on him 
and that this freedom cannot be construed as imposing 
on a state a positive obligation to disseminate infor-
mation of its own motion (Roche v the United Kingdom 
[GC], No 32555/96, § 172, ECHR 2005-X, with further ref-
erences). The Government’s primary duty is thus not to 
interfere with communication of information between 
individuals, be they legal or natural persons.

Complaints concerning a denial of access to informa-
tion which is of importance for the applicant’s personal 
situation have been generally examined under Article 
8 of the Convention which guarantees the right to re-
spect for private and family life:

‘1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and 
family life, his home and his correspondence.

accordance with the law and is necessary in a demo-
cratic society in the interests of national security, public 
safety or the economic wellbeing of the country, for 
the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection 
of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights 
and freedoms of others.’

In a number of cases, the court found that the authori-
ties had a positive obligation to disclose to the appli-
cant the relevant data. For example, this was the case 
where applicants sought access to information about 
risks to one’s health and well-being resulting from en-
vironmental pollution (Guerra and Others v Italy, 19 Feb-
ruary 1998), or information which would permit them 
to assess any risk resulting from their participation in 
nuclear tests (so called Christmas Island nuclear tests)
(McGinley and Egan v the United Kingdom, 9 June 1998, 
§ 101, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1998-III), or 
tests involving exposure to toxic chemicals (so-called 
Porton Down tests (Roche v the United Kingdom, 19 Oc-
tober, 2005). The court held, in particular, that a positive 
obligation arose to provide an ‘effective and accessible 
procedure’ enabling the applicants to have access to ‘all 
relevant and appropriate information’ (Roche, § 162).

‘The text of the ECHR does not exactly prompt one to 
think in terms of environmental risks, so it was genu-
inely interesting to see the court’s crafting of positive 
obligations from Article 2 (right to life) and 8 (right to 
respect for private and family life and home)’ (148).

Article 2 — Right to life

‘1. Everyone’s right to life shall be protected by law. No 
one shall be deprived of his life intentionally save in the 
execution of a sentence of a court following his convic-
tion of a crime for which this penalty is provided by law.

2. Deprivation of life shall not be regarded as inflicted 
in contravention of this Article when it results from 
the use of force which is no more than absolutely 
necessary:

(a) in defence of any person from unlawful violence;

(b) in order to effect a lawful arrest or to prevent the 
escape of a person lawfully detained;

2. There shall be no interference by a public author-
ity with the exercise of this right except such as is in 

(148)  Murphy, T. and Cuin, G. O., ‘Works in progress: new tech-
nologies and the European Court of Human Rights’, Human 
Rights Law Review, 2010, 637.

46

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationTHE HUMAN RIGHTS AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK  | CHAPTER 3

(c) in action lawfully taken for the purpose of quelling 
a riot or insurrection.’

emphasised the importance of the right to receive 
information also from private individuals and entities.

From both articles the ECrtHR has construed a range 
of positive ‘environmental’ obligations (the so-called 
‘greening of human rights’). States must regulate and 
control hazardous activities (whether public or private) 
where these are impairing Convention rights or might 
impair them and they must enforce such regulations. 
Of particular importance for this Opinion is that states 
must provide access to information on serious environ-
mental risks (in some instances they may have the duty 
to inform affected parties) and they must secure both 
public participation in environmental decision-mak-
ing and access to justice in environmental cases (149). 
To comply with Article 8, affected individuals must be 
able to participate in the decision-making process: first, 
information concerning environmental risks must be 
available to those who are likely to be affected, and 
second such individuals must also be able to appeal 
to the courts, against any decision, act or omission 
where they consider that their interests or their com-
ments have not been given sufficient weight in the 
decision-making process’ (150). In this way the court has 
assigned a considerable amount of human rights work 
to the contracting parties.

The court has recently moved towards a broader inter-
pretation of the notion of freedom to receive informa-
tion and thereby towards the recognition of a right to 
information (Társaság a Szabadságjogokért v Hungary, 
No 37374/05, § 35, 14 April 2009). In contrast to its pre-
vious approach, it has found that a refusal of access 
to documents held by the authorities constituted an 
interference with the applicants’ rights under Article 10 
(Sdružení Jihočeské Matky v the Czech Republic (dec.), No 
19101/03, 10 July 2001; Társaság a Szabadságjogokért, 
cited above). Although the public has a right to re-
ceive information of general interest, Article 10 does 
not guarantee an absolute right of access to all official 
documents (see, for example, Sdružení Jihočeské Mat-
ky, cited above, where the refusal of access, requested 
by an environmental association, to technical details 
of construction of a nuclear power plant was found 
to be justified by the Court). The Court has further 

(d) Right to participate in/benefit from 

the results of scientific developments 
without discrimination

Article 14 — Prohibition of discrimination

‘The enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set forth in 
this Convention shall be secured without discrimina-
tion on any ground such as sex, race, colour, language, 
religion, political or other opinion, national or social 
origin, association with a national minority, property, 
birth or other status.’

In an important area of ‘new’ technologies — medi-
cally assisted procreation — the ECrtHR has made it 
clear that contracting states have no obligation under 
the ECHR to permit such technologies (151). Should they 
choose to permit them, they have to respect the prohi-
bition of discrimination (152).

3.1.2.  The International Covenant 

on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights (ICESCR)

The ICESCR has been ratified by all 28 EU Member 
States and therefore all are bound by this UN treaty.

The right to participate in/benefit from the 
results of (medical) scientific research

The ICESCR is the major binding international human 
rights instrument addressing this issue.

Article 15

‘1. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognise 
the right of everyone:

(a) To take part in cultural life;

(b) To enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its 
applications;

(149)  Murphy, T. and Cuin, G. O., ‘Works in progress: new tech-
nologies and the European Court of Human Rights’, Human 
Rights Law Review, 2010, 624.

(150)  Murphy, T. and Cuin, G. O., ‘Works in progress: new tech-
nologies and the European Court of Human Rights’, Human 
Rights Law Review, 2010, 625.

(151)  Murphy, T. and Cuin, G. O., ‘Works in progress: new tech-
nologies and the European Court of Human Rights’, Human 
Rights Law Review, 2010, 621.

(152)  See S.H. and others v Austria; Hristozov and Others v Bulgaria; 

G.N. and Others v Italy.

47

CHAPTER 3 | THE HUMAN RIGHTS AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

(c) To benefit from the protection of the moral and ma-
terial interests resulting from any scientific, literary or 
artistic production of which he is the author.

2. The steps to be taken by the States Parties to the 
present Covenant to achieve the full realisation of this 
right shall include those necessary for the conserva-
tion, the development and the diffusion of science and 
culture.

3. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake 
to respect the freedom indispensable for scientific re-
search and creative activity.

4. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognise 
the benefits to be derived from the encouragement 
and development of international contacts and coop-
eration in the scientific and cultural fields.’

Article 15(1)b and c specifies that States Parties, that 
is the countries that have ratified or acceded to this 
instrument, ‘recognise the right of everyone’ both (b) 
‘to enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its ap-
plications’ and (c) ‘to benefit from the protection of the 
moral and material interests resulting from any scien-
tific, literary or artistic production of which he is the 
author’.

Article 15 ICESCR seeks to ensure that states provide 
an environment within which the development of sci-
ence and culture is undertaken for the greater good 
of society while recognising the need to provide spe-
cific incentives for this to happen. Article 15(1) is more 
specifically concerned with the balance between the 
individual and collective rights of all individuals to take 
part in culture and enjoy the fruits of scientific devel-
opment (subsection b of Article 15(1)) and the rights of 
individuals and groups making specific contributions 
to the development of science and culture (subsec-
tion c of Article 15(1)).

• 

‘Article 15(1)b: the right of everyone to enjoy the 
benefits of scientific progress and its applications.’

According to Chapman (153) the right of everyone to 
enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its appli-
cations has three central components:

(153)  Chapman, A. R. (1999), ‘A human rights perspective on intel-
lectual property, scientific progress and access to the ben-
efits of science’, in Intellectual Property and Human Rights, 
Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organisation, p. 9.

•  A right of access to beneficial scientific and techno-

logical developments;

•  A right of choice in determining priorities and mak-
ing decisions about major scientific and technologi-
cal developments;

•  A right to be protected from possible harmful ef-
fects of scientific and technological development, 
on both individual and collective levels.

See also Article 11 of the Venice Statement on the Right 
to enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its ap-
plications (2009 — not binding; soft law):

‘in the context of Article 15 1(b) ICESCR, enjoyment as 
“participation” is distinct from enjoyment as actual 
“sharing” in the benefits of scientific progress and its 
applications. Participation in scientific progress is valu-
able in its own right, and while the benefits of science 
should be shared equitably, neither of these compo-
nents of the right is a substitute for the other. The right 
to share in scientific benefits should not be predicated 
on participation, particularly where there is a direct 
threat to fundamental rights, most notably the rights 
to life, health and food.’ (154)

As regards ‘Article 15.1(c) (‘The right of everyone to 
benefit from the protection of the moral and material 
interests resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic 
production of which he is the author’), the provision 
recognises intellectual contributions in general without 
making any special reference to one or other category 
of existing Intellectual Property rights. Human rights 
are deemed to be fundamental, inalienable and uni-
versal entitlements. In this context, Article 15(1) should 
be read as putting everyone’s right to benefit from 
the development of science as a human right of more 
importance than the interests and rights of authors/
inventors (155).

(154)  See for more details Müller, A., Remarks on the Venice State-
ment on the right to enjoy the benefits of the scientific 
progress and its applications (Articles 15(1)(b) ICESCR).

(155)  Cullet, P., ‘Human rights and intellectual property rights: 
need for a new perspective’, IELRC Working Paper, 2004-4 
(http://www.ielrc.org/content/w0404.pdf).

48

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationTHE HUMAN RIGHTS AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK  | CHAPTER 3

Patient activism

A very interesting example of patient activism in 
Europe is the involvement of ‘the activist patient’ in 
the EU fight against cancer (Europe against Cancer, 
initiated in 1986). The activist patient in the cancer 
sphere developed a truly European dimension with 
the founding of the European Cancer Patients Coali-
tion (ECPC) which ‘aims to be the voice’ for all cancer 
patient groups in Europe (156).

3.1.3.  Citizen participation in the EU 
governance framework

Principles of participation enshrined in international 
human rights instruments can also be traced in the 
governance framework of the European Union, and 
have been translated into policy mechanisms deal-
ing with health, and science and technologies more 
broadly.

Participation is enshrined in the legal foundations of 
the Union, with Article 10.3 TEU providing that ‘every 
citizen shall have the right to participate in the dem-
ocratic life of the Union. Decisions shall be taken as 
openly and as closely as possible to the citizen’.

Further, Article 11 TEU states that ‘the institutions shall, 
by appropriate means, give citizens and representative 
associations the opportunity to make known and pub-
licly exchange their views in all areas of EU action’. It 
requires the maintenance of an open and transparent 
dialogue with civil society and obliges the Commission 
to carry out consultations with stakeholders before key 
policy action is taken. This is complemented by the ad-
dition in the Lisbon Treaty of the European Citizens’ 
Initiative allowing citizens to oblige the EU’s executive 
arm to act upon the presentation of 1 million signa-
tures from the appropriate number of Member States.

Some have pointed to the limits of citizen empower-
ment in the EU policy context. According to Flear and 
Vakulenko: ‘Although EU law provides a platform for cit-
izen participation, it fails to ensure meaningful empow-
erment for citizens. There is a failure to specify binding 
rights to participation, even if there is some attempt to 

(156)  Trubek, L., Nance, M. and Hervey, T., ‘The construction of 
healthier Europe: Lessons from the Fight against cancer’, 
Wisconsin International Law Journal and Legal Studies Research 
Paper Series Paper n° 1062, 2008 downloaded from the So-
cial Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection 
(http://ssrn.com/abstract=1169363).

provide the conditions of openness, transparency and 
accountability that foster participation’ (157).

On the other hand, there is an increasing tendency 
for citizens to be referenced in secondary law and 
soft policy tools surrounding the development of new 
technologies and health (158). A salient example is the 
approach taken by the European Medicine’s Agency 
towards a progressive policy of patient engagement. 
This includes the membership of patients’ representa-
tives in several EMA scientific committees and patient 
involvement in regulatory processes, including medi-
cines development and risk/benefit evaluations (159).

While the EMA may stand out as pioneering new mod-
els of engagement (see section 1.2), the involvement of 
patients as experts raises a number of ethical consid-
erations (section 2.3).

3.2.  Regulating new health technologies: new 

challenges

To what extent are new practices of knowledge genera-
tion and innovation in healthcare covered by existing 
regulatory frameworks? Are existing mechanisms of reg-
ulation and oversight fit for purpose in view of contem-
porary developments in health and health technologies?

The principles laid down in international law instru-
ments are the reference framework for regulating new 
technologies: the dignity of the human being, respect 
for physical integrity, informed and responsible free-
dom, justice and cooperation. These principles set the 
broad horizon for regulation, which should if necessary 
be further clarified in relation to specific technologies.

What may be required to precede emerging health 
technologies is an innovative ‘governance’ model for 
technologies under conditions of uncertainty and 
unpredictability of progress: a horizon guided by 
a triangulation of science, ethics and society, capable 
of grounding the regulation on updated scientific 

(157)  Flear, M. and Vakulenko, A. (2010), ‘A Human Rights Perspec-
tive on Citizen Participation in the EU’s Governance of New 
Technologies’, Human Rights Law Review, 10:4, 661-688.

(158)  Flear, M. and Vakulenko, A. (2010), ‘A Human Rights Perspec-
tive on Citizen Participation in the EU’s Governance of New 
Technologies’, Human Rights Law Review, 10:4, 661-688.

(159)  http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.jsp?curl=pages/
partners_and_networks/general/general_content_000317.
jsp&mid=WC0b01ac058003500c

49

CHAPTER 3 | THE HUMAN RIGHTS AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

consultation, balanced ethical evaluation and social 
needs. Regulations should draw inspiration from both 
a careful analysis of the evidence base, as well as the 
anticipation of possible scenarios, weighing pros and 
cons, as well as evaluating alternative options, at the 
scientific, ethical and social levels.

3.2.1.  Big health data

One of the most important new regulatory challenges 
relates to the large-scale collection of data.

Big data in healthcare could be considered a ‘big op-
portunity’ when it comes to bringing personal and 
social benefits. The goals of big data include mod-
el-driven patient-specific predictions and simulations 
and personalised diagnoses and treatments, to allow 
for advanced searches that can identify homogenous 
groupings among patients and model similarities; 
these could be shared between researchers and clini-
cians to allow for data-intensive diagnoses. The objec-
tive is to pool large quantities of data across broader 
populations in order to identify the most effective ser-
vices for improving care. But these relevant goals for 
the advancement of techno-science and public health 
are also a ‘big challenge’ to individuals and society.

The transformation of data into new biomedical knowl-
edge is not a simple process. The sheer volume, variety 
and questionable veracity of data currently impose ma-
jor challenges to extracting the value expected from 
big data in healthcare, research and public policy.

The  complexity  on  a  quantitative  and  qualitative 
level of data collected and aggregated and their use 
for purposes beyond those for which they were col-
lected, combined with the rapidity of scientific and 
technological ‘convergent’ advancement in this field 
(on a biomedical, genetic, clinical level and at the same 
time on informational/computational level), is a further 
complicating factor with regard to regulation.

Challenges are not sufficient reason to limit or even stop 
the development of the science, but it is evident that 
new forms of governance and regulation, which could 
institute a balance between rights to safety, privacy and 
the right to freedom of responsible research are needed.

The challenge is to regulate the collection, processing 
and storage of data in a way that guarantees responsible 
use and promotes the public interest, while safeguard-
ing the fundamental rights and interests of individuals 
(identity, relationships, health and well-being).

(a) Quality

If the collection of data collected or its analysis is inac-
curate or biased, its use for scientific progress is un-
dermined and potentially dangerous for public and 
individual health (exposing individuals needlessly to 
risks). Examples of erroneous, miscoded, fragmented, 
incomplete collections of data, are not uncommon, for 
various reasons (160). There can be biases in the auto-
mated processes used for collecting and assessing the 
data, often due to the algorithms (and their designers) 
including a lack of human checks in analysis, or lack 
of training and control of competencies in analysts. 
Data that comes directly from citizens, who are often 
unaware of their potential further use for analysis pur-
poses (data coming from direct-to-consumers tests, 
from mobiles, etc.), can include errors (citizens may 
provide incorrect data), and lack proper oversight and 
selection for authenticity.

If data quality in the collection and analysis process is 
not checked, monitored and ensured, this can gener-
ate invalid conclusions, on a scientific and clinical level, 
with possible negative consequences for individuals 
and society (161).

(160)  E.g. because of the increase in physicians’ documentation 
burden, lack of education and accuracy and/or knowledge 
of the correct methodology in registering data, lack of up-
dated international classification of diseases or knowledge 
of them, difficulties in selecting essential and specific infor-
mation of a patient’s history, lack of data harmonisation as 
regards terminology, etc.

(161)  Eysenbach, ‘mHealth and Mobile Medical Apps: a Frame-
work to assess risk and promote safer use’, Journal of Medical 
Internet Research, Sep. 2014, 16(9), e210; Buijink, A. W., Visser, 
B. J. and Marshall, L., ‘Medical apps for smartphones: lack of 
evidence undermines quality and safety’, ‘Evid. Based Med.’, 
2013 Jun, 18(3), pp. 90-92; Misra, S., Lewis, T. L. and Aungst, 
T. D., ‘Medical application use and the need for further re-
search and assessment in clinical practice: creation and inte-
gration of standards for best practice to alleviate poor appli-
cation design’, JAMA Dermatol., 2013 Jun, 149(6), pp. 661-662; 
Haffey, F., Brady, R. R. and Maxwell, S., ‘A comparison of the 
reliability of smartphone apps for opioid conversion’, Drug 
Saf., 2013 Feb, 36(2), 111-117; Wolf, J. A., Moreau, J. F., Akilov, 
O., Patton, T., English, J. C., Ho, J. and Ferris, L. K, ‘Diagnos-
tic inaccuracy of smartphone applications for melanoma 
detection’, JAMA Dermatol, 2013 April, 149(4), pp. 422-426; 
McCartney, M., ‘How do we know whether medical apps 
work?’, BMJ, 2013, 346, p. 1811; Husain, I., ‘Can healthy people 
benefit from health apps?’, BMJ, 2015; 350: h1887 (Published 
14 April 2015): ‘no evidence indicates that the use of health 
apps to promote physical activity or dietary change leads to 
harm, although such absence of evidence isn’t necessarily 
evidence of absence’.

50

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationTHE HUMAN RIGHTS AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK  | CHAPTER 3

Potential  measures  to  better  ensure  data  quality 
monitoring have been put forward, including codes 
of conduct to improve the competences and working 
practices of operators (including clinicians analysts, 
engineers, statisticians, bioinformaticians). Proposals 
include (162) ‘soft regulation’ such as an updated code 
of practice for clinicians or other professionals involved 
in collecting health-related data. Others aim to foster 
inter-disciplinarity between clinicians/researchers and 
engineers working together to translate and extend 
their existing and advanced data analysis technology, 
(including on the one hand the clinically trained human 
mind), into targeted big data analytical approaches 
that will achieve clinically effective outputs. Although 
engineers and clinicians have long collaborated suc-
cessfully, development work on ‘big data healthcare’ 
will require particularly intimate reciprocal understand-
ing by each disciplinary culture of the other. This will 
require further cultural development in both areas.

Questions of data harmonisation and interoperability 
of systems also require attention in order to guarantee 
a positive impact on research and public health (both 
as research and public policies); public health authori-
ties’ initiatives to use data to promote public health 
should be accompanied by a realistic understanding 
of challenges in methodologies and practices.

(b) Privacy

Full anonymisation of personal data, while touted 
as a key means of privacy protection, is very difficult 
to guarantee and, depending on the data recorded, 
re-identification is often possible and in some cases can 
be relatively easily accomplished by combining other 
data (for example dates of birth, age or location; both 
DNA and images). Partial anonymisation, also called 
pseudo-anonymisation, or the replacement of identi-
fiers with a code in order to guarantee the re-identifica-
tion when necessary or desirable (for example, to give 
information to individuals when serious illness or spe-
cific risks are discovered), entails risks and possible vul-
nerabilities, including potential access by third parties 
(employers, insurance companies). Re-identification 
has to be considered not only as a theoretical risk but 

(162)  Raghupathil, W. and Raghupathi, V., ‘Big data analytics in 
healthcare: promise and Potential’, Health Information Sci-
ence and Systems 2014, 2:3; Hoffman, S. and Podgurski, A., 
‘Big Bad Data: Law, Public Health, and Biomedical Databases’, 
Case Research Paper Series in Legal Studies Working Paper 
2012, 34 October 2012.

also as a practical and real possibility. Consequently, 
discussion should be deepened at a normative level 
on how to guarantee transparency at the moment of 
data collection and find additional measures to prevent 
identification of individuals, as standardised anonymi-
sation protocols are insufficient in specific contexts (163). 
Given the difficulties of guaranteeing the privacy of 
a data subject and taking into account that the risk of 
re-identification is both difficult to quantify and may 
become greater over time, de-identification might 
therefore be combined with further controls on the 
access to and uses of data.

The loss of trust in confidentiality caused by large-scale 
data disclosures as well as revelations regarding intru-
sions by government agencies and commercial com-
panies, (including inappropriate data sharing by social 
media organisations) has also lent weight to calls for 
new forms of governance as applied to data collection 
systems. Solutions found at the technical level, such 
as measures to prevent the identification of subjects 
and reduce the risk of privacy infringements (priva-
cy-by-design) could offer one means of addressing 
such concerns.

(c) Informed consent

The adequacy of traditional forms of consent and 
their applicability to the collection and use of big data 
have become the focus of attention (164). The EGE ad-
dressed this topic in its Opinion No 26 on the ethics 

(163)  Landau, S., ‘Control use of data to protect privacy’, Science, 
30 January 2015, Vol. 347, issue 6221; Parker, M., ‘Ethical con-
siderations related to mobile technology use in medical re-
search’, Journal of Mobile Technology in Medicine, 2012, 1, 3, 
pp. 50-52; Siòlberman, M. J., Clark, L., ‘M-Helath: the union of 
technology and healthcare regulations’, Greenbranch pub-
lishing, 2012; Mantovani, E., Quinn, P., Guihen, B., Habbig, 
A., Hert, P., ‘eHealth to mHealth — A Journey Precariously 
Dependent Upon Apps?’, European Journal of ePractice, Vol. 
20, November 2013; Barton, A. J., ‘The regulation of mobile 
health application’, BMC Medicine, 2012, pp. 10-46; Cortez, 
N. G., Cohen, I. G. and Kesselheim, A. S., ‘FDA Regulation of 
Mobile Health Technologies’, The New England Journal Of 
Medicine, 2014, 24, pp. 372-379.

(164)  The ‘specific’ consent invites individuals to agree on speci-
fied purpose of research or research directly linked, in a nar-
row context: users should have control on their data, where 
they are and how they are used, and for how long; data 
collected for one purpose not be used for another purpose 
without user permission; the possibility to correct inaccura-
cies; protecting security. The ‘broad consent’ invites people 
to agree to a general use of data (for research) without spec-
ifying details (which kind of research).

51

CHAPTER 3 | THE HUMAN RIGHTS AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

of Information and Communication Technologies (165). 
Here we refer only to some specific emerging issues 
related to big health data.

It would seem that only the broad concept of consent 
is applicable in the use of big data, which entails ask-
ing individuals transparently to consent not only to 
the immediate purpose for which their data has been 
collected, but also to unforeseen uses of their data (in 
so far as new possible uses really are unforeseen) (166).

One alternative solution is offered by so-called ‘en-
hanced  consent’,  which  aims  to  enhance  privacy, 
based on the awareness of the personal and social 
significance of anonymised (individual patient and 
personal) data for preventive and predictive purposes 
in healthcare, and for promoting ‘data donation’ (167). 
This could be combined with ‘data inheritance’, which 
is automatically applied after a certain period from the 
data subject’s time of death, unless they have explic-
itly opted out. ‘Enhanced privacy/enhanced consent’ 
could also permit the subject to determine restrictions 
of consent (e.g. when the study involves an application 
to which he/she objects in conscience) and should be 
coupled with the concept of ‘personal data portabil-
ity’ where an individual can export or delete his or her 
data from the system at the end of a relationship with 
a particular service provider or researcher. The data 
subject is able specifically to exclude certain data uses 
whilst allowing data utilisation for the benefit of, for 
example, healthcare research, alongside maintaining 
and ensuring that consent can be withdrawn and data 
completely deleted.

Another method for consent is the ‘one-off’ consent 
(narrow or broad), dynamic and flexible, engaging 

(165)  EGE Opinion No 26, The ethics of Information and Communi-

cation Technologies, Brussels, February 2012.

(166)  It requires a ‘fully informed’ consent (with procedures able 
to document the real comprehension of it) that refers ex-
plicitly to the impossibility to inform on the future possible 
unforeseen use and reuse of data. It should be explained 
that certain implications and the scope of consent given 
when data are collected may become unclear in changing 
circumstances, especially over long time periods.

(167)  Morley-Fletcher, E., Big Data Healthcare. An overview of the 
challenges in data intensive healthcare. This document consti-
tutes a preparatory draft for the Networking Session on ‘Big 
data and data analytics impact in healthcare’ organised by 
the FP7 integrated project MD-Paedigree, partially funded 
by the European Commission, for 7 November 2013, as part 
of the ICT’13 conference in Vilnius.

the active participation of the data subjects (168). It al-
lows a constant control of data access by individuals, 
through consent portals. Individuals may check if data 
are used for private gain/commercial purposes or pub-
lic good (169).

The individual/citizen might decide the level of their 
engagement. This form of active participation allows 
participants to shape and influence research using their 
data. But there is concern about the effective possibility 
of this kind of service if the data are used and reused for 
many purposes, as well as questions over how they are 
to be regulated. Who is responsible to digitally inform 
the patients/individuals? How is it possible to check 
that information has been received and understood? 
How is it possible to monitor these procedures and by 
whom? Continuing involvement of subjects through 
‘dynamic’ forms of consent can be demanding in prac-
tice (for both researchers and data donors).

In a context of greater participation and citizen involve-
ment in science/medicine, concerns also arise where 
individuals actively participate in research and willingly 
give their consent to donate data to ‘open source’ plat-
forms. Online platforms such as ‘PatientsLikeMe’ report 
high engagement from patients motivated to donate 
data to research in new forms of participant-driven 
research or ‘citizen science’. This may be explained as 
a form of altruistic behaviour, expressed in the willing-
ness to give unlimited permission regarding the use of 
data in a collaborative or cooperative context. Some 
criticise this kind of consent data donation, defining it 
as misinformed naivety and suspecting that the exalta-
tion of an unselfish logic, may be inspired by a hidden 
desire to stimulate above all the market. Paradoxically 
solidarity could possibly conceal commercialisation: 
donors would become free sources of data, exploitable 
by researchers in both public and private spheres. In 
this specific field, regulation could require a distinc-
tion between not-for-profit research and use of data 
for commercial purposes.

(168)  See Kaye, J., Whitley, E. A. and Lund, D. et al. (2015), ‘Dynamic 
consent: a patient interface for twenty-first century research 
networks’, European Journal of Human Genetics, 23: 141-146; 
and Bernal, P. (2010), ‘Collaborative consent: harnessing the 
strengths of the Internet for consent in the online environ-
ment’, International Review of Law, Computers and Technology 
24(3): 287-97.

(169)  Nuffield Council, The collection, linking, and use of data in 
biomedical research and healthcare: ethical issues, 2014.

52

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationTHE HUMAN RIGHTS AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK  | CHAPTER 3

Something specific must be said with reference to ge-
netic data, in the context of genome-wide analysis. In 
the case of genetic data a genomic sequence may re-
veal probabilistic information or disease traits or other 
characteristics in biological relatives. In such cases, 
there is a conflict between the autonomy expressed 
through consent by the individual (who gives permis-
sion for data access) and the privacy interests of oth-
ers who may be affected by this permission. This situ-
ation is difficult to manage in current data protection 
mechanisms. Consent, in these cases, should include 
information on the willingness or unwillingness to re-
ceive the results of research, the information about the 
possibility of ‘incidental findings’ (unexpectedly reveal-
ing results that may be difficult to be known, regarding 
risks or susceptibility to incurable illnesses), in respect 
of the subject or his/her relatives.

(d) Restriction of access to data 
and control of misuse

The difficulties in regulating new forms of consent 
and in ensuring privacy lend added weight to regula-
tory questions regarding who is permitted to access 
data, for what purposes, and over what time period. 
As neither anonymisation nor consent offer sufficient 
privacy protections in relation to big data, additional 
controls on the use of data and above all misuse may 
be required at a regulatory level. This is particularly im-
portant as misuse of data (medical and non-medical) 
opens possible new forms of stigmatisations and dis-
criminations (e.g. in the misuse of data by insurance 
companies, or employers).

One proposal put forward to address this issue sug-
gests instituting ethical committees or institutional re-
view boards to control researchers’ access to and use of 
data. Other suggested measures include enhancing the 
capacities of technologies to control not only collec-
tion, but also the use of big data (automated controls 
and audits) (170). There is also discussion on a possible 
flexible regulation, recognising existing improvements 
in technology, the need for speedier research, and the 
importance of balancing pros and cons when it comes 
to accessing data and evaluating what is the appro-
priate level of patient/consumer engagement when 
doing so.

3.2.2.  mHealth

In the context of big health data, there are specific con-
cerns related to mHealth (171).

(a) Regulatory context of medical 
and health devices

There is no explicit regulation of mHealth devices and 
apps at the European level. This field is currently regu-
lated as regards medical data by Recommendation 
No (97) 5 on the protection of medical data and as re-
gards medical devices by Directive 93/42/EEC concern-
ing medical devices and Directive 98/79/EC on in vitro 
diagnostic medical devices, and Directive 90/385/EEC 
on active implantable medical devices. However these 
regulations are not sufficient in view of the rapid accel-
eration and take-up of new technologies and devices 
in mHealth.

Challenges in advance of the launch of the Apple 
watch, and evidence of the systematic breach of data 
protection rules by smart phone app providers illus-
trate the safety, privacy, security and confidentiality 
concerns regarding citizen involvement and health.

A medical device is defined as: ‘any instrument, ap-
paratus, appliance, software, material or other article, 
whether used alone or in combination, including the 
software intended by its manufacturer to be used spe-
cifically for diagnostic and/or therapeutic purposes 
and necessary for its proper application. Such a de-
vice should be intended by the manufacturer for one 
of a number of defined purposes, one of which is, diag-
nosis, prevention, monitoring, treatment or alleviation 
of disease’ (Directive 93/42/EEC Article 1, 2).

When an application falls within the scope of the regu-
latory framework on medical devices it is obliged to 
comply with the established requirements of safety 
and performance. However, currently there are no 
rules in the European regulatory framework to delimit 
between lifestyle and wellbeing apps and a medical 
device or in vitro diagnostic medical device.

The rapidity of technological advancement may explain 
the lack of regulations of mHealth and health apps to 

(170)  Landan, S., ‘Control use of data to protect privacy’, Science, 

(171)  West, D., ‘How mobile devices are transforming healthcare’, 

30 January 2015, Vol. 347, issue 6221, pp. 504-506.

Issues in Technology Innovation, No 18, May 2012.

53

CHAPTER 3 | THE HUMAN RIGHTS AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

date (172). In addition, a strict application and exten-
sion of existing regulations to mHealth devices could 
impose undue obstacles to technological innovation.

In 2012, the European Commission put forward two 
proposals to update and replace the existing legal 
framework, one for a regulation on medical devices 
and the other for a regulation on in vitro diagnostic 
medical devices. This includes a proposal to introduce 
a new definition of ‘medical device’ enlarging the defi-
nition referring to ‘direct’ and ‘indirect’ medical pur-
poses, which would include products providing infor-
mation with a ‘direct’ or an ‘indirect’ impact on health.

Since January 2012, the Commission’s services have 
issued additional guidance setting out criteria for 
classification of stand-alone software used in health-
care within the regulatory framework of medical de-
vices (173). Medical apps are not designed to operate on 
one particular device but can function using different 
operating systems. Given the versatility of operating 
systems it is difficult to test the medical device with all 
available accessories, in order to guarantee safety. Even 
if the designed software is in conformity with the regu-
lations when created, it is difficult to guarantee that it 
will be in conformity with other smart devices currently 
available or available in the future.

Apps may in fact function as medical devices (as they 
are used by customers for diagnostic or therapeutic 
reasons), but while they are not explicitly subject to 
the same rules, no assessment of the risk they pose to 
individuals’ health nor specific safety requirements are 
imposed on app developers before putting apps on the 
market (it is not yet clear as to the limits of application 
in this field of the general products safety directive and 
the directive on liability for defective products apply to 
manufactured products). There is a need to specify the 
level of safety to be guaranteed in relation to the kinds 
of apps (purposes, technology, implications, whether 
medical or not), safety requirements and the documen-
tary procedures necessary to monitor such standards.

(172)  Guidelines  on  the  qualification  and  classification  of 
stand-alone software used in healthcare within the regu-
latory framework of medical devices (MEDDEV 2.1/6 Janu-
ary 2012). These guidelines are, at the moment, the only 
legal framework for app and software used in health-
care (http://ec.europa.eu/health/medical-devices/files/
meddev/2_1_6_ol_en.pdf).

(173)  European Commission, ‘Medical Devices Guidance docu-
ment: Qualification and Classification of stand-alone soft-
ware’, MEDDEV 2.1/6, January 2012.

Regulation is not explicit in distinguishing apps for 
medical purposes (diagnosis, treatment) and apps for 
lifestyle and wellness with reference to the supervision 
of a medical doctor or a health professional. Even in 
the case of so-called ‘wellness’ apps, recommenda-
tions may be warranted as regards seeking the advice 
of medical practitioners, indicating certified websites 
with information about certain health conditions or of-
fering medically approved advice related to certain life-
style behaviours. There is scope (and arguably a need) 
for regulation to determine criteria and requirements 
regarding medical supervision (according to the pur-
pose of the app) and the modality of its certification.

The large quantities of data (medical and health data, 
information  personal  data,  biometric  data,  social 
and environmental data) collected and processed by 
mHealth devices and the ubiquitous continuous com-
munication within the ‘mobile ecosystem’ (providers, 
manufacturers, developers, stores, users) raise chal-
lenges to privacy (174).

Data stored on devices by the user and data collected 
from different sensors, including location, fall under the 
scope of the data protection directive (Directive 95/46/
EC on the protection of individuals with regard to the 
processing of personal data and on the free movement 
of such data, currently under revision and the ePrivacy 
directive (Directive 2002/58/EC concerning the process-
ing of personal data and the protection of privacy in 
the electronic communications sector, as modified by 
Directive 2009/136/EC). These rules should apply to any 
apps installed/used by users in the EU, regardless of the 
location of the app developer or the app store.

One of the core requirements of data protection law is 
that personal data should be processed fairly. Fairness 
means among others that the person processing the 
data (the ‘data controller’) has made reasonable efforts 
to guarantee that those to whom the data relate (‘data 
subjects’) are aware of who is processing the data and 
for what purposes. The data protection directive im-
poses obligations on data controllers and data users: 
personal data must be collected for specified, explicit 

(174)  The Warsaw Declaration on the ‘appification of society’ 
(September, 2013), the Data Protection and Privacy Com-
missioners meeting, 35th annual international conference, 
urges legal systems to take into consideration this challenge 
as central, with reference to the ‘actors’ involved in mobile 
devices ecosystem. This recommendation was followed by 
the Article 29 Working Party on apps (2013), an advisory 
board on data protection and privacy.

54

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationTHE HUMAN RIGHTS AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK  | CHAPTER 3

and legitimate purposes, as well as adequate (propor-
tionate), relevant and not excessive in relation to the 
purposes for which they are collected and/or further 
processed.

As lifestyle and wellbeing apps can collect general 
personal data and health data, they should be fully 
compliant with the relevant provisions of the EU data 
protection directive (175).

(b) Implications for the right 
to informed consent

The Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine 
(Oviedo Convention, 1997) states in its Article 10.1 that 
everyone has the right to respect for private life in rela-
tion to information about his or her health. In a health-
care setting, a healthcare professional would be able to 
inform and answer patients’ questions in an environ-
ment of doctor–patient confidentiality. Current apps 
that collect personal data/medical data rely only on 
a simple consent at the moment of the app download. 
This is strictly speaking a violation of the data protec-
tion directive which stipulates that collecting health 
data outside the healthcare environment requires writ-
ten consent. This is an informatic/informed consent, 
written on the screen.

The right of users to be informed, to receive informa-
tion (Article 10 Directive 95/46/EC) means that individu-
als should be aware of the purpose for which apps are 
installed and the kind of data that are accessed and 
processed (also Article 5.3 of the ePrivacy Directive 
2002/58/EC affirms that consent is required provided 
with clear and comprehensive information). Informa-
tion should include the risks of data breach and leaks 
(Article 4 ePrivacy Directive 2002/58/EC recognises 
a duty of notification of data breach). Articles 12 and 
13 of Directive 95/46/EC recognise a right to access, 
rectify, withdraw, delete and object to data processing.

Attention has begun to focus on how to ensure that 
data collected for the purpose of mHealth services is 
not further processed for commercial (as well as other) 
purposes, unless the data subject, duly informed, has 
specifically and explicitly consented to the processing 
of his data for those other purposes. According to the 

(175)  Warsaw declaration on the ‘appfication’ of society, 35th 
International Conference of Data Protection and Privacy 
Commissioners, September 2013.

principle of purpose limitation, purpose must be speci-
fied, explicit and legitimate. (176).

The problem is that users are often unaware that they 
have submitted certain data or, if aware, do not always 
understand the processing implications. It is not pos-
sible for a user to read all the notices required for the 
large quantity of data collected; sometimes they have 
little alternative to dissent or change their choice.

A key question is how, if possible, to guarantee to us-
ers/consumers a right to be informed and to give their 
consent, should they wish, to the processing of their 
data by mHealth devices? This question is particularly 
pressing in light of the growing secondary use of data 
(by researchers and commercial companies) and in the 
context of the high rates of unawareness by users in 
this regard.

Alongside the EGE’s previous reflection on this ques-
tion in its Opinion on the Ethics of information and 
communication technologies, other bodies have also 
considered how to improve mechanisms for consent 
for apps. One proposed approach is the so-called ‘gran-
ular consent’ put forward in the Warsaw Declaration: 
‘individuals can finely (specifically) control which per-
sonal data processing functions are offered by the app 
they want to activate’. The consent should be given for 
each type of data the app intends to access (granular 
means ‘just-in-time disclosures’ and ‘affirmative express 
consent’). The patient should give different forms of 
consent: one consent for the general provisions regard-
ing the app and its functions, and another separate 
consent for the purpose and means of the processing.

This interpretation is based on paragraph 107 of the 
Explanatory memorandum of the Recommendation 
No (97) 5 on the protection of medical data: ‘But even 
in cases where his/her consent is not required — that is, 
when the collection and processing of medical data fol-
low an obligation under the law or under a contract, are 

(176)  There is a discussion on the application of e-Privacy Direc-
tive 2002/58/EC, as revised by Directive 2009/136/EC con-
sent requirement applies to any information (not limited 
to personal data, applicable to any information stored on 
the device). This means that when installing an app, users 
should be given the choice to accept or refuse tracking 
technologies on their device. This consent needs to be 
distinguished from the consent authorising personal data 
processing. Data controllers can collect consent for both 
processing operations, either during the installation or be-
fore the app starts to collect personal data from the device. 
Data breach notification duty.

55

CHAPTER 3 | THE HUMAN RIGHTS AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

provided for or authorised by law, or when the consent 
requirement is dispensed with — the recommendation 
provides that the data subject is entitled to relevant 
information’. The Article 29 Working Party recently pub-
lished an opinion ‘On apps on smart devices’, which 
deepens and clarifies the legal obligations of each of 
the subjects involved in the development of apps (177). 
The opinion outlines the need to inform in a clear and 
unambiguous way data processing to users (the types 
of data, the purposes, retention periods) prior to the 
installation of the app.

(c) Profiling of medical and non‑medical data

Another key challenge arises from the lack of clear 
distinction between personal information that can be 
classed medical data and thus deserves special protec-
tion, and non-medical data. mHealth devices gather 
both medical data but also non-medical data such as 
personal information, lifestyle data, tracking informa-
tion, etc.).

Paragraph 38 of the Explanatory memorandum (178) 
of the Recommendation No (97) 5 on the protection 
of medical data affirms that medical data in this con-
text can also include information relating to general 
lifestyle: ‘The drafters of the recommendation further 
agreed that under the terms of the recommendation, 
“medical data” should also include any information — 
unless it is public knowledge — giving a ready idea 
of an individual’s medical situation, for instance for in-
surance purposes, such as personal behaviour, sexual 
lifestyle, general lifestyle, drug abuse, abuse of alco-
hol and nicotine, and consumption of drugs. This was 
the reason for including in the definition of medical 
data the words “manifest and close”, that is, having 
a clear and direct impact on the health situation of the 
individual’.

Lifestyle information, tracked through apps and de-
vices, can constitute an immense source of sensitive 
data. Are these data processed as ‘medical data’ or as 
‘personal data’?

The  abovementioned  Explanatory  memorandum, 
states (in paragraph 61) that the processing of the data 
must be for the purpose of medical treatment: ‘In prac-
tice, this means that the principles are applicable to 
the collection or the processing of medical data for the 
purpose of medical treatment, the assessment of the 
health situation or the fitness of a person’. According to 
this interpretation, apps for the purposes of well-being, 
as a sort of quasi-medical purpose, may also be inter-
preted as medical data.

(d) Transfer of data

Current EU data protection regulations allow the trans-
mission of data to third parties only with the consent 
of the user.

Recommendation No (97) 5 on the protection of medi-
cal data, Explanatory report, paragraph 143 outlines: ‘It 
is obvious that medical data, one of the categories of 
sensitive data for which the convention requires spe-
cial protection, should not be communicated outside 
the medical context in which they were collected, un-
less they are made anonymous (in which case the data 
no longer fall under the definition of personal data)’. 
Paragraph 195: ‘In the second place, the drafters of 
the recommendation have suggested that communi-
cation could take place if the data subject had given 
consent, and thereby had taken the responsibility in 
the circumstances envisaged for his/her medical data 
to be communicated outside his/her national territory 
to a country where it is impossible to monitor the fate 
of the data’.

A large proportion of health apps for mobile phones 
send data (medical and non-medical) externally to third 
parties without notifying the user (179). The complexity 
of identifying the role of a third party refers to cloud 
computing providers as they can, according to the spe-
cific circumstances, be either data processors or data 
controllers or both at the same time. The Article 29 
Working Party opinion on cloud computing provides 
guidance on the application of existing data protection 
rules to cloud providers (180).

(177)  Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, Opinion 02/2013 

on apps on smart devices, 27 February 2013.

(178)  Council of Europe — Explanatory Memorandum on the Rec-
ommendation on the Protection of Medical Data (http://
www.coe.int/t/dghl/standardsetting/dataprotection/EM/
EM_R(97)5_EN.pdf).

(179)  Mantovani, E., Quinn, P., Guihen, B., Habbig, A. and Hert, P., 
‘eHealth to mHealth — A Journey Precariously Dependent 
Upon Apps?’, European Journal of ePractice, Vol. 20, Novem-
ber 2013.

(180)  Working Party ‘Opinion 02/2013 on apps on smart devices’, 
27 February 2013, WP ‘Opinion 05/2012 on Cloud Comput-
ing’, 01.07.2012.

56

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationTHE HUMAN RIGHTS AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK  | CHAPTER 3

(e) Liability

Regulations currently do not clearly define or attribute 
responsibilities to key actors (app manufacturers, de-
velopers, operators) with reference to data protection, 
data breach notification, and data minimisation.

The eCommerce Directive 2000/31/EC on certain legal 
aspects of information society services, contains infor-
mation requirements to be provided by service pro-
viders. App developers, when they are directly selling 
apps, are also providing information society services. 
This means that app traders and developers have to 
avoid any practices which could mislead a consumer or 
which could compromise his or her freedom of choice.

Directive 2011/83/EC on consumers’ rights applies to 
the purchase of apps by consumers in the EU (includ-
ing health apps and lifestyle apps), and aims to ensure 
a uniform EU-wide level of protection.

3.2.3.  Telemedicine

The introduction of telemedicine can impact on the na-
ture of patient–doctor interactions, potentially altering 
this relationship and the way in which consultations, 
care and treatment are delivered. Clear guidance about 
the responsibilities of each party engaged in this inter-
action, including remotely, should be made available.

The European Commission (181) in its communication of 
4 November 2008 to the Council and to the European 
Economic Committee asked the Member States to have 
examined and adapted their national legislation by the 
end of 2011, in order to allow wider access to telemedi-
cine services. France for example integrated in its law of 
21 July 2009 and then in its decree of 19 October 2010, 
five acts of telemedicine, and defined the conditions 
of its implementation.

The European Parliament resolution of 14 January 2014 
on the eHealth Action Plan 2012-2020 — Innovative 
healthcare for the 21st century (2013/2061(INI)) fur-
thermore requested ‘the Commission and the Member 
States to pay particular attention to digital literacy and 
to technical training in order to ensure that e-health 
tools, especially telemedicine, are genuinely effective 
and accessible for the whole population’.

(181)  Commission Communication of 4 November 2008 entitled 
‘Telemedicine for the benefit of patients, healthcare systems 
and society’ (COM(2008)0689).

Analysing the various European directives and com-
munications published from 1998 to the end of 2012, 
as well as legal and regulatory texts published since 
2009 in the French Code of Public Health, P. Simon 
and J. Lucas (182) demonstrate that ‘European law on 
the practice of telemedicine is inconsistent and that 
the European Commission must determine the same 
legal framework for all Member States of the European 
Union by 2020. The legal ambiguity between the con-
cepts of e-health and clinical telemedicine is empha-
sised. Nearly all codes of medical ethics in each Europe-
an Union Member State specify that clinical medicine 
cannot be a commercial practice. As a result, in the field 
of digital health, it is important to distinguish informa-
tion society services, which can sometimes be a subset 
of e-health, from healthcare services such as clinical 
telemedicine.’

3.2.4.  Direct to consumer genetic tests

Concerns have been raised regarding the increased 
availability of genetic susceptibility tests sold direct 
to consumers. Both governments and private enter-
prises operating in the sector are being urged to draw 
up international rules to regulate the market. Policies 
proposed should also include education of patients 
to grasp the complexities of the real value of genetic 
markers; furthermore, they should offer increased pro-
tection against possible discrimination (e.g. in employ-
ment) of individuals with genetic mutations (183).

Although only a few Member States (for instance, Aus-
tria and, to some extent, the United Kingdom) have 
regulated this area, others are proposing the urgent 
introduction of procedures for self-regulation by com-
panies engaged in direct-to-consumer genetic testing 
along the lines of the current European guidelines 
which emphasise the importance of genetic counsel-
ling in predictive tests. Others believe that self-regu-
lation may ultimately delay the introduction of legally 
binding regulations.

(182)  Simon,  P.  and  Lucas,  J.,  ‘La  télémédecine  n’est  pas  du 
e-commerce mais de la médecine clinique’, (Telemedicine 
is not e-commerce but clinical medicine), doi:10.1016/j.eur-
tel.2014.01.030 (http://www.eurtelemed.fr/article/876884/
la-telemedecine-n-est-pas-du-e-commerce-mais-de-la; 
consulted 13.02.2015).

(183)  Opinion 18 of the European Group on Ethics, Ethical aspects 

of genetic testing in the workplace, 2003.

57

CHAPTER 3 | THE HUMAN RIGHTS AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

3.3.  Further avenues for regulating citizen 

participation in health

3.3.1.  Transparency, clinical trials 

and drug development

There are close links between transparency and scien-
tific integrity: it is only by sharing research and data 
that science can be reviewed, verified, tested and, if 
necessary, improved. Transparency is also critical for 
underpinning trust: where there is a perceived lack of 
transparency, science is perceived as being less reliable. 
The Tamiflu case and the subsequent investigation and 
findings of the Cochrane Report provide a prime ex-
ample of this intermeshing of scientific integrity, trans-
parency and trust (184).

The question of transparency is at the heart of ongo-
ing debates surrounding access to clinical trials data 
(as illustrated by recent legal actions brought by US 
pharmaceutical companies Intermune and AbbVie to 
block the EMA from releasing data). A new policy on 
releasing trial data adopted by the EMA and which 
came into effect on 1 January 2015 aims, according to 
its Director, to set ‘a new standard for transparency in 
public health and pharmaceutical research and devel-
opment’ by publishing the clinical reports that under-
pin the decision-making on medicines (185).

The secrecy of data in the authorisation procedures 
for new drugs as well as surrounding the availability of 
information in the phase following their introduction 
is ethically questionable. It stands in tension with the 
right of the citizens to be informed (including of possi-
ble negative results), and to have access to documenta-
tion, as well as potentially the right to be cured. Patients 
participating in clinical trials often make a personal 
sacrifice, exposing themselves to risks associated with 
the lack of knowledge surrounding the new products 
they are testing. In the development of its products, the 
pharmaceutical industry benefits significantly from the 
support of such participants; without this public con-
tribution the development of drugs would be a great 
deal more onerous for the pharmaceutical industry. The 
secrecy of data — especially if asymmetrical, or if nega-
tive results have been kept unpublished, will ultimately 

(184)  B. Goldacre, ‘What the Tamiflu saga tells us about drug trials 

and big pharma’, The Guardian, 10 April 2014.

affect the trust of society vis-à-vis the pharmaceutical 
industry, science and researchers. In the development 
of new medicines, publication of negative results can-
not benefit the competition, as it is very unlikely that 
these data can be of any relevance in producing new 
drugs. It is therefore increasingly difficult to justify that 
scientific institutions and patients associations do not 
have access to all toxicological and clinical scientific 
data concerning drugs, including negative results.

However, transparency is not without limits. Data protec-
tion concerns should on occasion act as a counterweight 
towards transparency in clinical trial data, especially 
where drug trials on orphan diseases (relying on much 
smaller numbers of research participants) are concerned. 
In this regard, it is relevant to note reports that data pro-
tection concerns may in the past have been inflated and 
propagated to serve the interests of those stakeholders 
wishing to curb initiatives for increased transparency (186).

In addition to data protection considerations, commer-
cial concerns can also act as a justifiable limit to trans-
parency. Pharmaceutical companies have argued that 
disclosing trial data runs the risk of releasing trade se-
crets. Determining which data from clinical trials can be 
made public and which data should be redacted goes 
a long way towards answering this question. However, 
current definitions of ‘commercially confidential infor-
mation’ (CCI) are vague. It remains to be clarified where 
precisely the burden of proof should lie when estab-
lishing CCI (e.g. with industry or regulatory authorities).

Thus, despite recent progress following the adoption 
of a new clinical trials regulation and EMA policy on re-
leasing trial data, key questions surrounding the correct 
standards needed to ensure the right levels of transpar-
ency in drug development require further reflection. 
These include how to strike the right balance between 
open access/transparency imperatives, personal pri-
vacy protections and competitiveness, research excel-
lence and innovation.

3.3.2.  Regulating self‑experimentation 

and compassionate use

To a certain extent, citizen science currently suffers 
from a regulatory vacuum. While clinical trials of sci-
entific research are subject to both scientific and ethical 

(185)  European Medicines Agency (2014), ‘Press release: Publica-
tion of clinical reports — EMA adopts landmark policy to 
take effect on 1 January 2015’, 2 October 2014.

(186)  See leaked memo from EFPIA and PhRMA to patients groups 
instructing them to express concern about the non-scien-
tific reuse of data.

58

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationTHE HUMAN RIGHTS AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK  | CHAPTER 3

oversight, research conducted outside institutional set-
tings (such as hospitals, universities, etc.) is usually not 
subject to the same standards.

Patient-led research can open new paths for scientific 
advancement, but to be validated, this requires an im-
plementation of regulations and standards covering 
scientific procedures, such as clinical trials (187). This is 
not only to validate the results but to protect partici-
pants from the risk of harm. Regulation is also neces-
sary to prohibit any form of pressure on patients to par-
ticipate, guaranteeing the right not to participate or to 
revoke consent without further consequences. Some 
contend that without adequate public intervention, 
this leaves the field open to other actors whose mo-
tivations go beyond the social good (e.g. profit-driven 
enterprises).

Another important governance question concerns the 
lack of ethics reviews covering citizen-led initiatives. 
Certain scholars have pointed to a trade-off at stake in 
participant-led projects between ethical oversight and 
innovation. There may be scope to introduce innova-
tive models of ethical review, such as crowdsourced 
ethics reviews or the involvement of ‘citizen ethicists’. 
In this regard, depending on the relative risk to partici-
pants, different policies have been proposed ranging 
from no formal ethics review to standard ethics review 
with a place for crowdsourced review or the input of 
‘citizen ethicists’ (188).

This may bring new governance arrangements, applica-
ble to potential new scenarios: e.g. the requirement of 
scientific oversight (in the statistic design and relevance 
of research), institution of virtual ethical committees 
of evaluation of protocols, of virtual informed consent 
with technical modalities to ascertain real consent.

As regards the ‘compassionate use’ of drugs for indi-
vidual patients, Directive 2001/83/CE of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on 
the Community code relating to medicinal products for 

(187)  Wicks, P., Vaughan, T. E., Massagli, M. P. and Heywood, J. 
(2011), ‘Accelerated clinical discovery using self-reported 
patient data collected online and a patient-matching algo-
rithm’, Nature Biotechnology 29(5): 411-4
(http://www.nature.com/nbt/journal/v29/n5/abs/nbt.1837.
html); Wicks, P., Vaughan, T. E., and Heywood, J. (2014), 
‘Subjects no more: what happens when trial participants 
realise they hold the power?’, British Medical Journal 348, 
g368 (http://www.bmj.com/content/348/bmj.g368).

(188)  Vayena and Tasioulas, 2013.

human use, at Article 5 recognises that a Member State 
may, in accordance with legislation in force, in order to 
fulfil special needs, exclude from the provisions of the 
directive ‘medicinal products supplied in response to 
a bona fide unsolicited order, formulated in accordance 
with the specifications of an authorised healthcare pro-
fessional and for use by an individual patient under his 
direct personal responsibility’. There is the possibility 
to authorise temporarily unauthorised pharmaceuticals 
‘in response to the suspected or confirmed spread of 
pathogenic agents, toxins, chemical agents or nuclear 
radiation any of which could cause harm’.

The expression ‘compassionate use’ is introduced in 
Article 83 of the Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 
2004 laying down Community procedures for the au-
thorisation and supervision of medicinal products for 
human and veterinary use and establishing a European 
Medicines Agency. It defines ‘compassionate use’ as the 
use of medical products ‘for compassionate reasons to 
a group of patients with a chronically or seriously de-
bilitating disease or whose disease is considered to be 
life threatening, and who cannot be treated satisfacto-
rily by an authorised medicinal product. The medicinal 
product concerned must either be the subject of an 
application for a marketing authorisation in accordance 
with Article 6 of this regulation or must be undergo-
ing clinical trials’. The conditions for compassionate use 
are detailed in the ‘Guideline on compassionate use of 
medicinal products, pursuant to Article 83 of Regula-
tion (EC) No 726/2004 EMEA/27170/2006’ of the Euro-
pean Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products 
(EMEA), now the European Medicines Agency (EMA). It 
requires authorisation and experimentation, admitting 
their use in specific conditions as exceptional.

While compassionate care (expanded access) pro-
grammes permit patients with serious conditions to 
receive investigational drugs before their formal ap-
proval, there are many challenges, including regulatory 
ones, to its more widespread implementation. Some 
of the programmes may be financially problematic, as 
patients may be expected to cover at least some of the 
manufacturing costs. In addition, they may have only 
limited effect on the final development and regulatory 
approval and there may be insurance problems. Some 
patients believe that they have the right to access drugs 
at any stage of testing but so far this has not been sub-
stantiated by any court decision, although some com-
panies have bowed to patients’ pressures. In the USA, 
‘right to try’ laws passed in 20 states as of September 
2015 permit manufacturers to provide experimental 

59

 
CHAPTER 3 | THE HUMAN RIGHTS AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

medicines to patients with untreatable conditions with-
out FDA authorisation and shelter doctors from profes-
sional discipline and negligence actions. Their effect 
is limited as they do not compel manufacturers and 
insurers to supply and pay for experimental therapies. 
More precise regulations are needed to foster these 
programmes. For example, it has been suggested that 
multicentre ethical review boards focusing specifically 
on these programmes be established (189). Importantly, 
the regulations governing compassionate care (also re-
ferred to as special access programmes or expanded 
access) vary among European countries (authorising 
institution, who covers the costs, data collection obli-
gation, informed consent, ethics committee approval). 
Some experts believe that the programmes should be 
made conditional on systemic data submission by eli-
gible patients (190).

3.3.3.  Ownership of data

The growing value (scientific and commercial) asso-
ciated with data has prompted renewed discussions 
surrounding data ownership, and the possibility for citi-
zens and patients to benefit from the advantages deriv-
able from their data. International regulations, such as 
the 1997 European Convention on Human Rights and 
Biomedicine (and its 2002 additional protocol on bio-
medical research), have stated that ‘the human body 
and its parts shall not, as such, give rise to financial 
gain or comparable advantage’. Such an approach may 
equally be extended to personal data.

However, with changing practices of citizen participa-
tion in medical science, and the growth of ‘collabora-
tive’ and ‘participatory’ research models, participants 
are beginning to demand access to results of the re-
search to which they have contributed, either as limited 
access to the specific group suffering from the disease, 
or to the wider public.

The right of data subjects ‘to be forgotten’ implies, de 
facto, some sort of ownership of data relating to them, 

and therefore the right to eventually donate data or sell 
them. It is true, however, that when it comes to data 
relating to individual subjects, the preferred model for 
the advancement of scientific research seems to have 
been not to allow intellectual property (IP) rights de-
riving from raw datasets, while IP rights should only 
become attached to the analytic work performed on 
the data, in the same way as current IP law covers ar-
rangement of facts, but not the facts themselves.

Nevertheless, new questions are opening regard-
ing who owns the results of research. With data now 
a ‘tradable good’, are citizens entitled to gain (includ-
ing financially) from donating their data? Start-up ini-
tiatives are beginning to emerge based on just such 
a model, such as MyHealthBook, a company offering 
financial incentives in exchange for citizens’ health 
data. The latter raises a number of ethical concerns. Yet, 
given the considerable wealth generated by pharma-
ceutical companies from repositories of data derived 
from individuals (sometimes without their knowledge 
or consent), should greater reflection not be paid to 
allowing citizens/patients to share in the advantages 
of their contributions?

This would entail a significant reconceptualisation of 
ownership where it pertains to knowledge and research 
results. For instance, when a pharmaceutical company 
discovers a new drug, would the data surrounding the 
production of that medication be considered the sole 
property of the company concerned or a wider public 
good (given the shared investment in that innovation: 
patients who participated in research trials, researchers, 
education and training systems, etc.)?

There is a strong public interest in the responsible use 
of data in research to support the development of 
knowledge and innovation intended to improve the 
wellbeing of all by enabling advances in healthcare. 
The implications for ownership is a complex topic in 
need of extended public debate, and potentially requir-
ing eventual policy attention.

(189)  Darrow, J. J. et al., New Eng. J. Med. 2015, 372, 279-86.

(190)  Walker, M. J., Rogers, W. A. and Entwistle, V., Am. J. Bioethics 

2014, 14, 3-15.

60

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationRECOMMENDATIONS

Recommendations

This Opinion set out to explore new trends of partici-
pation in health by patients, citizens and consumers. It 
scrutinised citizen participation via a selection of case 
studies of scientific and technological innovation, ex-
amining the ethical implications of these socio-techni-
cal developments before making a critical analysis of 
the existing regulations and the governance of these 
phenomena.

an individuals’ understanding of health and illness. Re-
alising the full potential of data intensive medical tech-
nologies, such as precision medicine, requires main-
taining focus on the broader social, economic, cultural 
and environmental context of a patient. We also need 
to be mindful of the ways in which these technologies 
feed into the production of norms of health, behaviour 
and performance.

The EGE finds that new participatory practices in health 
are being driven by the confluence of new technolo-
gies and social changes in the 21st century. In effect, 
these practices draw on novel techniques in medical 
science, reliant on amassing large quantities of volun-
teer data, which are paving the way for new models of 
participatory and collaboration-based research. They 
also stem from the growth of the internet, and mobile 
devices which are driving new forms of digital network-
ing in health. These trends are by no means confined 
to the health domain, but form part of wider societal 
shifts relating to the democratisation of knowledge, 
the growth of an increasingly informed public, and 
a greater role claimed by lay citizens in the production 
of knowledge and innovation.

The result is an increasing diversity of roles available 
to citizens in health, as research participants or citizen 
scientists, lobbyists and advocates for particular health 
causes, or increasingly engaged and connected pro-
ducers and users of health data and information. Linked 
to these new participatory practices, and the health 
technologies which facilitate them, the EGE has identi-
fied three sets of shifts in the way that health and 
healthcare are perceived, organised and delivered.

First, the opening of a multitude of new roles for citi-
zens as active participants in various dimensions of 
health may impact on the way individuals view their 
health, their body, and conceptualise illness and 
disease. New technologies of participation may offer 
interactive forums for the narration and communicative 
sharing of lived experiences. Yet the growth of genetic 
testing, new diagnostic techniques and digital moni-
toring devices, and the wealth of bio-information that 
these tools generate, may feed a progressive under-
standing of the self whereby health information and 
data risk becoming detached from social and environ-
mental factors and from the biographical subjectivity 
of the patient. The EGE recognises that both the em-
pirical (informational, biological) and the experiential 
(lived experience) are essential components that feed 

Second, new health technologies, and participatory 
practices are destabilising traditional structures of 
power and knowledge which underpin medical prac-
tice, altering what it means to be a patient in the 
modern health context. The traditional role of ‘patient’ 
as a passive recipient of care appears increasingly in-
congruous in the face of new associations of the pa-
tient as informed partner, client, consumer, expert, 
or activist. The greater participation of individuals in 
health is likely to reframe traditional roles of ‘doctor’ 
and ‘patient’, alter how they interact with one another 
and shift the boundaries between them. Increased 
technological autonomy can stimulate health-aware-
ness, and motivate individuals to participate actively in 
health issues, as well as provide new possibilities for ac-
cessing care. However, ethical risks may emerge should 
technologies cause patients to lose critical contact with 
medical professionals when it counts. The challenge is 
to ensure an appropriate balance, whereby the patient 
is empowered to exercise autonomy, while not losing 
the crucial interpersonal exchange and necessary ex-
pert support in interpreting medical information and 
selecting treatment options. New technologies that 
support changing modes of patient–physician interac-
tion should be geared towards enhancing the patient–
physician relationship and the quality and availability 
of care provision from healthcare systems.

Third, participatory practices in health are opening 
new roles to citizens in the production of medical 
knowledge and innovation. The involvement of citi-
zens in the scientific endeavour has brought important 
innovations in the field of medical science, drawing on 
the unique perspectives of ‘expert patients’, of collec-
tive intelligence and new avenues opened by big data. 
It yields educative dividend in the form of knowledge, 
new skills, new life opportunities and emerging civic 
awareness, and can invest patients with a greater sense 
of empowerment over their health. The EGE identifies 
challenges in integrating the contributions of citizens 
into the advancement of medical research and in recon-
ciling lay expertise with the rigours of evidence-based 

61

RECOMMENDATIONS

medicine which requires a firm grounding in scientific 
competence, methodology and review and adherence 
to standards of ethical oversight. Yet the EGE recognis-
es the valuable contribution that citizens can make to 
the scientific endeavour and cautions against ‘partici-
patory approaches’ which disempower, or even exploit, 
volunteer participants by rendering research subjects 
a resource from which data and samples may be ex-
tracted but with little understanding of the research 
process, control over their data, or access to outcomes.

On the basis of the shifts identified and explored 
above, the EGE makes the following key findings and 
ethical reflections:

Balancing autonomy and responsibility: Growing 
autonomy on the part of citizens and patients in the 
steering of individual and collective health decisions 
are a welcome step forward. They not only fulfil re-
quirements for self-determination, self-actualisation 
and empowerment that are essential for human flour-
ishing, but they also improve health outcomes and 
the effectiveness of care. A more active engagement 
on the part of the individual can play an essential part 
in realising the goal of a patient-centred care. Here, 
in the spirit of a partnership approach to healthcare, 
autonomy should come hand in hand with patient re-
sponsibility. We should nevertheless be attentive to the 
ways in which processes of engagement or ‘empower-
ment’ are being mediated through external dynamics 
and drivers, including public healthcare authorities and 
commercial actors, where interests align to encourage 
the imperative for citizens to take a greater part in man-
aging their own health. The EGE cautions against any 
movement towards an ‘autonomy in health’ which re-
flect a broader shift of responsibility from state health 
services to the individual or which transfers the respon-
sibility for risk and the capacity for regulation onto the 
individual that would ultimately signal a reduction in 
the standards and quality of healthcare provision.

Disentangling participation: Participation can be an 
appealing notion, implying as it does inclusivity, open-
ness and democratisation. However, this Opinion cau-
tions against a simple reading of participation as an 
unalloyed good and reveals the layered meanings con-
tained in terms such as ‘citizen science’. Participation 
can fall short of expectations or produce unwanted 
outcomes. This takes shape in several ways. Participa-
tion may elicit expectations as to greater transparency 
or accountability, but cannot necessarily provide it. 
The term ‘participatory’ may be attributed to services 
where consent is ambiguous. It can be based on the 

extraction and sale of personal data, and where it con-
cerns the extraction of profit or labour, act as a veiled 
form of exploitation.

Weighing up the positive potential of participation for 
individuals and societies thus centres around a number 
of axes. The potential for empowerment and enrich-
ment will turn on the degree of voice or agency it ac-
cords, access to decision-making and goal setting; or 
the dividend reaped in terms of education and skills. 
Minimising the risks of exploitation can depend on the 
control of ownership of resources accorded to partici-
pants, its voluntary or obligatory character and the na-
ture of consent given. Attention should also be given 
to the nature of the ‘participants’ themselves who may 
not always be individual, disinterested citizens, but 
may encompass a range of organised interests: advo-
cacy groups, lobbies, or corporate actors. Developing 
a more nuanced understanding of participation in the 
health domain therefore requires careful consideration 
of the context in which participation takes place and 
greater transparency of the goals, functions and out-
comes, on the part of both the institutions inviting 
participation, as well as the participants themselves.

Implications for justice and solidarity: The EGE un-
derscores the importance of an equitable distribution 
of health resources and the right of everyone, particu-
larly the vulnerable, to health protection. At the same 
time, it notes that new practices of citizen participation 
are challenging and reframing the application of justice 
and solidarity as fundamental organising principles un-
derpinning European health systems.

Citizen involvement can open new avenues for col-
lective action and shows potential for rebalancing 
structural inequalities that have long existed regard-
ing investment in medical research. However, it can 
also exacerbate existing imbalances, amplifying the 
demands of the well-resourced and educated, further 
widening inequities. Breakthrough advances in medical 
technologies, such as precision medicine, can likewise 
present public health policy with challenges when 
setting priorities for investment. Decisions regarding 
expensive, high-tech or ‘personalised’ treatments will 
need to be carefully balanced with wider social needs 
for essential/basic forms of healthcare.

New technologies have also opened the way for citi-
zens to engage in health projects, actions and initia-
tives which reflect strong solidarity-based objectives. 
These movements are both giving new life to solidar-
ity as a driver of community action and redefining 

62

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationtraditional state-centred solidarity frameworks. The 
EGE is concerned that these developments change 
the balance of emphasis as to who should provide 
solidarity and according to which criteria. We should 
be mindful of potential shifts in shared understand-
ings of solidarity, from a state-managed process to one 
organised and driven by citizens.

Based on these considerations, the EGE agrees on the 
following recommendations in the field of citizen par-
ticipation and new health technologies:

A. General considerations: changing 
the way we think about health and 
about citizen involvement

Reflecting on key notions:

The EGE recommends fostering public debate on en-
trenched and evolving concepts which underpin our 
understanding of health and health research and how 
healthcare is delivered. Reflection should focus on pub-
lic understandings and potentially contested expecta-
tions surrounding the following notions:

•  Care, wellbeing and health. How to conceptualise 
health to better encompass both preventive ap-
proaches and holistic/global understandings of 
health and illness (while addressing medicalisation 
tendencies)? Attention should be given to societal 
understandings, principles and structures under-
pinning health. What is the role of the public health 
system in regard to debates on benefit sharing and 
responsibility-shifting in the domain of health?

•  Relatedly, this public debate regards the ways in 
which new forms of participation are recalibrating 
the balance between individual and collective in-
terests in medical services and medical research. 
Further, it should open a discussion as to where we, 
as a society, wish to place the limits on individual 
interests and where common interest and the pub-
lic good justify such limitations.

•  Being a patient. Perceptions, concepts and practic-
es have changed dramatically over the last decade, 
leading to tensions extending between passivity 
and activity, between individual and collective, as 
well as with regard to evolving understandings of 
the doctor–patient relationship together with the 
epistemic and power relations it carries.

RECOMMENDATIONS

Establishing conceptual clarity:

•  Given the aforementioned social transformations, 
it is crucial, when making policy decisions and es-
tablishing governance mechanisms, to offer clear 
definitions and reach a common understanding, on 
key concepts relevant in the policy sector, such as 
health, wellbeing, and lifestyle. The EGE thus rec-
ommends that the EU institutions in conjunction 
with Member States endeavour to reach common 
understandings and definitions on key terms such 
as ‘health’, including the demarcation between cat-
egories of health, wellbeing, and lifestyle. This is not 
a detached theoretical pursuit; it has concrete and 
sorely needed regulatory implications. Indeed such 
conceptual clarity would in turn support public de-
bate on expectations for public health services as 
well as support lawmakers when classifying and 
regulating new health technologies, such as apps 
which deal explicitly with health, as opposed to 
other aspects of wellbeing and lifestyle.

• 

The EGE recommends that the European Commis-
sion takes into account the heterogeneous mean-
ings associated with citizen participation when 
formulating policy proposals, especially when they 
draw on the concept of ‘citizen science’. Attention 
should be paid to the different dimensions and 
forms of citizen participation to which the term can 
apply, the specific value that different forms bring 
and ethical problems they pose.

Awareness raising and education

• 

The EGE recommends that training for healthcare 
professionals addresses the spread of medical 
knowledge beyond the traditional medical es-
tablishment, including the proliferation of online 
medical information and health apps. Healthcare 
professionals should be supported in exploring 
new ways of interacting with patients in light of the 
availability of alternative sources of health informa-
tion, including on how to make use of trustworthy 
health resources while avoiding potential harm 
from unreliable sources of information. Moreover, 
with the advent of precision medicine, information 
management skills, and greater understanding of 
what precision medicine can and cannot do, will 
become increasingly important for physicians if pa-
tients are to receive maximum benefit. Thus, the 
EGE recommends that medical curricula integrate 
training on informatics and advanced statistics, 
with the aim of increasing data literacy to allow 

63

RECOMMENDATIONS

physicians to interpret and act on results from pre-
cision medicine.

• 

The EGE recommends that the EU institutions and 
Member States seek to foster public knowledge, 
awareness and responsibility as well as debate on 
using trustworthy sources of health information 
and on making informed choices concerning par-
ticipation in research and the sharing of health data.

•  Online health resources can support citizens to be-
come informed. However, given the difficulties of 
distinguishing between trustworthy and reliable 
health websites, the EGE recommends that Mem-
ber State health authorities support the develop-
ment of ‘certified’ health resources with advice 
that is evaluated by independent/national health 
authorities. Such recognised sites should also meet 
EU standards of personal data protection.

• 

The EGE recommends the furthering of research 
into the implications of citizen involvement in sci-
ence and technology as such, and in the health 
domain in particular.

B. Regulatory recommendations: addressing 
gaps in the governance of citizen 
involvement and new health technologies

obliges explicit demonstration of compatibility of 
processing of research data with research purpos-
es, should then be maintained in the regulatory 
framework.

•  As data are deemed to be the new currency of the 
21st century, bringing considerable opportunities 
for economic activity and R & D, and because health 
data has become both a sensitive and a strategic 
object of attention, the EGE recommends the EU 
institutions to clarify the concept of ownership with 
regard to data. This includes provisions regarding 
the collection and security of health data. Acknowl-
edging the ongoing debate on the calibration of 
private ownership of data and the public good, the 
EGE recommends the setting up of measures in or-
der to protect individuals against the overreach by 
third parties with regard to health data.

• 

The EGE recommends a recalibration in the balance 
between the protection of commercial data rele-
vant to public health and the need for transparency 
and public access. In this light, it welcomes the pro-
visions on transparency in the new EU regulation 
on clinical trials. The EGE recommends that the Eu-
ropean Commission carefully monitor compliance 
with the new rules by relevant parties and take the 
necessary enforcement action when required.

Digital health products

Provision of care

• 

The EGE recommends that the European Commis-
sion (with the European Parliament and Council, 
as the case may be) addresses current gaps and 
loopholes in the regulatory framework concern-
ing digital health products (such as computer soft-
ware, internet applications, mHealth applications), 
the safety of which is fully covered neither by the 
medical devices directive nor by the product safety 
directive. In addition, the Commission should es-
tablish, via measures for rigorous enforcement, 
greater compliance by all parties with existing leg-
islation and standards.

Data

• 

Fundamental rights considerations should be inte-
gral to EU policy on health data, including big data. 
This could be delivered, for instance, by including 
a requirement to obtain individual consent for fur-
ther processing of health data in the EU regulation 
on data protection currently under negotiation. In 
addition, the compatibility safeguard clause which 

• 

The EGE recommends that the introduction of 
remote medicine programmes (with reference to 
mHealth, e-health, including telemedicine, using 
remoteness as a tool) maximises the benefits of 
these technologies and minimises potential harms. 
Public health providers should carefully assess the 
implications for quality of care, privacy and impact 
on budgetary resources before introduction, as 
well as monitor and evaluate their impact ex post. 
Guiding principles underpinning this assessment 
should include the following requirements: that 
telemedicine programmes do not in any way lead 
to a reduction in the standard of patient care; their 
introduction should aim to complement rather than 
substitute face-to-face contact between healthcare 
professional and patient; their introduction should 
seek to reduce rather than exacerbate inequali-
ties in access to care. Such assessments should be 
shared at the European level in order to exchange 
experience, highlight best practice, verify compli-
ance with patients’ rights and to feed eventual re-
flection on the needs to adapt the legal framework.

64

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationRECOMMENDATIONS

•  Because certain new diagnostic techniques (e.g. 
direct-to-consumer and internet-based tests, in-
cluding genetic tests) are available across borders 
and cut across different legislative frameworks, the 
EGE calls on the EU institutions to work together 
with the Member States to introduce Europe-wide 
standards and oversight. As the EGE has repeatedly 
stated, in the case of direct-to-consumer genetic 
susceptibility tests, these should abide by the fol-
lowing standards:

—  laboratories providing genetic tests must com-
ply with accepted quality standards; privacy 
and confidentiality of sensitive genetic infor-
mation should be ensured and security of data 
guaranteed;

—  information about the purpose and appropri-
ateness of testing must be given before the test 
is done and avenues for genetic counselling or 
follow-up advice offered;

—  in  accordance  with  current  standards  and 
guidelines, inappropriate testing of minors 
and other legally incapacitated persons must 
be prevented unless exceptional circumstances 
justify such an intervention;

Participation

• 

The EGE encourages wider and more meaningful 
participation of citizens in all aspects of the pol-
ity. While citizens and patients have long been 
encouraged to participate in medical research, the 
EGE welcomes active citizen involvement in health 
research at different levels, including setting the 
objectives, goals and structuring of research and 
policies. It recommends that, when it does occur, 
the same scientific standards that are required for 
research — with regard to safety, methodology, 
ethics and rigour — are preserved.

•  New ways of participation require the adjustment 
of ethical oversight. While ethical oversight can 
usefully draw upon increasing public involvement, 
citizen engagement in scientific experiments must 
be regulated in accordance with the same ethical 
standards as other forms of research.

• 

Traditionally, the ‘patient’ has been a passive spec-
tator in his or her own healthcare. The EGE wel-
comes and encourages active participation of pa-
tients in decision-making so that the individuals can 

contribute to improving the quality and efficiency 
of their own care. By vindicating the individuals’ 
right to be informed, to choose and to be heard, 
patients can play a more proactive role in the de-
sign and delivery of healthcare. Patient representa-
tives and advocacy groups have a vital role to play, 
but it is important that we do not fall into the trap 
of listening only to the loudest and best-resourced 
voices. The EGE would also welcome the increased 
participation of patients and the wider citizenry in 
discussions about setting healthcare priorities and 
allocation of resources.

• 

The EGE underscores the importance of patients 
having easy access to their health records, as en-
shrined in the Oviedo Convention on Human Rights 
and Biomedicine, and being able to interface with 
their clinical data as proactive users. The EGE rec-
ommends that there be a guarantee in every Mem-
ber State that citizens can obtain copies of their 
health records, electronic or otherwise, without 
excessive practical constraint, delay or expense.

Solidarity and justice

• 

The EGE recognises the new forms of solidarity 
fostered by citizen participation in health. It urges 
caution, in noting that solidarity in one context can 
present an imposition, or signal responsibilisation 
or commodification in another. The EGE recalls 
the freedom of individuals to choose not to par-
ticipate. It notes that commercial pursuits should 
not masquerade as philanthropic endeavours and 
recommends transparency also from third parties, 
to enable citizens to make more informed choices. 
The EGE underlines the necessity to promote a just 
solidarity in connection with human rights and the 
standards enshrined in the EU Charter of Funda-
mental Rights.

•  Precision medicine is a field in its infancy but sig-
nificant benefits could accrue to European patients 
and citizens more broadly. It also brings into sharp 
focus existing questions of distributive justice in 
healthcare systems that are being currently debat-
ed. It is important that funding of this innovative 
approach to prevention, diagnosis and treatment of 
disease should not be at the expense of initiatives, 
which address health inequalities. Further, efforts 
should be made to ensure that data cohorts are as 
representative as possible so that any benefits from 
precision medicine can be shared in a just and equi-
table manner. The EGE recommends that research 

65

RECOMMENDATIONS

be undertaken at the EU and Member State level 
on how treatments arising from research in preci-
sion medicine will be funded and/or reimbursed 
through public health systems.

• 

The EGE draws attention to the position of indi-
viduals and groups who cannot or do not wish to 
engage in new forms of health participation or who 
have little access to the technologies on which par-
ticipation relies. The EGE warns of the risk of new 
technologies deepening pre-existing health in-
equalities and recommends that where health ser-
vices are predicated on digital tools, non-ICT-based 
alternatives be maintained. The EGE calls on the EU 
to further develop strategies to ensure that those 
who wish to can make effective use of new forms 
of health participation and harness the potential of 
health empowerment.

66

The ethical implications of new health technologies and citizen participationRECOMMANDATIONS

Recommandations

Le présent avis avait vocation à explorer les nouvelles 
tendances concernant la participation des patients, des 
citoyens et des consommateurs en matière de santé. Il 
a examiné la participation des citoyens à travers une 
sélection d’études de cas d’innovation scientifique et 
technologique, évaluant les incidences éthiques de ces 
développements sociotechniques, avant d’avancer une 
analyse critique de la réglementation et de la gouver-
nance actuelle de ces phénomènes.

Le Groupe européen d’éthique des sciences et des nou-
velles technologies (GEE) estime que les nouvelles pra-
tiques participatives en matière de santé résultent de la 
confluence des nouvelles technologies et des change-
ments sociaux survenus au XXIe siècle. En effet, ces pra-
tiques se nourrissent des nouvelles techniques utilisées 
dans les sciences médicales, basées sur la collecte d’im-
portantes quantités de données fournies par des parti-
cipants volontaires, qui ouvrent la voie à de nouveaux 
modèles de recherche participative et collaborative. 
Elles résultent également du développement de l’inter-
net et des appareils mobiles, qui font naître de nouvelles 
formes de mise en réseau numérique dans le domaine 
de la santé. Ces tendances ne se limitent pas seulement 
au secteur de la santé, mais s’inscrivent dans le cadre 
de changements sociétaux plus larges qui concernent 
la démocratisation des connaissances, la part croissante 
du public averti et le plus grand rôle revendiqué par les 
simples citoyens dans la production de la connaissance 
et de l’innovation.

Cela se traduit par une plus grande diversité des rôles 
accessibles aux citoyens dans le domaine de la santé, 
en tant que participants à la recherche ou citoyens-
chercheurs, lobbyistes et défenseurs de causes parti-
culières liées à la santé, ou en tant que producteurs et 
utilisateurs, de plus en plus engagés et connectés, des 
données et informations sur la santé. En lien avec ces 
nouvelles pratiques participatives, et les technologies de 
la santé qui les facilitent, le GEE a cerné trois types de 
changements dans la façon dont la santé et les soins 
de santé sont perçus, organisés et dispensés.

Premièrement, l’accès des citoyens à une multitude 
de nouveaux rôles en tant que participants actifs dans 
divers aspects de la santé peut influencer la façon dont 
les individus perçoivent leur santé, leur corps, et 
conceptualisent la maladie et les pathologies. Les 
nouvelles technologies de participation peuvent offrir 
un forum interactif permettant la communication et le 
partage des expériences vécues. Toutefois, l’essor des 

tests génétiques, des nouvelles techniques de diagnos-
tic et des dispositifs numériques de surveillance, associé 
à la richesse des informations biologiques que ces outils 
génèrent, peut favoriser une compréhension progressive 
de soi-même, dans laquelle l’information et les données 
médicales risquent de se dissocier des facteurs sociaux 
et environnementaux et de la subjectivité du patient 
liée à ses antécédents. Le GEE reconnaît que la dimen-
sion empirique (informations, paramètres biologiques) 
comme l’expérience vécue sont des composantes essen-
tielles qui favorisent la compréhension de la santé et de 
la maladie par les individus. Pour pouvoir exploiter plei-
nement le potentiel des technologies médicales à forte 
intensité de données, comme la médecine de précision, 
il est nécessaire de rester centré sur le contexte social, 
économique, culturel et environnemental d’un patient 
au sens le plus large. Il faut aussi rester attentif à la façon 
dont ces technologies participent à la production de 
normes en matière de santé, de comportement et de 
performance.

Deuxièmement, les nouvelles technologies de la santé 
et les pratiques participatives déstabilisent les structures 
traditionnelles du pouvoir et du savoir qui caractérisent 
la pratique médicale, en modifiant ce qu’on entend par 
«patient» dans le contexte de la santé moderne. Le rôle 
traditionnel du patient en tant que bénéficiaire passif 
de soins semble de plus en plus incongru au regard des 
nouvelles conceptions du «patient», en tant que parte-
naire, client, consommateur, expert ou militant informé. 
La participation accrue des individus dans le domaine 
de la santé pourrait refaçonner les rôles traditionnels du 
médecin et du patient, modifier la façon dont ces deux 
acteurs interagissent l’un avec l’autre et déplacer les fron-
tières entre eux. Une plus grande autonomie technolo-
gique peut stimuler la sensibilisation à la santé, inciter les 
individus à participer activement aux débats sur la santé 
et fournir de nouvelles possibilités d’accès aux soins. Ce-
pendant, des risques éthiques pourraient se poser si ces 
technologies devaient entraîner une perte de contact 
entre les patients et le corps médical, dans les moments 
cruciaux. Le défi consiste à trouver un juste équilibre, 
pour que le patient puisse exercer son autonomie, sans 
pour autant être privé de l’échange interpersonnel ni de 
l’assistance de spécialistes indispensables à l’interpréta-
tion des renseignements médicaux et au choix des op-
tions de traitement. Les nouvelles technologies qui favo-
risent l’évolution des modes d’interaction entre patient 
et médecin devraient être axées sur l’amélioration de la 
relation médecin-patient et de la qualité et disponibilité 
des soins dispensés par les systèmes de santé.

67

RECOMMANDATIONS

Troisièmement, les pratiques participatives en matière 
de santé créent de nouveaux rôles pour les citoyens 
dans la production des connaissances et des inno‑
vations médicales. La participation des citoyens à l’ef-
fort scientifique a engendré d’importantes innovations 
dans le domaine des sciences médicales, exploitant les 
perspectives uniques du «patient expert», de l’intelli-
gence collective et des nouvelles voies ouvertes par les 
mégadonnées. Cette participation est source de gains 
éducatifs sous forme de connaissances, de nouvelles 
compétences, de nouvelles possibilités de vie et d’une 
prise de conscience civique, et peut conférer aux patients 
un plus grand sentiment d’autonomie à l’égard de leur 
santé. Le GEE perçoit les difficultés que posent l’intégra-
tion des contributions des citoyens dans l’avancement 
de la recherche médicale, la conciliation de l’expertise 
profane avec la rigueur d’une médecine fondée sur des 
preuves — qui nécessite une base solide en termes de 
compétences scientifiques, de méthodologie et d’exa-
men —, ainsi que le respect de normes de surveillance 
éthique. Cependant, le GEE reconnaît la précieuse contri-
bution que les citoyens peuvent apporter à l’effort scien-
tifique et met en garde contre les «approches partici-
patives» qui déresponsabilisent, ou même exploitent, 
les participants bénévoles, en faisant des sujets de la 
recherche une ressource dont on peut extraire des don-
nées et des échantillons, mais qui permet peu de com-
préhension du processus de recherche, peu de contrôle 
sur les données, ou peu d’accès aux résultats.

Sur la base des changements relevés et analysés ci-des-
sus, le GEE formule les principales conclusions et consi‑
dérations éthiques suivantes.

Trouver le juste équilibre entre autonomie et res‑
ponsabilité: une plus grande autonomie de la part des 
citoyens et des patients dans l’orientation des décisions 
individuelles et collectives de santé est une avancée 
dont on peut se réjouir. Cela répond non seulement aux 
besoins d’autodétermination, de réalisation de soi et 
d’autonomisation qui sont essentiels pour l’épanouisse-
ment personnel, mais améliore également les résultats 
en matière de santé et l’efficacité des soins. Un engage-
ment plus actif de la part de l’individu peut jouer un rôle 
essentiel pour atteindre l’objectif de soins centrés sur le 
patient. Dans ce domaine, dans l’esprit d’un partenariat 
pour les soins de santé, l’autonomie devrait aller de pair 
avec la responsabilité du patient. Il faut néanmoins être 
attentif à la façon dont les processus de participation ou 
de «responsabilisation» sont influencés par des dyna-
miques et des facteurs externes, y compris les autorités 
de santé publique et les acteurs commerciaux, lorsque 
les intérêts convergent pour encourager la nécessité 

pour les citoyens de participer davantage à la gestion 
de leur propre santé. Le GEE met en garde contre une 
dérive de l’«autonomie en matière de santé» qui corres-
pond à un transfert plus général de la responsabilité des 
services publics de la santé vers les particuliers ou qui 
place sur ces derniers la responsabilité du risque et la 
capacité de réglementation, et qui, en fin de compte, 
annoncerait une baisse des niveaux et de la qualité des 
soins de santé dispensés.

Élucider la participation: la participation peut être 
une notion intéressante, qui implique inclusion, ouver-
ture et démocratisation. Pourtant, le présent avis met 
en garde contre une vision simpliste de la participation 
qui la considérerait comme positive à 100 %, et révèle 
les différentes couches que recèlent des expressions 
telles que «sciences citoyennes». La participation peut 
décevoir les attentes ou donner des résultats autres que 
ceux recherchés. Cela se traduit de différentes façons. 
La participation peut susciter des attentes quant à une 
plus grande transparence ou responsabilisation, mais 
ne permet pas nécessairement d’y répondre. Le terme 
«participatif» peut désigner des services pour lesquels 
le consentement est ambigu. Il peut s’appuyer sur l’ex-
traction et la vente de données personnelles et, lorsqu’il 
s’agit d’un profit ou de travail, constituer une forme dé-
guisée d’exploitation.

L’appréciation du potentiel positif de la participation des 
individus et des communautés s’articule donc autour de 
plusieurs axes. Le potentiel d’autonomisation et d’enri-
chissement variera en fonction du niveau des facultés 
d’expression et de représentation accordées, ainsi que de 
l’accès à la prise de décisions et à l’établissement des ob-
jectifs, ou des bénéfices récoltés en termes de formation 
et de compétences. La minimisation des risques d’exploi-
tation peut dépendre du contrôle de la propriété des res-
sources accordée aux participants, de son caractère vo-
lontaire ou obligatoire et de la nature du consentement 
donné. Il conviendrait également de prêter attention à la 
nature des «participants» eux-mêmes, terme qui peut ne 
pas toujours désigner des particuliers désintéressés, mais 
qui peut englober tout un éventail d’intérêts organisés: 
des groupes de défense, des groupes de pression, des 
entreprises. Développer une compréhension plus nuan-
cée de la participation en matière de santé exige donc un 
examen attentif du contexte dans lequel elle a lieu et une 
plus grande transparence des objectifs, des fonctions et 
des résultats, de la part à la fois des institutions invitant 
à la participation et des participants eux-mêmes.

Conséquences en termes de justice et de solidarité: 
le GEE souligne l’importance d’une répartition équitable 

68

Éthique des nouvelles technologies de la santé et de la participation des citoyensRECOMMANDATIONS

des ressources de santé et du droit de tout un chacun, 
en particulier des plus vulnérables, à la protection de la 
santé. Par ailleurs, il observe que les nouvelles pratiques 
de participation citoyenne remettent en cause et refa-
çonnent l’application de la justice et de la solidarité, prin-
cipes fondamentaux d’organisation sur lesquels reposent 
les systèmes de santé européens.

La participation des citoyens peut ouvrir de nouvelles 
voies pour une action collective et contribuer au réé-
quilibrage des inégalités structurelles qui caractérisent 
depuis longtemps l’investissement dans la recherche 
médicale. Cependant, elle peut également accentuer 
les déséquilibres existants, en amplifiant les exigences 
des mieux nantis et des plus instruits, augmentant en-
core les inégalités. Les progrès décisifs réalisés dans les 
technologies médicales, comme la médecine de pré-
cision, peuvent également représenter des défis pour 
la politique de santé publique, qui doit déterminer les 
priorités d’investissement. Les décisions concernant des 
traitements coûteux, sophistiqués ou «personnalisés» 
devront être soigneusement mises en balance avec des 
besoins sociaux plus larges concernant des formes fon-
damentales/élémentaires de soins de santé.

Les nouvelles technologies ont également donné la pos-
sibilité aux citoyens de participer à des projets, actions et 
initiatives en matière de santé qui répondent à des objec-
tifs forts faisant appel à la solidarité. Ces actes d’engage-
ment donnent un nouveau souffle à la solidarité en tant 
que vecteur de l’action communautaire et redéfinissent 
les cadres de solidarité traditionnels centrés sur l’État. Le 
GEE craint que cette évolution ne modifie l’équilibre des 
priorités, parmi ceux qui doivent assurer la solidarité et 
les critères qu’il convient d’appliquer. Il importe d’être 
attentif aux transformations possibles de la conception 
commune de la solidarité, qui pourrait passer d’un pro-
cessus géré par l’État à un processus organisé et dirigé 
par les citoyens.

Partant de ces considérations, le GEE adopte les recom-
mandations suivantes dans le domaine de la participa-
tion citoyenne et des nouvelles technologies de la santé:

A. Considérations générales: 
changer nos conceptions de la santé 
et de la participation citoyenne

Réflexion sur des notions clés

Le GEE recommande d’encourager le débat public autour 
des notions — profondément ancrées pour certaines, 
en pleine évolution pour d’autres — qui sous-tendent 

notre compréhension de la santé et de la recherche en 
matière de santé, ainsi que la façon dont les soins de san-
té sont dispensés. La réflexion devrait se centrer sur les 
conceptions et les attentes potentiellement opposables 
du public entourant les notions suivantes:

• 

Les soins, le bien-être et la santé. Comment concep-
tualiser la santé pour mieux englober à la fois les 
approches préventives et les représentations holis-
tiques/globales de la santé et de la maladie (tout en 
tenant compte des tendances à la médicalisation)? 
L’attention devrait être accordée aux conceptions, 
principes et structures sur lesquels repose la santé 
dans nos sociétés. Quel est le rôle du système de 
santé publique en ce qui concerne les débats sur le 
partage des avantages et le transfert de responsabi-
lité dans le domaine de la santé?

•  Dans  le  même  ordre  d’idées,  ce  débat  public 
concerne la façon dont les nouvelles formes de par-
ticipation permettent de réajuster l’équilibre entre 
l’intérêt individuel et l’intérêt collectif dans les ser-
vices médicaux et la recherche médicale. En outre, 
il devrait ouvrir une discussion sur la question de 
savoir où nous, en tant que société, voulons placer les 
limites de l’intérêt individuel et dans quelle mesure 
l’intérêt commun et le bien public justifient de telles 
limitations.

• 

Être un patient. Les perceptions, les concepts et les 
pratiques ont radicalement changé au cours de la 
dernière décennie, ce qui a engendré des tensions 
entre la passivité et l’activité, entre l’individuel et 
le  collectif,  mais  également  quant  à  l’évolution 
des conceptions de la relation médecin-patient et 
des rapports épistémiques et de pouvoir qu’elle 
implique.

Clarifier les concepts

•  Compte tenu des transformations sociales susmen-
tionnées, il est essentiel, lors de la prise de décisions 
politiques et de l’établissement des mécanismes de 
gouvernance, de donner des définitions claires et 
de parvenir à une compréhension commune des 
concepts clés pertinents dans le secteur d’action, tels 
que la santé, le bien-être et le mode de vie. Le GEE 
recommande donc que les institutions de l’Union 
européenne (UE), en collaboration avec les États 
membres, s’efforcent de parvenir à des conceptions 
et à des définitions communes de termes clés tels 
que «santé», notamment en distinguant clairement 
les catégories que sont la «santé», le «bien-être» et 

69

RECOMMANDATIONS

le «mode de vie». Il ne s’agit pas d’un exercice théo-
rique isolé, mais d’une démarche qui aura des impli-
cations réglementaires concrètes et grandement 
nécessaires. En effet, cette clarté conceptuelle favo-
riserait le débat public sur les attentes en matière de 
services de santé publique et aiderait les législateurs 
à établir une classification et une réglementation 
des nouvelles technologies de la santé, comme les 
applications traitant explicitement de la santé, par 
opposition aux autres aspects que sont le bien-être 
et le mode de vie.

• 

Le GEE recommande à la Commission européenne de 
tenir compte de la variété des significations associées 
à la participation citoyenne lors de la formulation de 
propositions politiques, notamment quand elles 
s’appuient sur la notion de «sciences citoyennes». Il 
convient de prêter attention aux différentes dimen-
sions et formes de la participation citoyenne que 
l’expression peut désigner, à la valeur spécifique 
que ces différentes formes peuvent apporter et aux 
problèmes éthiques qu’elles posent.

Sensibilisation et éducation

• 

Le GEE recommande que la formation des profes-
sionnels de la santé aborde la question de la diffu-
sion des connaissances médicales au-delà du milieu 
médical traditionnel, y compris de la multiplica-
tion de l’information médicale et des applications 
de santé en ligne. Les professionnels de la santé 
devraient être encouragés à chercher de nouvelles 
façons d’interagir avec les patients compte tenu de 
la disponibilité d’autres sources d’information sur la 
santé, y compris en expliquant comment utiliser des 
ressources de santé dignes de confiance et éviter les 
préjudices potentiels que peuvent causer des sources 
d’information peu fiables. En outre, avec l’avènement 
de la médecine de précision, une importance plus 
grande devra être accordée par les médecins aux 
compétences de gestion de l’information et à une 
meilleure compréhension de ce que la médecine 
de précision peut et ne peut pas faire pour que les 
patients puissent tirer un maximum de profit de leur 
traitement. Par conséquent, le GEE recommande 
que les cursus médicaux intègrent une formation 
en informatique et en statistiques avancées, afin de 
permettre aux médecins, ainsi mieux initiés aux don-
nées, d’interpréter les résultats de la médecine de 
précision et d’agir en conséquence.

• 

Le  GEE  recommande  que  les  institutions  et  les 
États membres de l’UE s’efforcent de favoriser la 

connaissance, la sensibilisation et la responsabilité du 
public ainsi que le débat sur l’utilisation de sources 
d’information fiables en matière de santé et sur la 
fixation de choix éclairés concernant la participation 
à la recherche et au partage des données en matière 
de santé.

• 

Les ressources en ligne sur la santé peuvent aider 
les citoyens à s’informer. Toutefois, étant donné les 
difficultés rencontrées pour reconnaître les sites 
consacrés à la santé dignes de confiance sur l’inter-
net, le GEE recommande que les autorités sanitaires 
des États membres encouragent le développement 
de ressources de santé «certifiées» contenant des 
conseils qui seraient évalués par des autorités sani-
taires indépendantes/nationales. Ces sites reconnus 
devraient également répondre aux normes de l’UE 
en matière de protection des données personnelles.

• 

Le GEE recommande d’approfondir la recherche sur 
les incidences de la participation des citoyens dans 
la science et la technologie en soi, et en particulier 
dans le domaine de la santé.

B. Recommandations réglementaires: 
combler les lacunes dans la gouvernance 
de la participation des citoyens et des 
nouvelles technologies en matière de santé

Produits de santé numériques

• 

Le GEE recommande que la Commission européenne 
(avec le Parlement européen et le Conseil, selon le 
cas) comble les lacunes et les failles actuelles du 
cadre réglementaire concernant les produits de santé 
numériques (tels que les logiciels, les applications 
internet, les applications de «santé mobile»), dont la 
sécurité n’est pas pleinement couverte ni par la direc-
tive sur les dispositifs médicaux ni par la directive sur 
la sécurité des produits. En outre, la Commission de-
vrait instaurer, par le biais de mesures d’application 
rigoureuse, un plus grand respect de la législation et 
des normes de la part de tous les participants.

Données

• 

Les considérations relatives aux droits fondamentaux 
devraient faire partie intégrante de la politique de 
l’UE sur les données de santé, y compris les méga-
données. Pour ce faire, il faudrait par exemple inclure, 
dans le règlement de l’UE sur la protection des don-
nées, actuellement en cours de négociation, l’obli-
gation d’obtenir un consentement individuel pour 

70

Éthique des nouvelles technologies de la santé et de la participation des citoyensRECOMMANDATIONS

• 

• 

le traitement ultérieur des données de santé. Il fau-
drait en outre maintenir dans le cadre réglementaire 
la clause de sauvegarde en matière de compatibilité, 
qui impose la démonstration explicite de la compati-
bilité du traitement des données de la recherche avec 
les fins de la recherche.

Sachant que les données sont considérées comme la 
nouvelle monnaie du XXIe siècle, offrant des possibi-
lités considérables en termes d’activité économique 
et de R & D, et que les données de santé suscitent 
aujourd’hui l’attention en tant que biens à la fois 
sensibles et stratégiques, le GEE recommande aux 
institutions de l’UE de clarifier le concept de propriété 
à l’égard des données. Cela passe notamment par des 
dispositions relatives à la collecte et à la sécurité des 
données de santé. Reconnaissant le débat en cours 
sur l’ajustement de la propriété privée des données 
en regard du bien public, le GEE recommande de 
mettre en place des mesures visant à protéger les 
individus et à empêcher les excès par des tiers quant 
aux données de santé.

Le GEE recommande un recalibrage de l’équilibre 
entre la protection des données commerciales pré-
sentant un intérêt pour la santé publique et le besoin 
de transparence et d’accès public. À cet égard, il se 
félicite des dispositions sur la transparence figurant 
dans le nouveau règlement de l’UE sur les essais cli-
niques. Le GEE recommande à la Commission euro-
péenne de surveiller scrupuleusement le respect 
des nouvelles règles par les parties concernées et 
de prendre les mesures d’exécution qui s’imposent 
en cas de besoin.

Dispense des soins

• 

Le GEE recommande que l’introduction de pro-
grammes de médecine à distance (en lien avec la 
santé mobile, la santé en ligne, notamment la télé-
médecine, utilisant l’éloignement comme outil) maxi-
mise les avantages de ces technologies et minimise 
les préjudices potentiels. Les prestataires de la santé 
publique devraient soigneusement en évaluer les 
répercussions sur la qualité des soins, la vie privée et 
les ressources budgétaires avant leur introduction, et 
surveiller et évaluer leur impact a posteriori. Les prin-
cipes directeurs guidant cette évaluation devraient 
inclure les exigences suivantes: les programmes de 
télémédecine ne doivent en aucun cas entraîner une 
réduction du niveau de soins offert aux patients; leur 
introduction devrait chercher à compléter, et non pas 
à remplacer, le contact direct entre les professionnels 

de la santé et le patient; leur introduction devrait 
chercher à réduire, et non pas à creuser, les inéga-
lités en matière d’accès aux soins. Ces évaluations 
devraient être partagées à l’échelon européen afin 
d’échanger les expériences, de mettre en exergue 
les bonnes pratiques, de vérifier la conformité avec 
les droits des patients et d’alimenter une éventuelle 
réflexion sur la nécessité d’adapter le cadre juridique.

•  Du fait que certaines nouvelles techniques de dia-
gnostic (par exemple les tests accessibles directe-
ment aux consommateurs et par l’internet, y compris 
les tests génétiques) sont disponibles par-delà les 
frontières et relèvent de différents cadres législatifs, 
le GEE invite les institutions de l’UE à collaborer avec 
les États membres pour introduire des normes et une 
surveillance dans toute l’Europe. Comme le GEE l’a 
déclaré à plusieurs reprises, les tests de susceptibilité 
génétique directement accessibles aux consomma-
teurs devraient respecter les normes suivantes:

—  les laboratoires proposant des tests génétiques 
doivent se conformer aux normes de qualité 
reconnues; le respect de la vie privée et la confi-
dentialité des informations génétiques sensibles 
devraient être assurés et la sécurité des données 
garantie;

—  des informations sur le but et la pertinence des 
tests doivent être données avant que le test 
ne soit effectué, et des pistes de consultation 
génétique ou de conseils de suivi doivent être 
proposées;

—  conformément aux normes et lignes directrices 
en vigueur, les tests inappropriés sur des mineurs 
et autres personnes frappées d’incapacité juri-
dique doivent être évités, excepté dans les cas 
où des circonstances exceptionnelles justifient 
une telle intervention.

Participation

• 

Le GEE encourage une participation plus large et 
plus effective des citoyens dans tous les aspects de 
la communauté. Si les citoyens et les patients sont 
depuis longtemps encouragés à participer à la re-
cherche médicale, le GEE se réjouit de la participation 
active de citoyens dans la recherche en matière de 
santé à différents niveaux, notamment dans la défini-
tion des objectifs et de la structure de la recherche et 
des politiques. Il recommande, dans ce cas, de main-
tenir les mêmes normes scientifiques que celles qui 

71

RECOMMANDATIONS

• 

• 

• 

s’imposent à la recherche — en termes de sécurité, 
de méthodologie, d’éthique et de rigueur.

Les nouveaux modes de participation imposent un 
ajustement de la surveillance éthique. Si la surveil-
lance éthique peut utilement tirer parti de la mobili-
sation accrue du public, la participation des citoyens 
à des expériences scientifiques doit être régie par les 
mêmes normes éthiques que les autres formes de 
recherche.

Jusqu’à présent, le «patient» était un spectateur pas-
sif des soins de santé dont il bénéficiait. Le GEE salue 
et encourage la participation active des patients dans 
la prise de décisions car ils peuvent ainsi contribuer 
à améliorer la qualité et l’efficacité des soins qu’ils 
reçoivent. En revendiquant le droit des individus 
à être informés, à choisir et à se faire entendre, les pa-
tients peuvent davantage intervenir en amont dans 
la conception et la dispense des soins de santé. Les 
représentants et les groupes de défense des patients 
ont un rôle essentiel à jouer, mais il est important de 
ne pas tomber dans le piège qui consiste à n’écouter 
que les voix les plus fortes et les mieux dotées. Le 
GEE serait également favorable à une participation 
accrue des patients et de la population au sens large 
dans les discussions concernant l’établissement des 
priorités en matière de soins de santé et l’affectation 
des ressources.

Le GEE souligne l’importance pour les patients de 
pouvoir facilement accéder à leur dossier médical, 
comme le prévoit la convention d’Oviedo sur les 
droits de l’homme et la biomédecine, et de pouvoir 
interagir avec leurs données cliniques comme des 
usagers proactifs. Le GEE recommande que chaque 
État membre garantisse que les citoyens puissent 
obtenir une copie de leur dossier médical, sous forme 
électronique ou autre, sans contrainte pratique, délai 
ou frais excessifs.

Solidarité et justice

• 

Le GEE reconnaît les nouvelles formes de solidarité 
encouragées par la participation citoyenne à la santé. 
Il appelle à la prudence, en relevant que la solidarité 
peut, dans certains cas, représenter une contrainte 
ou, dans d’autres, être le signe d’une responsabilisa-
tion ou d’une marchandisation. Le GEE rappelle que 
les individus sont libres de choisir de ne pas partici-
per. Il déplore qu’on puisse faire passer des préoccu-
pations commerciales pour des efforts philanthro-
piques et recommande la transparence également 

72

• 

• 

de la part des tiers, afin de permettre aux citoyens 
de faire des choix plus éclairés. Le GEE souligne la 
nécessité de promouvoir une juste solidarité en lien 
avec les droits de l’homme et les normes consacrées 
par la charte des droits fondamentaux de l’UE.

La médecine de précision est un domaine qui n’en est 
qu’à ses balbutiements, mais qui pourrait présenter 
de gros avantages pour les patients et, d’une façon 
plus générale, pour les citoyens européens. Elle met 
également les pleins feux sur les questions de jus-
tice distributive dans les systèmes de santé, qui font 
actuellement débat. Il est important que le finance-
ment de cette approche novatrice de la prévention, 
du diagnostic et du traitement des maladies ne se 
fasse pas au détriment des initiatives visant à lutter 
contre les inégalités en matière de santé. En outre, 
des efforts devraient être réalisés pour s’assurer que 
les cohortes de données sont aussi représentatives 
que possible, de sorte que tous les avantages qu’offre 
la médecine de précision puissent être partagés de 
manière juste et équitable. Le GEE recommande 
que des recherches soient entreprises au niveau 
de l’Union européenne et des États membres sur la 
façon dont les traitements issus de la recherche en 
médecine de précision seront financés et/ou rem-
boursés par les systèmes de santé publique.

Le GEE attire l’attention sur la situation des personnes 
et des groupes qui ne peuvent pas ou ne souhaitent 
pas s’engager dans les nouvelles formes de partici-
pation en matière de santé ou qui ont peu accès aux 
technologies sur lesquelles se fonde cette participa-
tion. Le GEE met en garde contre le risque que les 
nouvelles technologies creusent les inégalités pré-
existantes en matière de santé et recommande que, 
lorsque des services de santé reposent sur des outils 
numériques, des solutions non basées sur les techno-
logies de l’information et de la communication soient 
maintenues. Le GEE invite l’UE à élaborer de nou-
velles stratégies, de façon que ceux qui le souhaitent 
puissent faire un usage efficace des nouvelles formes 
de participation en matière de santé et exploiter le 
potentiel d’autonomisation dans ce domaine.

Éthique des nouvelles technologies de la santé et de la participation des citoyensEMPFEHLUNGEN

Empfehlungen

In dieser Stellungnahme wurden zunächst neue Trends 
der Partizipation von Patienten, Bürgern und Ver-
brauchern im Gesundheitssektor untersucht. An eine 
Betrachtung der Bürgerbeteiligung anhand von aus-
gewählten Fallstudien zu wissenschaftlichen und tech-
nologischen Innovationen unter dem Gesichtspunkt 
der ethischen Auswirkungen dieser soziotechnischen 
Entwicklungen schloss sich eine kritische Analyse der 
bestehenden Regelungen sowie des Umgangs mit die-
sen Phänomenen an.

Nach Auffassung der Europäischen Gruppe für Ethik 
der Naturwissenschaft und der Neuen Technologien 
(EGE) hat das zusammentreffen von neuen Technolo-
gien und sozialen Veränderungen im 21. Jahrhundert 
den Anstoß für neue partizipatorische Verfahren im Ge-
sundheitswesen gegeben. Diese Verfahren stützen sich 
auf neuartige Techniken in der Medizin, für die große 
Mengen an Patientendaten erfasst werden müssen und 
die den Weg für neue Modelle partizipatorischer und 
partnerschaftlicher Forschung ebnen. Weitere Fakto-
ren, die diese Neuerungen begünstigen, sind die Ver-
breitung des Internets und mobiler Geräte, die Impulse 
für neue Formen der digitalen Vernetzung im Gesund-
heitswesen geben. Diese Entwicklungen beschränken 
sich keineswegs auf den Gesundheitsbereich, sondern 
sind Teil umfassenderer gesellschaftlicher Verschiebun-
gen, die in zusammenhang mit der Demokratisierung 
des Wissens, der zunahme einer immer besser infor-
mierten Bevölkerung und der Forderung von Laien 
nach einer stärkeren Einbeziehung in die Entwicklung 
von Wissen und Innovation stehen.

Das Ergebnis ist eine immer größer werdende Vielfalt 
der Rollen, die Bürger im Gesundheitsbereich einneh-
men können: als Forschungsbeteiligte oder Bürger-
wissenschaftler, als Lobbyisten und Interessenvertre-
ter für bestimmte ziele im Gesundheitsbereich oder 
als zunehmend engagierte und miteinander verbun-
dene Lieferanten und Nutzer von Gesundheitsdaten 
und -informationen. Im zusammenhang mit diesen 
neuen partizipatorischen Verfahren und den Gesund-
heitstechnologien, die sie ermöglichen, hat die EGE 
drei Verschiebungen festgestellt, die die Art der 
Wahrnehmung, Organisation und Bereitstellung 
in Bezug auf Gesundheit und Gesundheitsdienst‑
leistungen betreffen.

Erstens kann sich die Entstehung einer Vielzahl neuer 
Rollen für Bürger als aktive Beteiligte an verschiedenen 
Gesundheitsdimensionen darauf auswirken, wie die 

Einzelnen ihre Gesundheit und ihren Körper wahr‑
nehmen und wie sie über Krankheit und Leiden 
denken. Neue Partizipationstechnologien können ein 
interaktives Forum für die Schilderung und Kommuni-
kation von gelebten Erfahrungen bieten. Die steigende 
zahl von Gentests, neuen Diagnosetechniken und digi-
talen Überwachungsgeräten sowie die Fülle von Bioin-
formationen, die diese Instrumente erzeugen, können 
ein wachsendes Verständnis des Selbst begünstigen, 
wobei eine Loslösung der Gesundheitsinformationen 
und Datenrisiken von sozialen Faktoren, Umweltfak-
toren und von der biografischen Subjektivität des Pa-
tienten erfolgt. Die EGE ist sich bewusst, dass sowohl 
die empirischen (informationellen, biologischen) Ele-
mente als auch die (gelebten) Erfahrungen wesentliche 
Komponenten sind, die das Verständnis des Einzelnen 
von Gesundheit und Krankheit prägen. Um das volle 
Potenzial datenintensiver medizinischer Technologien 
wie der Präzisionsmedizin ausschöpfen zu können, ist 
es erforderlich, das umfassendere soziale, wirtschaftli-
che, kulturelle und natürliche Umfeld eines Patienten 
im Auge zu behalten. zudem ist zu berücksichtigen, in-
wiefern diese Technologien die Schaffung von Normen 
in den Bereichen Gesundheit, Verhalten und Leistung 
beeinflussen werden.

Zweitens unterwandern neue Gesundheitstechnolo-
gien und partizipatorische Verfahren herkömmliche 
Macht- und Wissensstrukturen, die der medizinischen 
Praxis zugrunde liegen, und verändern das Verständ‑
nis davon, was es heißt, im modernen Gesundheits-
wesen ein Patient zu sein. Das herkömmliche Ver-
ständnis eines „Patienten“ als passivem Empfänger von 
Gesundheitsleistungen scheint sich immer weniger mit 
den neuen Vorstellungen des Patienten als informier-
tem Partner, Kunden, Verbraucher, Experten oder Akti-
visten zu decken. Die stärkere Einbindung Einzelner in 
die Gesundheitsfürsorge dürfte zu einer Neudefinition 
herkömmlicher Rollen von „Arzt“ und „Patient“ führen, 
die Interaktion zwischen diesen beiden verändern und 
die Grenzen zwischen ihnen verschieben. Eine wach-
sende technologische Autonomie kann das Gesund-
heitsbewusstsein fördern, Einzelne motivieren, sich ak-
tiv mit Gesundheitsthemen zu beschäftigen, und neue 
Möglichkeiten des zugangs zur Gesundheitsfürsorge 
schaffen. Wenn die Technologien jedoch dazu führen 
sollten, dass die Patienten im entscheidenden Fall den 
unverzichtbaren Kontakt zu den Angehörigen von Ge-
sundheitsberufen nicht mehr haben, könnte dies ethi-
sche Risiken hervorrufen. Die Herausforderung besteht 
darin, ein ausgewogenes Verhältnis sicherzustellen, bei 

73

EMPFEHLUNGEN

dem der Patient zu autonomem Handeln befähigt ist, 
bei der Interpretation medizinischer Informationen 
und der Wahl der Behandlungsmethoden aber wei-
terhin den entscheidenden zwischenmenschlichen 
Austausch und die erforderliche Unterstützung von 
Experten in Anspruch nimmt. Neue Technologien, 
die die Veränderung der Interaktion zwischen Patient 
und Arzt fördern, sollten darauf ausgerichtet sein, das 
Patient-Arzt-Verhältnis zu stärken und die Qualität und 
Verfügbarkeit von Gesundheitsleistungen in Gesund-
heitsversorgungssystemen zu verbessern.

Drittens führen partizipatorische Verfahren im Ge-
sundheitsbereich zur Entstehung neuer Rollen für 
Bürger bei der Erzeugung von medizinischem Wis‑
sen und von medizinischen Innovationen. Aus der 
Einbindung von Bürgern in die wissenschaftliche Tätig-
keit sind wichtige Innovationen in der Medizin hervor-
gegangen, die sich auf die besonderen Perspektiven 
von „Patienten als Experten“, auf kollektive Intelligenz 
und auf die neuen mit Big Data verbundenen Mög-
lichkeiten stützen. Die Partizipation von Bürgern wirft 
eine Bildungsdividende in Form von Wissen, neuen 
Kompetenzen, neuen Lebenschancen und wachsen-
dem zivilgesellschaftlichen Bewusstsein ab und kann 
bei den Patienten das Gefühl der Eigenverantwortung 
für ihre Gesundheit stärken. Die EGE zeigt Herausfor-
derungen auf, die mit der Integration der Beiträge von 
Bürgern in die Förderung der Medizinforschung und 
mit der Anpassung des Fachwissens von Laien an die 
strikten Vorgaben faktengestützter Medizin verbunden 
sind, wofür eine solide Basis an wissenschaftlicher Kom-
petenz, Methodik und Kontrolle sowie die Einhaltung 
von Standards für ethische Kontrolle erforderlich sind. 
Die EGE erkennt jedoch an, dass Bürger einen wert-
vollen Beitrag zur wissenschaftlichen Tätigkeit leisten 
können, und möchte vor „partizipatorischen Ansätzen“ 
warnen, die Probanden entmachten oder sogar ausnut-
zen, indem sie Forschungssubjekte als eine Ressource 
betrachten, aus der Daten und Proben gewonnen wer-
den können, von denen aber nur wenig Verständnis für 
den Forschungsprozess erwartet wird und denen nur 
in geringem Umfang Kontrolle über ihre Daten oder 
zugang zu den Ergebnissen gewährt wird.

Ausgehend von den weiter oben beschriebenen und 
untersuchten Verschiebungen kommt die EGE zu fol-
genden wichtigen Erkenntnissen und ethischen 
Überlegungen:

Herstellung eines ausgewogenen Gleichgewichts 
zwischen Autonomie und Verantwortung: Die zu-
nehmende Autonomie von Bürgern und Patienten bei 

der Steuerung individueller und kollektiver Entschei-
dungen im Gesundheitsbereich ist als Fortschritt zu 
begrüßen. Sie entspricht nicht nur den Forderungen 
nach Selbstbestimmung, Selbstverwirklichung und Be-
fähigung, die wesentliche Elemente des menschlichen 
Gedeihens sind, sondern verbessert auch die Ergebnis-
se für die Gesundheit und die Wirksamkeit der Gesund-
heitsfürsorge. Ein aktiverer Einsatz des Einzelnen kann 
für die Erreichung des ziels einer patientenorientierten 
Gesundheitsfürsorge entscheidend sein. Im Sinne eines 
partnerschaftlichen Ansatzes für die Gesundheitsfür-
sorge sollte hierbei die Autonomie des Patienten Hand 
in Hand mit seiner Verantwortung gehen. Dennoch 
sollte aufmerksam beobachtet werden, wie die Prozes-
se der Einbeziehung oder „Befähigung“ durch externe 
Faktoren und Kräfte, z. B. Gesundheitsbehörden und 
gewerbliche Interessengruppen, beeinflusst werden, 
wenn es um die Abstimmung von Interessen zur Unter-
stützung der Forderung geht, dass Bürger die eigene 
Gesundheit in stärkerem Maße selbst steuern sollten. 
Die EGE möchte vor Bestrebungen nach einer „Gesund-
heitsautonomie“ warnen, bei der mehr Verantwortung 
von den staatlichen Gesundheitsdiensten auf den Ein-
zelnen abgewälzt wird oder die Verantwortung für 
Risiken und die Regulierungsfunktion dem Einzelnen 
übertragen werden, was letztlich eine Herabsetzung 
der Standards und der Qualität von Gesundheitsdienst-
leistungen bedeuten würde.

Entflechtung der Beteiligung: Partizipation kann in-
sofern ein interessanter Ansatz sein, als er Integration, 
Offenheit und Demokratisierung beinhaltet. Dennoch 
ist vor einem einfachen Verständnis der Partizipation 
als uneingeschränkt positiv zu warnen; in der vorlie-
genden Stellungnahme wird auf die vielschichtige 
Bedeutung von Begriffen wie „Bürgerwissenschaft“ 
hingewiesen. Die Partizipation kann hinter den mit 
ihr  verknüpften  Erwartungen  zurückbleiben  oder 
unerwünschte Folgen haben. Hierbei kommen meh-
rere Möglichkeiten in Betracht. Die Partizipation kann 
Hoffnungen auf mehr Transparenz oder Rechenschafts-
pflicht wecken, die sich jedoch nicht unbedingt erfüllen 
müssen. Der Begriff „partizipatorisch“ kann auf Dienst-
leistungen angewandt werden, die nicht unbedingt zu-
stimmung finden. Sie können auf der Erfassung und 
dem Verkauf personenbezogener Daten basieren; bei 
Vorteilsnahme oder Ausnutzung von Arbeit kann Par-
tizipation eine versteckte Form der Ausbeutung sein.

Bei der Abwägung des positiven Potenzials der Par-
tizipation für Einzelne und für Gesellschaften spielen 
daher mehrere Aspekte eine Rolle. Die Wirksamkeit 
der Befähigung und Bereicherung wird sich nach dem 

74

Die ethischen Auswirkungen neuer Technologien und Bürgerengagements im GesundheitswesenEMPFEHLUNGEN

Umfang der gewährten Mitbestimmung oder Mitwir-
kung, dem zugang zur Entscheidungsfindung und zur 
Vereinbarung von zielen bzw. dem Nutzen für Bildung 
und Kompetenzen richten. Die Minimierung der Risiken 
der Ausbeutung kann davon abhängen, inwieweit die 
Kontrolle über die eigenen Ressourcen auf die Beteilig-
ten übertragen wird, ob dies freiwillig geschieht oder 
vorgeschrieben wird, und von der Art der erteilten zu-
stimmung. Ferner sollte darauf geachtet werden, wer 
die „Beteiligten“ selbst sind: Es muss sich nicht immer 
um einzelne neutrale Bürger handeln; vielmehr kommt 
ein breites Spektrum organisierter Interessen in Ge-
stalt von Interessenverbänden, Lobbyisten oder wirt-
schaftlichen Akteuren in Betracht. Voraussetzung für 
ein differenzierteres Verständnis von Partizipation im 
Gesundheitswesen sind daher die sorgfältige Prüfung 
der Bedingungen, unter denen Partizipation stattfin-
det, und eine größere Transparenz der ziele, Funktio-
nen und Ergebnisse sowohl aufseiten der Institutionen, 
die Partizipation ermöglichen, als auch aufseiten der 
Beteiligten selbst.

Auswirkungen auf Gerechtigkeit und Solidarität: 
Die EGE unterstreicht die Bedeutung einer ausgewo-
genen Verteilung von Gesundheitsressourcen und 
das Recht aller, insbesondere der Schutzbedürftigen, 
auf Gesundheitsschutz. Gleichzeitig stellt sie fest, dass 
neue Verfahren der Bürgerbeteiligung eine Herausfor-
derung in Bezug auf die Wahrung von Gerechtigkeit 
und Solidarität als grundlegende Organisationsprinzi-
pien europäischer Gesundheitssysteme darstellen und 
eine Neuordnung der aktuellen Rahmenbedingungen 
nach sich ziehen.

Die Einbindung der Bürger kann neue Wege für kollek-
tives Handeln eröffnen und bietet die Chance, struktu-
relle Ungleichheiten abzubauen, die bei Investitionen 
in die medizinische Forschung lange zeit bestanden 
haben. Andererseits kann sie aber auch vorhandene 
Ungleichgewichte verstärken, den Forderungen der 
gut ausgestatteten und gebildeten Kreise mehr Beach-
tung schenken und Ungleichheiten weiter verschärfen. 
Auch bahnbrechende Fortschritte bei den medizini-
schen Technologien, z. B. der Präzisionsmedizin, kön-
nen die öffentliche Gesundheitspolitik im Hinblick auf 
die Festsetzung von Investitionsprioritäten vor schwie-
rige Aufgaben stellen. Entscheidungen über Behand-
lungen, die mit hohen Kosten oder mit dem Einsatz von 
Hochtechnologie verbunden sind, oder über „individu-
elle“ Behandlungen bedürfen einer sorgfältigen Abwä-
gung mit dem allgemeineren gesellschaftlichen Bedarf 
an notwendiger/grundlegender Gesundheitsfürsorge.

Dank neuer Technologien haben Bürger zudem die 
Möglichkeit, sich an Projekten, Aktionen und Initiati-
ven im Gesundheitsbereich zu beteiligen, die in hohem 
Maße von Solidarität geprägte ziele widerspiegeln. 
Diese Entwicklungen verleihen einerseits der Solidari-
tät als Basis gemeinschaftlichen Handelns neue Impul-
se und führen andererseits zu einer Neugestaltung her-
kömmlicher staatlich getragener Solidaritätsrahmen. 
Die EGE gibt zu bedenken, dass diese Entwicklungen 
das Gleichgewicht verändern und Auswirkungen da-
rauf haben werden, wer sich solidarisch zeigen sollte 
und nach welchen Kriterien. Sie ruft daher dazu auf, 
auf potenzielle Verschiebungen im gemeinsamen So-
lidaritätsverständnis von einem staatlich kontrollierten 
Prozess zu einem von Bürgern organisierten und ge-
steuerten Prozess zu achten.

Auf der Grundlage der vorstehenden Erwägungen 
einigt sich die EGE auf die nachstehenden Empfeh-
lungen zur Partizipation von Bürgern und zu neuen 
Gesundheitstechnologien.

A. Allgemeine Erwägungen: 
Veränderung der Vorstellung von 
Gesundheit und Bürgerbeteiligung

Nachdenken über Schlüsselbegriffe

Die EGE empfiehlt, eine öffentliche Debatte über fest 
verwurzelte und in der Entstehung begriffene Vorstel-
lungen zu fördern, die unser Verständnis von Gesund-
heit und Gesundheitsforschung und von der Art und 
Weise bestimmen, wie Gesundheitsdienstleistungen 
erbracht werden. Schwerpunkte dieses Nachdenkpro-
zesses sollten das allgemeine Verständnis und mögli-
cherweise strittige Erwartungen im zusammenhang 
mit folgenden Begriffen sein:

• 

Fürsorge,  Wohlbefinden  und  Gesundheit.  Wie 
soll der Gesundheitsbegriff neu gefasst werden, 
um sowohl Ansätze der Vorbeugung als auch ein 
ganzheitliches/umfassendes Verständnis von Ge-
sundheit und Krankheit besser zu integrieren (und 
gleichzeitig Tendenzen der Medikalisierung zu 
berücksichtigen)? Hierbei sollten gesellschaftliche 
Auffassungen, Grundsätze und Strukturen im Ge-
sundheitsbereich sorgfältig beleuchtet werden. 
Welche Rolle spielt das öffentliche Gesundheits-
system bei Debatten über die Aufteilung von Vor-
teilen und die Übertragung von Verantwortung im 
Gesundheitsbereich?

75

EMPFEHLUNGEN

•  Diese öffentliche Debatte betrifft somit die Aus-
wirkungen neuer Formen der Partizipation auf das 
Gleichgewicht zwischen individuellen und kollek-
tiven Interessen bei medizinischen Dienstleistun-
gen und medizinischer Forschung. zudem sollte sie 
eine Diskussion darüber einleiten, wo wir als Ge-
sellschaft individuellen Interessen Grenzen setzen 
möchten und inwiefern gemeinsame Interessen 
und das Gemeinwohl derartige Beschränkungen 
rechtfertigen.

•  Patient  sein.  In  den  vergangenen  zehn  Jahren 
haben sich Wahrnehmungen, Konzepte und Ver-
fahren drastisch verändert, was zu Spannungen 
zwischen Passivität und Aktivität, Individuum und 
Kollektiv und in Bezug auf in der Entwicklung be-
griffene Vorstellungen von der Beziehung Arzt-Pa-
tient sowie den zugrunde liegenden epistemischen 
Beziehungen und Machtbeziehungen führt.

Klarstellung von Begriffen

• 

In Anbetracht der beschriebenen sozialen Verände-
rungen ist es für politische Entscheidungen und für 
die Einführung von Regelungsmechanismen von 
entscheidender Bedeutung, für politikrelevante 
Schlüsselbegriffe wie Gesundheit, Wohlbefinden 
und Lebensweise klare Definitionen vorzugeben 
und zu einem gemeinsamen Verständnis dieser 
Begriffe zu gelangen. Die EGE empfiehlt daher 
den Institutionen der EU, sich zusammen mit den 
Mitgliedstaaten auf gemeinsame Vorstellungen 
und Definitionen von Schlüsselbegriffen wie „Ge-
sundheit“ einschließlich der Abgrenzung zwischen 
Kategorien von Gesundheit, Wohlbefinden und Le-
bensweise zu einigen. Es handelt sich hierbei nicht 
um ein zweckfreies theoretisches Unterfangen, 
vielmehr hat es konkrete regulatorische Auswir-
kungen, die dringend notwendig sind. Eine solche 
Klarstellung der Begriffe würde der öffentlichen 
Debatte über die Erwartungen an öffentliche Ge-
sundheitsdienste zugutekommen und Gesetzgeber 
bei der Klassifizierung und Regulierung von neuen 
Gesundheitstechnologien unterstützen, z. B. von 
Apps, die speziell Gesundheitsthemen im Gegen-
satz zu anderen Aspekten des Wohlbefindens und 
der Lebensweise betreffen.

•  Die EGE empfiehlt der Europäischen Kommission, 
bei der Formulierung von Vorschlägen für politi-
sche Strategien insbesondere im zusammenhang 
mit dem Begriff „Bürgerwissenschaft“ die mit der 
Bürgerbeteiligung  verbundenen  heterogenen 

Bedeutungen zu berücksichtigen. Hierbei sind be-
sonders die verschiedenen Dimensionen und For-
men der Bürgerbeteiligung, auf die sich der Begriff 
beziehen kann, der spezifische Nutzen, den ver-
schiedene Partizipationsformen bringen, und mit 
ihnen verbundene ethische Probleme zu beachten.

Sensibilisierung und Bildung

•  Die EGE empfiehlt, bei der Ausbildung von Fach-
kräften der Gesundheitsberufe die Verbreitung von 
medizinischem Fachwissen, unter anderem von 
medizinischen Online-Informationen und Gesund-
heitsapps, über die herkömmlichen medizinischen 
Fachkreise hinaus zu behandeln. In Anbetracht 
der Verfügbarkeit alternativer Quellen für Gesund-
heitsinformationen sollten die Fachkräfte bei der 
Erkundung neuer Möglichkeiten der Interaktion 
mit Patienten unterstützt werden, wobei auch die 
Nutzung vertrauenswürdiger Quellen für derarti-
ge Informationen und die Verhütung potenziellen 
Schadens durch unzuverlässige Informationsquel-
len angesprochen werden sollten. Ferner werden 
in Anbetracht der aufkommenden Präzisionsme-
dizin Kompetenzen auf dem Gebiet des Informa-
tionsmanagements und ein besseres Verständnis 
der Möglichkeiten und Grenzen dieser Medizin für 
Ärzte immer wichtiger, wenn der bestmögliche 
Nutzen für die Patienten sichergestellt werden 
soll. Die EGE empfiehlt daher, zur Verbesserung der 
Fähigkeiten im Umgang mit Daten Informatik und 
fortgeschrittene Statistik in die Curricula im Fach 
Medizin einzubeziehen, damit Ärzte die Ergebnisse 
der Präzisionsmedizin interpretieren und entspre-
chende Maßnahmen ergreifen können.

•  Die EGE empfiehlt den Institutionen und den Mit-
gliedstaaten der EU, auf die Förderung des Wissens, 
der Sensibilisierung und der Verantwortung der 
Bevölkerung sowie auf eine Debatte über die Nut-
zung vertrauenswürdiger Quellen für Gesundheits-
informationen und über fundierte Entscheidungen 
über die Partizipation an der Forschung und den 
Austausch von Gesundheitsdaten hinzuwirken.

•  Online-Gesundheitsressourcen können den Bür-
gern  dabei  helfen,  sich  einen  Einblick  zu  ver-
schaffen. In Anbetracht der Schwierigkeit, ver-
trauenswürdige  und  zuverlässige  Websites  zu 
Gesundheitsthemen zu erkennen, empfiehlt die 
EGE jedoch, dass die nationalen Gesundheitsbehör-
den die Entwicklung „zertifizierter“ Gesundheitsres-
sourcen mit Ratschlägen fördern sollten, die von 

76

Die ethischen Auswirkungen neuer Technologien und Bürgerengagements im GesundheitswesenEMPFEHLUNGEN

unabhängigen/nationalen Gesundheitsbehörden 
bewertet werden. Diese anerkannten Websites 
sollten auch die EU-Standards für den Schutz per-
sonenbezogener Daten einhalten.

•  Die EGE empfiehlt, Forschungsarbeiten zu den 
Auswirkungen der Beteiligung von Bürgern an Wis-
senschaft und Technologie im Allgemeinen und am 
Gesundheitssektor im Besonderen zu fördern.

B. Empfehlungen zur Regulierung: Lücken im 
Ordnungsrahmen für Bürgerbeteiligung und 
neue Gesundheitstechnologien schließen

Digitale Gesundheitsprodukte

•  Die EGE empfiehlt der Europäischen Kommission, 
(ggf. mit dem Europäischen Parlament und dem 
Rat) derzeit bestehende Lücken und Schlupflöcher 
im Regulierungsrahmen für digitale Gesundheits-
produkte (z. B. Computer-Software, Internetanwen-
dungen, m-Health-Anwendungen), deren Sicher-
heit weder durch die Medizinprodukte-Richtlinie 
noch die Richtlinie über Produktsicherheit voll-
ständig gewährleistet wird, zu schließen. Darüber 
hinaus sollte die Kommission mittels strikter Durch-
setzungsmaßnahmen dafür sorgen, dass die gel-
tenden Rechtsvorschriften und Standards von allen 
Beteiligten besser eingehalten werden.

Daten

•  Grundrechtserwägungen sollten wesentlicher Be-
standteil der EU-Politik für Gesundheitsdaten ein-
schließlich Big Data sein. zu diesem zweck könnte 
z. B. eine Bestimmung in die derzeit verhandelte 
EU-Datenschutzverordnung aufgenommen wer-
den, die die individuelle zustimmung zur Weiter-
verarbeitung von Gesundheitsdaten vorsieht. Fer-
ner sollte dann die Klausel zur Sicherstellung der 
Vereinbarkeit, die zum ausdrücklichen Nachweis 
der Vereinbarkeit der Verarbeitung von Forschungs-
daten mit dem zweck der Forschung verpflichtet, 
im Regulierungsrahmen beibehalten werden.

• 

In Anbetracht der Tatsache, dass Daten als die neue 
Währung des 21. Jahrhunderts gelten, die beträcht-
liche Möglichkeiten für Wirtschaftstätigkeit sowie 
für Forschung und Entwicklung eröffnet, und Ge-
sundheitsdaten sowohl ein sensibler als auch ein 
strategischer Gegenstand der Aufmerksamkeit 
geworden sind, empfiehlt die EGE den EU-Institu-
tionen, den Begriff der Inhaberschaft von Daten 

klarzustellen. Dies beinhaltet Vorschriften für die 
Sammlung und Sicherheit von Gesundheitsdaten. 
In Anerkennung der laufenden Debatte über die 
Abwägung zwischen privater Dateninhaberschaft 
und dem Gemeinwohl empfiehlt die EGE, Maß-
nahmen zum Schutz von Einzelpersonen vor dem 
Übergriff auf Gesundheitsdaten durch Dritte zu 
ergreifen.

•  Die EGE empfiehlt eine Neujustierung des Gleich-
gewichts zwischen dem Schutz von kommerziellen, 
für die öffentliche Gesundheit relevanten Daten 
und der Notwendigkeit, Transparenz und öffentli-
chen zugang zu gewährleisten. In diesem zusam-
menhang begrüßt sie die Bestimmungen zur Trans-
parenz in der EU-Verordnung zu klinischen Studien.

•  Die EGE empfiehlt der Europäischen Kommission, 
die Einhaltung der neuen Bestimmungen durch 
relevante Dritte aufmerksam zu überwachen und, 
wenn nötig, die erforderlichen Maßnahmen zur 
Durchsetzung zu ergreifen.

Erbringung von Gesundheitsleistungen

•  Die EGE empfiehlt, bei der Einführung von Pro-
grammen zur Fernmedizin (im zusammenhang 
mit m-Health, e-Health einschließlich Telemedizin, 
Nutzung der Entfernung als Instrument) die Vorteile 
dieser Technologien zu maximieren und potenzielle 
Nachteile zu minimieren. Anbieter öffentlicher Ge-
sundheitsdienstleistungen sollten die Auswirkun-
gen auf die Qualität der Gesundheitsfürsorge, die 
Privatsphäre und die Finanzmittel vor der Einfüh-
rung sorgfältig prüfen und auch danach beobach-
ten und bewerten. Bei dieser Bewertung sollten als 
Leitprinzipien unter anderem folgende Forderun-
gen berücksichtigt werden: Telemedizinprogram-
me führen nicht zur Herabsetzung des Standards 
der Patientenversorgung; ziel ihrer Einführung soll-
te es sein, den persönlichen Kontakt zwischen dem 
Erbringer von Gesundheitsdienstleistungen und 
dem Patienten zu ergänzen, anstatt ihn zu ersetzen; 
ihre Einführung sollte auf die Verringerung von Un-
gleichheiten beim zugang zur Gesundheitsfürsorge 
und nicht auf ihre Verschärfung ausgerichtet sein. 
Diese Bewertungen sollten auf europäischer Ebene 
bekannt gemacht werden, um Erfahrungen auszu-
tauschen, bewährte Verfahrensweisen vorzustellen, 
die Wahrung der Patientenrechte zu überprüfen 
und eventuelle Überlegungen zur Notwendigkeit 
einer Anpassung des Rechtsrahmens mitzuteilen.

77

EMPFEHLUNGEN

•  Da bestimmte neue Diagnosetechniken (z. B. direkt 
an den Verbraucher gerichtete und internetge-
stützte Tests einschließlich Gentests) grenzüber-
schreitend verfügbar sind und mehrere verschie-
dene Rechtsrahmen betreffen, ersucht die EGE 
die EU-Institutionen, zur Einführung europaweiter 
Standards und europaweiter Kontrolle mit den Mit-
gliedstaaten zusammenzuarbeiten. Die EGE hat be-
reits wiederholt erklärt, dass bei direkt an Verbrau-
cher gerichteten genetischen Dispositionstests die 
folgenden Standards eingehalten werden sollten:

–  Laboratorien, die Gentests durchführen, müs-
sen anerkannte Qualitätsstandards einhalten; 
Privatsphäre und Vertraulichkeit sensibler gene-
tischer Informationen sollten gewahrt und die 
Sicherheit der Daten sollte garantiert sein.

– 

– 

Informationen über den zweck und die Eig-
nung der Tests müssen vorab mitgeteilt werden; 
Möglichkeiten für genetische Beratung oder 
Anschlussberatung sollten angeboten werden.

In Übereinstimmung mit geltenden Standards 
und Leitlinien ist die Durchführung ungeeig-
neter Tests an Minderjährigen und anderen 
geschäftsunfähigen Personen zu verhindern, 
sofern nicht außergewöhnliche Umstände dies 
rechtfertigen.

Partizipation

•  Die EGE spricht sich für eine breitere und sinnvolle-
re Beteiligung von Bürgern an allen Bereichen des 
Gemeinwesens aus. Bereits seit Langem werden 
Bürger und Patienten zur Teilnahme an medizini-
schen Forschungen ermutigt; die EGE begrüßt die 
aktive Einbindung von Bürgern auf verschiedenen 
Ebenen der Gesundheitsforschung einschließlich 
der Festlegung von zielen und Vorgaben und der 
Strukturierung von Forschung und Politiken. Sie 
empfiehlt, hierbei dieselben wissenschaftlichen 
Standards für Sicherheit, Methodik, Ethik und Strin-
genz wie für die Forschungstätigkeit zugrunde zu 
legen.

•  Neue Wege der Partizipation setzen die Anpassung 
der ethischen Kontrolle voraus. Während die ethi-
sche Kontrolle von der zunehmenden Einbeziehung 
der Öffentlichkeit profitieren kann, ist es erforder-
lich, für die Bürgerbeteiligung an wissenschaftli-
chen Versuchen dieselben ethischen Standards 
aufzustellen wie für andere Forschungsbereiche.

•  Bisher war der „Patient“ bei seiner Gesundheits-
versorgung passiver zuschauer. Die EGE begrüßt 
und fördert die aktive Partizipation von Patienten 
an der Entscheidungsfindung, damit die Einzelnen 
zur Verbesserung der Qualität und Wirksamkeit 
der eigenen Gesundheitsversorgung beitragen 
können. Durch die Wahrnehmung des Rechts der 
Einzelnen auf Unterrichtung, auf freie Wahl und auf 
Gehör haben Patienten die Möglichkeit, eine pro-
aktivere Rolle bei der Gestaltung und Erbringung 
von Gesundheitsdienstleistungen zu übernehmen. 
Patientenvertreter und Interessengruppen sind von 
großer Bedeutung, aber es ist wichtig, sich nicht 
beeinflussen zu lassen und nur die Parteien anzu-
hören, die sich am lautesten bemerkbar machen 
und mit den meisten Ressourcen ausgestattet sind. 
Die EGE würde es zudem begrüßen, wenn Patien-
ten und die Bürgerschaft im weiteren Sinne an 
Diskussionen über die Festlegung von Prioritäten 
der Gesundheitsfürsorge und der Mittelzuteilung 
beteiligt würden.

•  Die EGE betont, wie wichtig es ist sicherzustel-
len, dass Patienten in Einklang mit dem Überein-
kommen von Oviedo über Menschenrechte und 
Biomedizin problemlos zugang zu ihren Gesund-
heitsakten haben und als proaktive Nutzer auf 
ihre klinischen Daten zugreifen können. Die EGE 
empfiehlt, den Bürgern in allen Mitgliedstaaten zu 
garantieren, dass sie ohne unzumutbare praktische 
Hindernisse, Verzögerungen oder Kosten Kopien 
ihrer Gesundheitsakten in elektronischer oder in 
sonstiger Form erhalten können.

Solidarität und Gerechtigkeit

•  Die EGE erkennt die neuen Formen der Solidari-
tät an, die mit der Bürgerbeteiligung im Gesund-
heitsbereich einhergehen. Sie mahnt dringend zur 
Vorsicht und weist darauf hin, dass Solidarität in 
einem Fall eine zumutung sein kann und in einem 
anderen Fall Mitverantwortung oder Kommodifi-
zierung bedeuten kann. Die EGE erinnert an die 
Freiheit des Einzelnen, sich gegen eine Teilnahme 
zu entscheiden. Sie stellt fest, dass kommerzielle 
Interessen nicht unter dem Deckmantel der Men-
schenfreundlichkeit verfolgt werden sollten, und 
empfiehlt, dass auch Dritte Transparenz sicherstel-
len sollten, um die Bürger in die Lage zu verset-
zen, fundierte Entscheidungen treffen zu können. 
Die EGE betont die Notwendigkeit, eine gerechte 
Solidarität in Verbindung mit den Menschenrech-
ten und den in der Charta der Grundrechte der 

78

Die ethischen Auswirkungen neuer Technologien und Bürgerengagements im GesundheitswesenEMPFEHLUNGEN

Europäischen Union verankerten Standards zu 
fördern.

Gesundheitssysteme finanziert und/oder erstattet 
werden.

•  Die Präzisionsmedizin steht noch am Anfang ihrer 
Entwicklung, könnte aber Patienten und Bürgern 
im weiteren Sinne in Europa deutliche Vorteile 
bringen. Sie wirft zudem ein Schlaglicht auf gegen-
wärtig diskutierte Fragen zur Verteilungsgerech-
tigkeit in Gesundheitsversorgungssystemen. Es ist 
wichtig, darauf zu achten, dass die Finanzierung 
dieses innovativen Ansatzes für die Prävention, 
Diagnose und Behandlung von Krankheiten nicht 
zulasten von Initiativen zum Abbau von Ungleich-
heiten im Gesundheitswesen geht. Ferner sollten 
Anstrengungen unternommen werden, um mög-
lichst repräsentative Datenkohorten sicherzustel-
len, damit etwaige Vorteile der Präzisionsmedizin 
in gerechter und ausgewogener Weise allen zugu-
tekommen. Die EGE empfiehlt, auf der Ebene der 
EU und der Mitgliedstaaten zu untersuchen, wie 
Behandlungen, die aus der Erforschung der Präzisi-
onsmedizin hervorgehen, im Rahmen öffentlicher 

•  Die EGE weist auf die Lage von Einzelpersonen 
und Gruppen hin, die die neuen Formen der Par-
tizipation im Gesundheitsbereich nicht nutzen 
können oder möchten oder kaum zugang zu den 
Technologien haben, die Voraussetzung für diese 
Partizipation sind. Die EGE warnt vor dem Risiko, 
dass die neuen Technologien bereits bestehende 
Ungleichheiten im Gesundheitsbereich verschärfen 
könnten, und empfiehlt, in Fällen, in denen digitale 
Tools erforderlich sind, um Gesundheitsleistungen 
in Anspruch nehmen zu können, künftig auch Al-
ternativen anzubieten, die ohne den Einsatz von 
Informations- und Kommunikationstechnologien 
(IKT) auskommen. Die EGE ersucht die EU, weiterhin 
Strategien zu entwickeln, um sicherzustellen, dass 
diejenigen, die dies wünschen, neue Formen der 
Partizipation im Gesundheitsbereich wirksam nut-
zen können und das Potenzial der Befähigung im 
Gesundheitsbereich ausschöpfen können.

79

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies

The Chairperson: 

Julian Kinderlerer

The members: 

Peter Dabrock 

Inez de Beaufort

Emmanuel Agius 

Andrzej Gorski 

Hille Hacker 

Ritva Halila

 Paula Martinho da Silva 

Linda Nielsen 

Herman Nys

  Siobhán O’Sullivan 

Laura Palazzani 

Pere Puigdomenech

Marie-Jo Thiel 

Günter Virt

 
 
 
EGE Secretariat

Address
European Commission
Orban 7/91, 1049 Brussels
Fax: +32 22994565 
Email: EC-ETHICS-GROUP@ec.europa.eu

Jim DRATWA

European Commission
Head of the EGE Office
Secretary-General of the IDB
Orban 7/89, 1049 Brussels
Email: jim.dratwa@ec.europa.eu

Joanna PARKIN

European Commission
Policy Officer
EGE Office
Orban 7/91, 1049 Brussels
Email: joanna.parkin@ec.europa.eu

Laura CUESTA

European Commission
Policy Assistant
EGE Office
Orban 7/91, 1049 Brussels
Email: laura.cuesta-fernandez@ec.europa.eu

Kim Hoang LE

European Commission
Administrative Assistant
EGE Office
Berl 8/362, 1049 Brussels
Email: kim-hoang.le@ec.europa.eu 

Website:
http://ec.europa.eu/research/ege/index.cfm

HOW TO OBTAIN EU PUBLICATIONS

Free publications:

(cid:127) 

one copy: 
via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu);

(cid:127)   more than one copy or posters/maps: 

from the European Union’s representations (http://ec.europa.eu/represent_en.htm);  
from the delegations in non-EU countries (http://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/index_en.htm);  
by contacting the Europe Direct service (http://europa.eu/europedirect/index_en.htm) or  
calling 00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11 (freephone number from anywhere in the EU) (*).

(*) 

The information given is free, as are most calls (though some operators, phone boxes or hotels may charge you).

Priced publications:

(cid:127) 

via EU Bookshop (http://bookshop.europa.eu).

 
E
S
-
0
1
-
1
5
-
5
5
4
-
E
N
-
N

T

h

e

e

t

h

i

c

a

l

i

m

p

l

i

c

a

t

i

o

n

s

o

f

n

e

w

h

e

a

l

t

h

t

e

c

h

n

o

l

o

g

i

e

s

a

n

d

c

i

t

i

z

e

n

p

a

r

t

i

c

i

p

a

t

i

o

n

B

r

u

s

s

e

l

s

,

1

3

O

c

t

o

b

e

r

2

0

1

5

ISBN 978-92-79-50351-1
doi:10.2872/488735

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
