EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES 

Statement  
on  
Gene Editing 

In  1975  an  international  conference  (the  Asilomar  Conference)  was  convened  to  consider  the 

implications  of  the  new  technologies  that  were  then  becoming  available  to  modify  the  genome  of 

organisms through the insertion or deletion of segments of DNA. At that time it was only possible to 

genetically  modify  microorganisms.    That  conference  instigated  a  moratorium  on  the  genetic 

modification  of  humans  –  germline  modification  –  and  the  interpretation  of  the  discussions  led  to 

significant  regulation  of  all  forms  of  genetic  ‘manipulation’,  whether  the  organisms  were  modified 

and used in containment, or (later) when released into the environment.   

The  technology  has  changed  very  significantly  over  the  last  40  years  as  we  have  learned  to 

understand more of the processes by which genetic material is altered in microorganisms, plants and 

animals and it is now possible to precisely insert or delete sequences of DNA in situ. This forty year 

old global consensus on prohibiting human germline gene modification has come under significant 

pressure in 2015.  

In  February  of  this  year,  the  UK  parliament  voted  to  approve  regulations,  following  a  rigorous 

debate, that permit the clinical use of mitochondrial replacement techniques. While mitochondrial 

gene transfer does not involve gene editing techniques, it could be argued that the approval of this 

limited form of germline gene modification did cross a Rubicon. There has been a rapid development 

in gene editing technologies in the last five years, and the announcement in April 2015 of genome 

editing  of  non-viable  human  embryos  using  CRISPR-Cas9  demonstrated  that  human  germline  gene 

modification has moved out of the realm of the theoretical, and clinical applications are becoming 

feasible.  Techniques  such  as  CRISPR-Cas9  can  modify  genomes  of  living  organisms  at  precise 

locations  in  more  specific  ways  and  more  cost-effectively  than  previously  possible.  This  is  already 

challenging the international regulatory landscape for the modification of human cells in the near to 

medium term.  

Gene  editing  of  somatic  cells  is  currently  in  clinical  development  for  a  variety  of  conditions.  The 

editing  of  genomes  in  human  somatic  cells  certainly  raises  ethical  questions,  but  is  distinct  from 

germline gene modification, in that changes in the gene(s) do not persist beyond a single generation.  

 
 
As  to  human  germline  editing,  the  EGE  is  of  the  view  that  there  should  be  a  moratorium  on  gene 

editing of human embryos or gametes which would result in the modification of the human genome. 

Germline gene modification is still in its infancy and there are many significant technical hurdles to 

be overcome before clinical applications become a viable reality. The question of whether, if ever, 

germline  engineering  of  human  embryos  would  be  precise  enough  to  guarantee  a  successful 

outcome and would be acceptable to the public is still an open one.  

The more pressing question for policy makers at this moment is whether germline genome editing 

technology  research  should  be  suspended,  under  which  conditions  it  could  proceed,  and  in  this 

respect  varying  views  have  been  articulated.  The  EGE  is  of  the  view  that  this  question  warrants 

careful  consideration,  given  the  profound  potential  consequences  of  this  research  for  humanity.  It 

has been suggested that research with a clinical application, as distinct from basic research, should 

be subject to a moratorium. We would be cautious in terms of whether such a clear-cut distinction 

can be made between basic and translational research. Likewise, the blurring of the lines between 

clinical  applications  in  pursuit  of  therapeutic  or  enhancement  goals  (albeit  the  ethical  issues 

pertaining to each may be different), must be considered. 

The EGE considers that deliberation regarding the acceptability and desirability of gene editing will 

require  inclusive  debate  which  extends  to  civil  society  where  diverse  perspectives  and  those  with 

different expertise and values can be heard. This cannot be left to select countries, social groups or 

disciplines  alone.  The  EGE  cautions  against  reducing  the  debate  to  safety  issues  and  the  potential 

health risks or health benefits of gene editing technologies. Other ethical principles such as human 

dignity, justice, equity, proportionality and autonomy are clearly at stake and should be part of this 

necessary  reflection  towards  the  international  governance  of  gene  editing.  Moreover,  ethical 

consideration  needs  to  be  given  to  all  applications  of  gene  editing,  including  the  non-human 

applications.  It  is  likely  that  many  of  the  practical  applications  of  gene  editing  will  occur  in  the 

environmental sphere and will have significant implications for the biosphere.  

For  some  members  of  the  EGE,  human  germline  gene  modification  for  reproductive  purposes 

cannot be ethically justified; they therefore call for upholding the prohibition that reflects, among 

others,  Art.  3  of  the  European  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights;  because  of  the  blurring  lines 

between  basic  and  applied  research,  some  also  call  for  a  moratorium  on  any  basic  research 

involving human germline gene modification until the regulatory framework is adjusted to the new 

possibilities. For other members of the EGE, there may be positions worth considering which would 

justify  continued  research.  As  is  the  case  in  the  scientific  community  at  large,  diverse  views  are 

represented in the group. We call for a broad public debate on these issues and are convinced that 

the EGE will make a useful contribution to these deliberations. In view of the above considerations, 

we  urge  the  European  Commission  to  request  that  the  EGE  succeeding  the  current  group,  as  a 

matter of priority, consider the inextricably linked ethical, scientific and regulatory issues pertaining 

to germline and somatic cell gene modification.  

___ 

