COVID-19 pandemic 

STATEMENT ON SCIENTIFIC ADVICE  
TO EUROPEAN POLICY MAKERS  
DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC 

By The Group of Chief Scientific Advisors of the European Commission, 
The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies, and  
Peter Piot - special advisor to the President Ursula von der Leyen on the response to 
COVID-19 

24 June 2020 

#Coronavirus 

In late 2019 in Wuhan, China, a new severe acute 
respiratory and multi-organ disease was identified 
named COVID-19, caused by the coronavirus SARS-
CoV-2.  The  WHO  declared  the  outbreak  of  a 
pandemic on 11 March, and called countries to take 
urgent and vigorous action. It is now a major public 
health  crisis  throughout  the  world,  and  is  also 
predicted  to  have  major  impacts  on  European 
societies and economies.  

The  SARS-CoV-2  virus  is  a  pathogen  previously 
unknown to science and medicine. To date, there is 
still a dearth of information on the virus itself, the 
spread  of  the  disease,  and  the  causes  of  excess 
deaths. Looking beyond the chain of infection, there 
is limited understanding of how the measures that 
have  been  taken  to  fight  the  pandemic  are 
disrupting health systems, businesses, trade chains, 
and  society more generally, as well as how all  of 
these interconnect with each other. Regarding the 
future, the possibility exists that societies will have 
to live long-term with COVID-19. 

It  will  take  time  for  scientific  knowledge  to  be 
advanced to a level that will allow the disease to be 
kept  under  control.  Nevertheless,  evidence  from 
science, which is often required at short notice, is 
crucial to help develop sound public policy. It raises 
the  question  of  how  scientific  advice  can  be  best 
given to European policy makers when knowledge 
is  fast  evolving,  risks  are  large,  and  evidence  is 
preliminary  and 
is 
particularly  difficult  because  there  are  many 
uncertainties, outcomes and risks  that  need to be 
considered  as  well  as  at  times  limited  scientific 
evidence,  which  means  politicians  have  to  face 
difficult 
requiring 
sometimes 
controversial and unpopular decisions. 

  This  question 

trade-offs 

limited. 

The COVID-19 pandemic has been with us for some 
months  now,  and  the  Group  of  Chief  Scientific 

Research and 
Innovation 

 
 
 
 
 
Advisors (GCSA)1 of the European Commission, who 
tend to work on long-term issues, has decided that 
it  is  now  time  to  learn  from  experience  to  date, 
about  giving  scientific  advice  concerning  this 
ongoing  crisis.  Giving  scientific  advice  in  complex 
and  uncertain  circumstances  such  as  the  current 
pandemic, was the subject of an Opinion “Scientific 
Advice  to  European  Policy  in  a  Complex  World” 
prepared by the Group of Chief Scientific Advisors 
(GCSA)  of the  European  Commission,  published  in 
September  2019.  In  the  present  Statement  the 
GCSA  draw  on  the  principles  generated  in  that 
Opinion with inputs from Peter Piot (special advisor 
to the European Commission’s President Ursula von 
der Leyen on the response to the coronavirus and 
COVID-19),  and  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in 
Science and Technologies draw on their Statement 
“European 
of 
Fundamental Rights in the COVID-19 Pandemic”, to 
explain how science advice can be best provided to 
help policy makers cope with the COVID-19 crisis. 

Protection 

Solidarity 

and 

To help policy makers manage a viral epidemic such 
as COVID-19, scientific advice needs to address a 
number  of  crucial  issues. First, there is  a  need  to 
understand the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the disease 
that it causes: how does it infect; what is the way 
and the rate of transmission in populations; what 
are the severity and long-term health effects of the 
disease; how can the virus be detected; how does 
the  virus  evolve?  Answers  to  these  kinds  of 
questions  are  required  to  properly  model  the 
pandemic  so  appropriate  social  measures  can  be 
recommended  taking  into  account  fundamental 
rights  and  freedoms  to  contain  and  flatten  the 
curve  of  infection,  to  avoid  overwhelming  health 
care systems and to preserve lives. However, when 
knowledge is only partial as it is at the beginning of 

1 Professor Janusz Bujnicki – former member of the 
Group of Chief Scientific Advisors, contributed to 
this statement 

a  pandemic,  scientific  understanding  may  be 
limited and modelling is imprecise with significant 
margins of error, and so advice may well change as 
knowledge improves. A second issue important for 
managing  the  pandemic  is  the  development  of 
treatments that can reduce or eliminate the virus, 
or  can  ameliorate  symptoms  of  the  disease.  
Because of the length of time it takes to  develop 
drugs,  the  main  option  initially  is  re-purposing  of 
pre-existing  drugs.  Subsequently,  treatments  can 
be designed that are more specific to the virus, but 
that  is  a  longer  term  solution.  Third,  is  the 
development  of  a  vaccine,  which  depends  on 
knowing  how  the  immune  system  can  mount  a 
defence  against  the  virus,  and  how  that  immune 
response  can  be  best  stimulated.    Vaccines  also 
take  time  to  develop,  to  test,  and  to  scale-up  for 
use at the population level, and indeed may not be 
developed  at  all.  Fourth,  is  understanding  and 
advising  on  the  impact  the  pandemic  and  the 
containment measures can have more generally on 
society,  for  example  on  other  human  health 
conditions  and  their  treatment,  on  the  quality  of 
lives,  on  policies,  economies,  and  fundamental 
rights and freedoms. A fifth issue is the need to use 
systems  approaches  to  address  the  two  way 
feedbacks and interactions between societies and 
the  disease  as  societies  respond  to  the  threat  of 
COVID-19.  The  pandemic  itself  is  evolving,  partly 
because of changes in the virus and the disease it 
causes,  and  partly  because  of  the  personal  and 
societal  measures  put  in  place  to  control  the 
infection.  

The complexity and uncertainty of the coronavirus 
crisis  in  what  is  a  febrile  political  environment,  is 
why giving science advice is difficult and must be 
given  with  great  care.  Below  we  give  guidance 

2 PAGE                                                                                  Statement on scientific advice to European policy makers during the COVID-19 pandemic 

 
 
                   
                                                 
about how scientific advice should be given in these 
demanding  circumstances,  which  should  be 
acknowledged  as  being  difficult  for  scientists,  for 
politicians, and for the public. 

that 

include 

is  obvious.  Physics 

The complexity of the COVID-19 pandemic and its 
aftermath means that a multidisciplinary approach 
is  required  to  develop  advice.  The  disciplines 
required 
the  biological  and  medical 
sciences,  other  natural  sciences  and  engineering, 
the social sciences and the humanities.  The need 
to  consider  biological  and  medical  aspects  of  the 
is  relevant  to 
pandemic 
determine  how  far  droplets  containing  virus  may 
carry  after  a  sneeze  to  determine  appropriate 
physical distancing and to assess the effectiveness 
of  face  masks.    Engineering  is  relevant  for  the 
development of machines that can assist  survival 
and  help  avoid  contagion.    Given  that  distancing 
measures are central to counter the spread of the 
virus  and 
the  social  and  economic 
consequences  of  such  measures  can  be  complex 
lasting,  the  social,  economic  and 
and 
behavioural sciences as well as law, are crucial to 
devise practical approaches that will be effective to 
reduce  human  contacts.  These  measures  may  be 
required for a considerable period of time and it is 
important to limit harm to individuals and societies. 
The  humanities  are  needed  to  address  issues 
related to moral acceptability, ethics, psychosocial 
impact,  culture, and communication, which inform 
complex decision-making. These include balancing 
COVID-19  deaths  compared  with  deaths  due  to 
other diseases not being treated, or for even more 
difficult  comparisons  such  as  with  the  damage 
being done to economies and the effects this will 
have  on  individuals,  their  families  and  societies. 
Issues  that  need  to  be  considered  in  this  context 
include  education,  mental  health,  and  social 
attitudes. 

long 

Therefore,  multidisciplinarity  in  science  advice  is 
essential. These discussions across disciplines have 

to  be  organised  and  co-ordinated  well,  given  that 
the range of perspectives is wide and the scholars 
involved may not always be familiar with working 
across the territories of other  disciplines. There is 
also merit in a mechanism of scientific advice that 
delivers considered and balanced opinions based on 
a wide range of perspectives, because it promotes 
public trust in the policy decisions taken. 

to 

For 

conclusions. 

As  already  emphasised  scientific  knowledge  of  a 
pandemic such as COVID-19 is often uncertain and 
tentative,  and  changes  over  time.  Communicating 
uncertainty and complexity to policy makers and to 
the public at large can be difficult, but is essential 
if  trust  in  politicians  and  their  advisors  is  to  be 
maintained.  It  is  recommended  that  attention  is 
identifying  and  assessing 
always  given 
uncertainties  when  the  scientific  advice  is  given. 
Scientific  advisors  need  to  provide  clarity  about 
what  is  known,  partially  known,  unknown,  and 
unknowable.  Uncertainties  can  arise  from  the 
limitations,  analyses  and  interpretations  of  data, 
whether  all  aspects  of  the  problem  have  been 
considered,  and  when  there  are  differences  in 
scientific 
example,  when 
epidemiological  models  are  involved  in  scientific 
advice,  there  needs  to  be  a  focus  on  the 
probabilities  associated  with 
the  different 
estimates of outcomes being made, as well as the 
assumptions that are assumed in that model and 
how  they  may  differ  from  other  models  being 
developed.    This  can  be  confusing  for  scientists, 
politicians  and  the  public  alike,  but  it  is  essential 
that 
the  uncertainties  are  explained  and 
understood. It is not enough for politicians to say 
they  are  “following  the  science”,  they  need  to 
understand  the  uncertainty  in  the  science  and  its 
relation  to  the  recommended  measures  of  policy 
makers, and to communicate that to the public well. 
There  can  also  be  uncertainties  in  the  legal  and 
ethical  aspects  of  advice and  when  that  occurs  it 
needs to be explained in communications as well. 
This is all difficult for communication professionals 

3 PAGE                                                                                  Statement on scientific advice to European policy makers during the COVID-19 pandemic 

 
 
                   
to  deal  with,  as  they  are  used  to  distilling  advice 
down  to  simple  messages,  but  simple  messages 
are  usually  not  the  right  approach  when  policy  is 
generated  from  multiple  and  complex  science  in 
times of uncertainty, such as during the COVID-19 
pandemic. 

Trust is particularly critical if the public are to have 
confidence in their political leaders and is especially 
required  when  onerous  demands  are  made  on 
personal behaviour. There also has to be trust in the 
scientists and the way they work if their advice is 
to be heeded. Trust is only possible if the science 
advice  given  by  official  advisors  is  open  and 
transparent, and is based on the highest quality of 
evidence. It also needs to be well communicated to 
the  public  by  the  scientists  and  politicians.  Being 
open  and  transparent  allows  the  evidence  upon 
which the advice is based to be publically assessed, 
and makes it clear whether political leaders indeed 
take the science seriously and if not, it forces them 
to justify their actions. Being open also allows other 
scientists to challenge evidence and interpretation, 
which 
is 
tentative, uncertain, and complex. In a situation of 
fast  evolving  knowledge,  as  in  early  stages  of  a 
pandemic, there needs to be challenge and debate 
between scholars of different opinions to advance 
understanding.  That  is  how  science  works.  The 
public  and  politicians  need  to  appreciate  that 
scientific  knowledge  evolves  and  improves,  and 
that new understanding of the disease and of the 
societal impact and reaction to management of the 
disease,  may  lead  to  changes  in  policy  direction. 
Differences of views between scientists can serve 
as  an  ‘early  warning’  for  the  public  authorities, 
which indicates that more discussion and analysis 
is  required.  This  is  important  to  ensure  that 
preparations  and  actions  are  put  in  place  to  limit 
damage and accelerate recovery.  

is  often  required  when  knowledge 

This all is easily said, but is not so easily delivered, 
given  that  diverging  scientific  opinions  can  be 

confusing  for  both  politicians  and  the  public. 
However, the solution is not to ‘hide’ differences of 
opinion but rather to force them into the open and 
clarify  why  there  is  a  range  of  scientific  opinions 
and  ethical  assessments.  This  is  made  more 
difficult if the public and politicians are not ‘at ease’ 
with  science,  which  can  be  the  case.  Early  and 
frequent  deliberative  engagement  of  science 
advisors  and  policy-makers  helps  increase  the 
understanding  of  scientists  of  how  policy  making 
and  politics  works  and  of  policy  makers  about 
science  and its  uncertainties  and  complexities.  An 
educational  system  designed  to  generate  an 
informed  citizenship  together  with  a  mature 
relationship between scientists and policy makers, 
are crucial to the nourishment of public trust at the 
science/public  policy  interface.  Relevant  to  this  is 
fake  news,  misinformation,  and  conspiracy 
theories,  that  also  confound  and  confuse  good 
scientific  advice.    Present  egregious  examples 
include ingesting disinfectant to combat SARS-CoV-
2, or blaming 5G technology for the infections. Such 
ideas  can  spread  fast  through  social  and  mass 
media, and are prone to manipulation by politicians, 
celebrities,  and  other  prominent  public  figures. 
Scientific advisors need to push back vigorously on 
such misinformation, even if it puts them in conflict 
with their political leadership. 

Another  critical  factor  for  scientific  advice  is  the 
importance  of  clarity  about  the  governance 
arrangements and responsibilities in the networks 
from science advisors to political leadership, and on 
to  the  medical  agencies  that  are  tasked  with 
implementing the public policy. Clarity should cover 
definition  and  demarcation  of  advisory  versus 
decision-making functions and roles, together with 
the  responsibilities  for  communications  and  for 
ensuring  the  public  messaging  is  carried  out 
correctly. This is necessary so the scientific case is 
not ‘distorted’ by the messaging, and that scientists 
are not used as ‘cover’ for politicians, who are the 
ones  ultimately  responsible  for  policy  making.  It 

4 PAGE                                                                                  Statement on scientific advice to European policy makers during the COVID-19 pandemic 

 
 
                   
Contacts: 

EC Group of Chief Scientific Advisors 
(SAM) 

E-mail: EC-SAM@ec.europa.eu 
#SAMGroup_EU 

Website: Group of Chief Scientific Advisors 

European Group on Ethics in Science and 
New Technologies (EGE) 

E-mail: EC-ETHICS-GROUP@ec.europa.eu 
#EthicsGroup_EU 

Website: European Group on Ethics in 
Science and New Technologies  

should  also  be 
that  politicians 
recognised 
sometimes  have  to  make  difficult  decisions  and 
may choose not to follow the scientific advice, but 
if they do so they should make that clear and give 
their reasons for doing so. 

The coronavirus crisis has taught us that much of 
Europe was insufficiently prepared. In the world of 
today,  pathogens  can  spread  from  anywhere  to 
everywhere on the earth, and present a challenge 
of the same order as Climate Change, but it is one 
that can be prepared for, as has been shown by the 
responses of some of the Asian countries. To assist 
policy makers in their future considerations about 
this  issue,  the  Chief  Science  Advisors  to  the 
European Commission and the European Group on 
Ethics in Science and New Technologies, who both 
typically work on longer term issues requiring broad 
scientific consultation and analysis, are planning to 
the  management  of 
produce  Opinions  on 
pandemics more generally later in 2020, and on the 
wider topic of crisis resilience later in 2021 together 
with SAPEA, the consortium of science academies 
in  Europe.  They  will  work  with  Peter  Piot,  special 
advisor  to  Commission  President  Ursula  von  der 
Leyen  on  the  response  to  the  coronavirus  and 
COVID-19. 

The College of the Commissioners can count on the 
Chief  Science  Advisors  and  the  Members  of  the 
European Group on Ethics to produce opinions now 
and in the future to support their decision-taking, in 
particular  under  circumstances  of  complexity  and 
uncertainty.  

© European Union, 2020  |  KI-04-20-332-EN-N  ISBN 978-92-76-19921-2   Doi 10.2777/854269 

Reuse is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. The reuse policy of European Commission documents is regulated by Decision 2011/833/EU (OJ L 330, 
14.12.2011, p. 39). 

The contents of this publication do not necessarily reflect the position or opinion of the European Commission. 

5 PAGE                                                                                  Statement on scientific advice to European policy makers during the COVID-19 pandemic 

 
 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
