EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES 

Statement  

on 

European Solidarity and the Protection of  
Fundamental Rights in the COVID-19 Pandemic 

The COVID-19 pandemic poses grave challenges for societies in Europe and all around the 
world. Many lives have already been lost, and many more people fear for their own health and 
that of their loved ones. Moreover, the economic impact of the pandemic has cost people their 
jobs  and  livelihoods,  and  has  started  to  impact  people’s  wellbeing  and  mental  health.  The 
effects of this public health emergency will impact an entire generation. 

Acts of solidarity which we are witnessing on a daily basis, in our neighbourhoods, cities and 
countries all around Europe, serve as a beacon of hope. Young people reach out to their elderly 
neighbours  to  help  with  errands,  people  provide  support  to  strangers,  and  we  unite  in 
demonstrating our appreciation to those healthcare workers who shoulder a disproportionate 
burden  of  this  pandemic  in  caring  for  patients.  Individuals,  organisations  both  public  and 
private, across a diverse range of sectors are offering their expertise and capacity in the effort 
to quell this pandemic. At the same time, however, we observe the less edifying sight of people 
being  stranded  at  national  borders,  politicians  pitching  the  plight  of  refugees  against  the 
suffering of people in Europe and at times a lack of cooperation of Member States for the good 
of all. 

Solidarity however becomes a very thin concept if we only apply it to those who are very much 
like us and if it comes with conditions and negotiations. It is most potent and meaningful when 
it extends unreservedly also to those who are different. It is more important than ever in this 
difficult time to uphold a form of solidarity that is inclusive of everyone, which recognises that 
respect  is  due  to  everyone,  and  not  exclusive  to those  that  live in  our  own  town,  region,  or 
country.  

Solidarity with those who are hit hardest 

Not everyone is affected equally by the pandemic. Some have access to life-saving healthcare 
while others do not.  Some experience quarantine in comfortable homes with gardens, while 
others are confined in small apartments, or even slums or refugee camps. We have to recognise 
and address the significant imbalances in terms of economic and social resources, during as 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
well as after the outbreak. This also means considering the downstream effects of the measures 
taken now, from economic recession to increases in domestic violence, child abuse and suicide. 
In  turn,  this  means  that  instituting  immediate  supporting  measures  such  as  financial  and 
psychosocial assistance is vital. All policies and measures must invariably be based on the basic 
idea of equal worth of all human beings, rooted in a common human dignity. 

It is worth noting that many of those who have lost their jobs as a direct result of the restrictive 
measures put in place to secure public health goals, are lower paid workers. As noted by the 
EGE in its Opinion on Future of Work, Future of Society (2018),1 the work of those providing 
essential  services,  such  as  providing  care  to  our  children  and  older  persons,  including 
healthcare,  needs  to  be  recognised  and  remunerated  appropriately.  To  deal  with  the  deep 
economic  recession  that  will  follow  the  current  measures  introduced  in  response  to  the 
pandemic, we need to make use of forms of financial assistance provided by the instruments 
that  the  EU  has  put  in  place  in  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis  of  2008  –  and  possibly 
expand them. 

Trust and transparency 

This pandemic should be seized, not as an opportunity but as a call, to foster solidarity at the 
European  and  global  level.  This  must  manifest  itself  in  concrete  actions  such  as  the  honest 
sharing  and  pooling  of  information,  experiences,  innovations  and  resources.  We  agree  with 
those calling for governments and their science advisors to make transparent the evidence for 
their  decisions,  strengthen  open  science  and  research,  and  cooperate  internationally.  When 
citizens are asked to trust those in positions of knowledge and power, and to abide by their rule, 
then respect for democratic principles, transparency, accountability and the rule of law are more 
important than ever.  

Strengthening our values 

The pandemic is also a challenge to individualistic, nationalistic notions of safety, health and 
wellbeing.  Even  those  of  us  who,  in  other  times,  felt  self-sufficient  and  strong  are  now 
confronted  with  our  vulnerabilities,  and  a  realisation  of  our  dependency  on  the  hard  work, 
support, of others. It is natural in these circumstances of deep uncertainty to focus on immediate 
action and speed of measures. This must not, however, lead to a continuous suspension of rights 
and liberties. We therefore call for vigilance about the necessity, evidence, proportionality of 
any policy and technological intervention that, even temporarily, suspends fundamental rights. 
Consideration needs to be given to the immediate and lasting impacts that such measures have 
on our societies (in particular how they may impact disproportionately on different groups, e.g. 
elderly, single parents, at-risk children). Derogations of human rights, albeit in the interests of 
the public good must be temporary, and critically there must be clear, transparent criteria for 

1 Future of Work, Future of Society, p9 : « Much of the work done today that is of key importance to the functioning 
of our societies (such as care work) is unpaid and often invisible in the sense that it takes place inside people’s 
homes  and  is  not  recognised  by  our  institutions. »  https://ec.europa.eu/info/publications/future-work-future-
society_en 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their suspension e.g. in the form of sunset clauses to emergency legislation. The greatest danger 
– during and after the end of any formal ‘state of emergency’ – is a ‘new normal’ of eroded 
rights  and  liberties.  Good  leadership  in  times  of  crisis  is  dependent  upon  protecting  and 
promoting democracy and human rights and the rule of law. 

Research and Innovation  

COVID-19 has brought the scientific world together at a scale and with a focus and zeal that is 
unprecedented. Open science and open data practices now greatly support the global pursuit of 
breakthroughs in research. Academic publishers open up their proprietary troves, journals and 
newspapers tear down their paywalls when it comes to COVID-19. Science, technology and 
innovation can, must and will provide the help that will make the difference.  

What often makes the difference in science and technology is the relentless pursuit of what 
seems impossible and infeasible in first instance. Our values we hold dear not only serve as a 
much-needed  moral  compass,  but  they  also  present  us  with  conflicting  obligations  and 
requirements,  that  can  trigger  innovative  solutions  and  rouse  us  to  make  a  hitherto 
unprecedented effort. We must therefore be wary of arguments that there are “no alternatives”. 
This pandemic has already provided many concrete examples of technological innovations that 
exemplify  unwillingness  to  accept  tragic  choices  in  shortages  of  equipment,  in  limited 
functionality of equipment. In the space of a week some have developed apps which can be 
downloaded on to people’s phones so that they have up-to-date access to public health info 
without geo location or tracking.  

Ways out of the crisis  

The challenges and consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic affect every person and every 
region differently. What we have in common, in Europe and beyond, however, is that this crisis 
confronts us acutely with our own vulnerability and reliance on each other. We are stronger if 
we confront the threat posed by COVID-19 together, and not alone. In this spirit we recommend 
that: 

1. 

The protection of human health is accorded a much higher priority in the system of 
values  of  the  European  Union  than  economic  interests.  EU  member  states  should 
jointly pursue the protection of health of EU citizens and assist in strengthening and 
maintaining the integrity of health care systems and other public infrastructures. 
2.  Measures  undertaken  by  many  governments  to  provide  immediate  financial  and 
other support for individuals, families, and community businesses are continued and 
strengthened,  and  we  suggest  that  additional  measures  should  be  undertaken  to 
improve housing security in particular across Europe.  

3.  Member  States  with  sufficient  resources  for  healthcare  share  their  resources  with 

those who lack necessary resources in an attitude of solidarity. 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. 

Saving  lives  is  the  most  important  and  urgent  goal.  Restrictions  of  rights  and 
freedoms that are imposed in order to save lives in an emergency situation, however 
– including those implemented through technological surveillance through mobile 
devices through to drones and surveillance cameras – need to be removed, and data 
need to be destroyed, as soon as the emergency is over or infringements are no longer 
proportionate. The public health emergency must not be abused to usurp power, or 
to permanently suspend the protections of rights and liberties.  

5.  Once  the  crisis  is  over,  European  societies  should  work  together  to  implement 
lessons learned during COVID-19. A common strategy to deal with a pandemic and 
similar threats should be elaborated and implemented at the European and the global 
level. Any strategy needs to be mindful not only of health threats but also of threats 
to our democracies, individual rights and economic sustainability. COVID-19 has 
shown, once more, that the most socio-economically deprived are most vulnerable 
to disease and illness. 

We must live through this pandemic, and after it. We must face this situation with strength, 
care and solidarity – a social vaccine that accompanies our search for a COVID-19 vaccine, 
which  has  an  enduring  character.  One  that  provides  resilience,  lasting  social  and  economic 
solidarity and lasting immunity against indifference. 

___ 

This Statement was initiated on 26 March 2020 and issued on 2 April 2020. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
