Executive Summary of the Opinion 

Ethics  
of Genome  
Editing 

#EthicsGroup_EU 

European Group  
on Ethics in Science and  
New Technologies 

Read the full Opinion – Ethics of Genome Editing 

KEY INSIGHTS: A GLIMPSE INTO THE OPINION 

The  advent  of  new  genome  editing  technologies  such  as  CRISPR/CasX  has  opened  new 
dimensions  of  what  and  how  genetic  interventions  into  our  world  are  possible.  The 
European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New  Technologies  (EGE)  addresses  the 
profound  ethical  questions  raised  and  revived  by  them  in  its  Opinion  on  Ethics  of 
Genome  Editing.  The  Opinion  analyses  various  domains  of  application,  from  human 
health  to  animal  experimentation,  from  livestock  breeding  to  crop  variety  and  to  gene 
drives.  

With  its  wide  view  across  areas,  it  identifies  underlying  and  overarching  issues  that 
deserve  our  concerted  attention,  among  them,  the  different  meanings  that  ought  to  be 
attributed to humanness, naturalness or diversity. This enables conclusions that provide 
panoramic  perspectives  complementing  narrower,  area-specific  analyses.  In  the  same 
vein,  the  Opinion  is  concerned  with  the  global  dimension  of  genome  editing  and  its 
regulation and formulates recommendations with a particular focus  on the international 
level. Its main overarching considerations are the following:  

  How  the  human  ability  to  edit  the  genome  should  be  regulated  is  closely  linked  to 
questions about the status of humanity in ‘nature’. Are we its masters with a right to 
transform  it,  or  are  we  one  of  many  parts  of  it  that  all  thrive  in  relation  to  each 
other? Does our growing knowledge about it postulate that we care for it and protect 
it  where  we  can?  Awareness  of  one-sided  positions,  such  as  anthropocentrism  and 
speciesism, can help us to engage in the debate about genome  editing on the basis 
of the values of diversity, respect and responsibility. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  The application of genome editing in human and non-human animals raises questions 
about  what  defines  us  as  humans  and  what  distinguishes  species  from  each  other. 
Our  genome  is  often  taken  as  foundational  of  our  humanness,  providing  us  with 
distinct  capacities.  Should  we,  or  should  we  rather  not,  experiment  with  the 
delineations  defining  and  distinguishing  species?  What  risks  and  responsibilities 
would  this  entail?  On  the  other  hand,  genetic  exceptionalism  and  determinism  (the 
idea  that  the  genome  plays  the  central  role  in  shaping  who  we  are  and  determines 
our behaviour)  can prevent us from taking a  more holistic perspective  on the many 
factors  defining  us  and  our  lives,  as  well  as  other  species  and  theirs.  Awareness  of 
this can help us to put genome editing and discourses about it into perspective. 

  Diversity,  human  diversity  and  overall  biodiversity,  can  be  impacted  by  genome 
editing in different ways. The technology may both offer possibilities to preserve and 
diversify  biospheres,  and  come  with  risks  of  reducing  genetic  pools  and,  hence, 
diversity – both in biological terms and in terms  of  what kind of diversity is socially 
appreciated. This requires us to reflect about the responsibilities of humans towards 
other  species  and  the  planet,  most  importantly  as  regards  anthropogenic  climate 
change;  as  well  as  towards  other  humans,  as  regards  determining  what  kinds  of 
persons a society might want to have and what specific variations are, or are not, a 
problem in need of a genetic, technological ‘solution’. When thinking about diversity 
and genome  editing, we therefore also need to think about freedom, autonomy and 
risks of oppression and marginalisation. 

  The focus on the broader picture of the Opinion also raises awareness of the risk that 
genome editing could be hailed as a technological solution for issues of social nature. 
An approach that does not consider the ethics and governance of genome editing in a 
technology-specific  way  enables  us  to  pinpoint  the  broader  societal  questions  in  the 
realm  of  which  technologies,  or  socio-technical  systems,  can  have  an  impact.  What 
world do we want to live in and what role can technologies play in making it reality? 

  Debates about genome editing often focus on the question about the  conditions that 
would  render  it  ‘safe  enough’  for  application.  The  Opinion  draws  attention  to  the 
importance of nuancing and resisting this framing, as it purports that it is enough for 
a given overall level of safety to be reached in order for a technology to be rolled out 
unhindered, and it limits reflections on ethics and governance to considerations about 
safety.  Much  to  the  contrary,  ethics  should  serve  to  tackle  broad  governance 
questions about how technologies can serve our common goals and values, and not 
be limited to providing a ‘last step’ of ‘ethics-clearing’ of a technology. Safety, if to be 
a safe concept, must be framed in its broadest sense, including psychological, social 
and environmental dimensions, as well as questions about who gets to decide what is 
safe enough, and by which processes. 

  With  the  increasing  adoption  of  genome  editing,  claims  were  made  that  scientists 
were not only able to ‘read’ the ‘Book of Life’,  but also to ‘write’ it and ‘edit’ it. Any 
words that are chosen to describe a new technology have an impact on the discourse 
about it. They shape how we perceive it and engage in debates about it, they frame 
what  questions  scholars  ask  about  it  and  investigate,  they  influence  how  policy 
makers respond to it. Awareness of this can help us to find terms that appropriately 
capture  and  transmit  the  complexity  of  new  genome  editing  applications  and  of  the 
ethical questions they raise. 

2 

 
The  Opinion  begins  with  an  overarching  chapter  assessing  the  preceding  points  and 
continues  with  detailed  ethical  analyses  of  pertaining  questions  in  the  main  areas  of 
application  of  genome  editing.  Some  of  the  key  reflections  of  those  chapters  are  the 
following: 

Genome editing in humans 

If  the  genome  of  one  human  being  can  be  submitted  to  deliberate,  targeted  editing  by 
another human being, what implications does this have for the relationship between the 
two persons? Would this undermine the fundamental equality of all human beings, or is 
it  necessary  to  assume  the  responsibility  of  such  an  intervention  when  it  can  help  to 
prevent  a  serious  disease?  In  this  context,  we  often  distinguish  between  therapy, 
prevention and enhancement, as different purposes that genome editing can serve, with 
the  use  of  genome  editing  for  purposes  of  therapy  or  prevention  of  disease  being  by 
many considered far more acceptable than the use for enhancement purposes. 

While somatic genome editing therapies have been developed for decades, there appears 
to  be  general  agreement  that  germline  genome  editing,  hence  introducing  heritable 
changes, is not to be applied at this point. In many fora have its potentially severe risks 
–  for  the  individuals  concerned  and  for  society  overall  –  been  discussed.  Together  with 
the difficulty to conduct long-term studies and the availability of alternative methods for 
avoiding  heritable  disorders,  they  require  us  to  ask:  Are  research  on  embryos  and  the 
risk of harm caused by the technology ethically acceptable and proportionate for the few 
cases for which there is no alternative solution? Questions like these  require broad and 
well-informed  societal  deliberation  on  the  basis  of  an  awareness  about  how  heritable 
genome editing may result in major changes of a society overall, its composition and its 
values. 

Genome editing in animals 

Animals can be considered by humans as having an intrinsic value in their own right, or 
they can be considered in their instrumental value for humans. Against this background, 
genome  editing  revives  old  questions  about  inter-species  relationships  and  relational 
values. In what is the intrinsic value of non-human animals different from that of human 
animals?  How  do  we  define  respect  for  non-human  animals  and  what  rights  do  we 
attribute to them?  

In human health research, genome editing might on the one hand offer opportunities to 
replace animal experimentation with alternative laboratory methods; on the other hand, 
the  mere  ease  of  creating  genome  edited  animals  with  the  precise  genetic  traits  useful 
for a given research purpose could also lead to an increase in their use. Genome editing 
in research animals moreover raises questions about animal welfare, for example if traits 
leading to disease are introduced; about de-animalisation, if traits that are natural for a 
species are knocked out; about humanisation, if non-human primates (or other animals) 
are  genetically  changed  in  a  way  so  that  they  resemble  humans  more  than  they  would 
naturally  do;  and  about  justice  if  the  technology  would  serve  exclusive  scientific  and 
commercial health services, for example in the context of xenotransplantation. 

3 

 
 
 
In  farm  animals,  genome  editing  applications  largely  serve  the  same  goals  as  selective 
breeding  practices,  namely,  to  increase  yields,  strengthen  disease  resistance  and 
improve  product  quality.  Ethical  considerations  in  this  context  relate  to  animal  welfare, 
biodiversity,  sustainability  and  the  necessity  of  an  unbiased  public  dialogue.  Genome 
editing  has  the  potential  to  facilitate  or  exacerbate  commercial  practices  in  livestock 
breeding that are already highly contested. 

Genome editing in plants 

Current  forms  of  agriculture  contribute  significantly  to  the  anthropogenic  climate  crisis. 
There is a need to ensure food security, provide renewable resources for fuel, feed and 
fibre,  safeguard  the  retention  of  biodiversity  and  protect  the  environment.  Genome 
editing  technologies  could,  with  appropriate  and  proportionate  control,  enhance  our 
ability to achieve these goals, just as they could result in the opposite without it. 

Social and justice considerations play a role in this too. The economic impact of choosing 
to  use  or  not  use  plants  produced  with  new  genome  editing  technologies  may  be 
significant  and  public  authorities  should  ensure  that  society  overall  benefits.  This 
includes  that  small  farmers  and  holistic  approaches  to  production  are  supported;  that 
new  varieties  will  not  result 
increased 
unemployment and precariousness in agriculture; that the ability of small companies and 
research  organisations  to  produce  new  varieties  is  strengthened  and  monopolisation  of 
the production of seed restrained and prevented. 

industrialisation 

leading  to 

in  greater 

In  Europe,  genetically  modified  food  is  contested  in  large  parts  of  society.  This  can  be 
attributed, in parts, to mistakes made in the past in not involving the public in choosing 
what  was  introduced  onto  the  market,  as  well  as  a  lack  of  safeguards  preventing  false 
information or hype provided by all sides in the debate. 

Gene drives 

Gene drives are a specific use of genome editing that has drawn particular attention as it 
offers  the  possibility  to  guide  ‘biased’  inheritance  of  certain  genes  into  entire  animal  or 
insect populations, for example pests or mosquitos, usually with the aim to make them 
harmless  or  more  vulnerable.  This  raises  a  number  of  ethical  concerns  that  have  been 
discussed  in  various  fora.  Among  them  are  also  important  concerns  about  global  and 
epistemic  justice,  as  well  as  anthropocentrism:  If  one  day  applied,  how  can  we  ensure 
that those populations that need it the most have access to the technology? How can we 
ensure  that  we  solve  those  scientific  questions  that  address  the  alleviation  of  the 
greatest  suffering?  Given  the  increasing  recognition  that  animals  and  plants  and  our 
ecosystem  as  a  whole  should  not  only  be  protected  for  the  sake  of  human  health  and 
wellbeing, but also in their own right, how can we ensure that the interests of all species 
are considered in regulation and governance decisions?  

There  is  a  clear  need  for  collective,  inclusive,  democratically  legitimate  ways  to  decide 
what  new  genome  editing  techniques  should  be  used  for  in  each  area,  as  well  as  how 
such responsible use should be safely regulated. 

4 

 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS  

(Read a more extensive version of each recommendation in the Opinion.) 

On  the  basis  of  the  manifold  aspects  and  potential  implications  of  genome  editing  in 
humans, animals and plants, including a particular attention to gene drives, outlined and 
ethically analysed in the chapters of the Opinion, and noting that the recommendations 
should  not  be  seen  as  an  endorsement  of  specific  technologies,  applications,  or 
application areas, the EGE recommends to: 

On overarching matters and concerns 

  Foster  broad  and  inclusive  societal  deliberation  on  genome  editing  in  all  fields  of 

application and with a global scope;  

  Avoid  narrow  conceptualisations  to  frame  debates  about  the  ethics  and  governance 

of genome editing; 

  Develop  international  guidelines  and  strengthen  national,  regional  and  global 

governance tools; 

On genome editing in humans  

  Engage in global governance initiatives and create a platform for information sharing 

and inclusive debate on germline genome editing; 

  Establish a public registry for research on germline genome editing; 

  Protect social justice, diversity and equality; 

  Ensure adequate competencies in expert bodies; 

On genome editing in animals 

  Strengthen  oversight  of  genome  editing  in  animals  for  scientific  experiments 

according to, and beyond, the 3Rs; 

  Apply strict standards to experimentation with non-human primates and invest in the 

development of alternatives; 

  Broadly discuss the humanisation of animals and implement appropriate limitations; 

  Regulate  the  banking  and  farming  on  animals  carrying  human  organs  for 

transplantation; 

  Prevent unregulated use of genome editing tools; 

  Strengthen  ethical  oversight  of  practices  involving  reductions  of  animals’  natural 

abilities; 

  Ensure the wellbeing of genome edited livestock animals; 

  Reconsider ethically contested industrial farming practices; 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
On genome editing in plants  

  Carefully assess the potentials and risks of genome edited plants for agriculture; 

  Develop  an  (eco)systems  approach  for  evaluating  the  costs  and  benefits  of  genome 

edited crops; 

  Develop mechanisms to ensure corporate responsibility; 

 

Investigate mechanisms for traceability and labelling of genome edited crops; 

  Develop measures to support small actors; 

  Devote more attention to public debates about genome edited agricultural products;  

On gene drives 

  Acknowledge epistemic and other uncertainties; 

  Use gene drives in ways that are based on shared values; 

  Regulate, monitor after release and have mitigation plans in place; 

  Retain stock of original organisms. 

_____ 

6 

 
 
 
The  EGE  is  an  independent,  multi-disciplinary  body  appointed  by  the  President  of  the 
European Commission, which advises on all aspects of Commission policies and legislation 
where ethical, societal and fundamental rights dimensions intersect with the development of 
science and new technologies.  

E-mail: EC-ETHICS-GROUP@ec.europa.eu  

Website: www.ec.europa.eu/research/ege  

Twitter: #EthicsGroup_EU  

© European Union, 2021  
Reuse  of  this  document  is  allowed,  provided  appropriate  credit  is  given  and  any  changes  are  indicated 
(Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license). For any use or reproduction of elements that are 
not owned by the EU, permission may need to be sought directly from the respective right holders.  

All  images  ©  European  Union,  unless  otherwise  stated.  ©  Sergey  Nivens,  #109431940;  ©  mas0380, 
#262515783; © Fotomay, #269866045; 2021. Source: stock.adobe.com 
ISBN 978-92-76-32320-4, doi: 10.2777/949299, KI-02-21-498-EN-N 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
