#EthicsGroup_EU

Values  
in times  
of crisis: 
Strategic crisis 
management  
in the EU

European Group  
on Ethics in Science and
New Technologies

Research and 
Innovation 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU

European Commission
Directorate-General for Research and Innovation
Unit 03 

Contact 
Email 

Jim DRATWA
 EC-ETHICS-GROUP@ec.europa.eu  
 RTD-PUBLICATIONS@ec.europa.eu

European Commission
B-1049 Brussels

Manuscript completed in October 2022.

The European Commission is not liable for any consequence stemming from the reuse of this publication. The contents of this Statement are 
the sole responsibility of the European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (EGE). The views expressed in this document reflect the 
collective view of the EGE and may not in any circumstances be regarded as stating an official position of the European Commission.

This is an EGE Statement, written and adopted by the members of the EGE: Nikola Biller-Andorno, Maria do Céu Patrão Neves (Vice-Chair), Migle 
Laukyte, Paweł Łuków, Pierre Mallia, Fruzsina Molnár-Gábor, Thérèse Murphy, Herman Nys, Laura Palazzani, Barbara Prainsack (Chair), Nils-Eric 
Sahlin (Vice-Chair), Tamar Sharon, Jeroen van den Hoven, Renata Veselská, Takis Vidalis. 

PDF

ISBN 978-92-76-55607-7

doi:10.2777/79910

KI-07-22-806-EN-N

Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2022 

©  European Union, 2022

The reuse policy of European Commission documents is implemented by Commission Decision 2011/833/EU of 12 December 2011 on the reuse 
of Commission documents (OJ L 330, 14.12.2011, p. 39). Unless otherwise noted, the reuse of this document is authorised under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). This means that reuse is allowed provided 
appropriate credit is given and any changes are indicated.

For any use or reproduction of elements that are not owned by the European Union, permission may need to be sought directly from the respective 
rightholders. The European Union does not own the copyright in relation to the following elements:
Image credits: Cover page: ©Mihail, #356496615, 2022. Source: stock.adobe.com

EUROPEAN COMMISSION

European Group on Ethics  
in Science and New Technologies

Values in times  
of crisis:
Strategic crisis  
management in the EU

Brussels, October 2022

2022

Directorate-General for Research and Innovation

Table of contents 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................ 3 

INTRODUCTION......................................................................................................... 4 

1. POLICYMAKING IN TIMES OF CRISIS........................................................................ 6 

2. THE PUBLIC INTEREST ........................................................................................... 9 

3. FROM ATOMISTIC RIGHTS TO WELL-BEING FOR ALL: THE VALUE OF SOLIDARITY ......... 12 

4. POVERTY AND SOCIAL INEQUALITIES ...................................................................... 16 

5. SOLIDARITY IN LAW AND POLICY IN THE EU AND BEYOND ......................................... 19 

6. PRIORITISATION OF HEALTHCARE RESOURCES: ETHICAL REQUIREMENTS ................... 22 

7. DATA, COMMUNICATION, AND PUBLIC TRUST ........................................................... 24 

RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 28 

REFERENCES ............................................................................................................ 31 

 
 
 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 3 

 
 
 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

Introduction 

In  a  crisis,  the  fundamental  values  or,  in  other  words,  the  functioning  of  a 
society  is  under  threat  (SAPEA,  2022,  p. 38).  A  difficulty  in  strategic  crisis 
management  is  that  responses  to  the  situation  need  to  be  developed  quickly, 
yet  under  circumstances  of  uncertainty.  Time  pressure  and  social  pressure  in 
decision-making often go hand in hand with a lack of a solid evidence base and 
experience  that  can  be  drawn  on.  Another  key  difficulty  is  that  crisis 
management  measures  need  to  be  implemented  at  the  same  time  as  current 
affairs continue to be managed. 

In  this  statement,  the  European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New 
Technologies  (EGE)  addresses  how  ethical  values  can  contribute  to  strategic 
crisis  management.  Values  play  an  important  role  in  how  we  understand  and 
make sense of crises. They influence how we frame the problems that strategic 
crisis management is supposed to address and how we choose the instruments 
to  do  so.  Very  often,  however,  values  remain  implicit  and  invisible. 
Foregrounding the values that are inherent in, and should guide, strategic crisis 
management is an important task to which this statement seeks to contribute. 

Values play an important role in how 
we  understand  and  make  sense  of 
crises.  They  influence  how  we  frame 
the  problems  that  strategic  crisis 
management  is  supposed  to  address 
and  how  we  choose  the  instruments 
to do so. 

Of  particular  relevance  in  the  context  of  crises  is 
solidarity  (see  also  EGE,  2020),  which  is  a  value 
that is frequently appealed to in crises, but often 
in a merely symbolic or tokenistic manner. When 
solidarity  is  mobilised  by  politicians  merely  to 
demand  of  people 
they  comply  with 
that 
measures,  support  each  other  or  are  resilient  in 
the  face  of  hardship,  then  it  can  do  more  harm 
than  good –  especially  when  governments 
themselves  are  seen  to  act  in  ways  that  are  detrimental  to  solidarity.  When 
solidarity  is  used  as  an  analytic  lens  on  whom  we  prioritise  and  whom  we 
exclude, however, or on the ways in which we establish the boundaries between 
‘us’  and  ‘the  other’,  it  can  help  to  make  better,  more  ethical  and  (socially  and 
politically) more sustainable decisions. Similarly, as a value, solidarity can be a 
guiding  principle  for  overcoming  crises  and  strengthening  societal  resilience. 
This  is  because  it  bridges  individual  and  collective  needs  and  interests  in  the 
deep  awareness  of  human  interdependence  across  borders,  social  groups,  and 
other boundaries. 

Given  that  many  people  and  groups  are  negatively  affected  by  crises,  while 
others benefit from them, a key challenge within strategic crisis management is 
to  assess  how  societies  should  equitably  distribute  the  burdens  and  benefits 
arising  in  a  crisis.  How  can  democratic  societies  protect  the  economically, 
socially,  or  medically  most  vulnerable ( 1)?  How  do  we,  as  people  in  Europe, 

(1)  Vulnerability  can  refer  to  specific  vulnerabilities –  such  as  having  diminished  autonomy 
due  to  illness or  injury, or other  conditions, or belonging  to  a  marginalised or otherwise 
disadvantaged  group –  or  to  the  common  human  vulnerability  towards  war,  disease, 
oppression,  etc.  (e.g.  Ten  Have,  2006).  The  principle  of  vulnerability  expresses  two 
obligations:  the  first  is  a  positive  one  (a  claim),  an  obligation  to  provide  assistance,  to 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 4 

 
 
                                                
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

decide  whose  needs  to  prioritise  when  resources  are  scarce  and  how  financial 
and other support is provided to those in need? These are just a few questions 
that previous crises have raised  and that need to be considered in the present 
for the future. 

In  this  statement  we  frequently  draw  upon  one  of  the  ongoing  crises,  namely 
the  COVID-19  pandemic,  to  highlight  lessons  to  be  learned  and  illustrate  the 
role that solidarity and other values play – and should play – in strategic  crisis 
management.  Where  some  of  our  examples  focus  on  public  health  and 
healthcare, our broader arguments pertain to all crises. 

Our  argument  proceeds  by  means  of  the  following  steps.  In  Section 1,  we  lay 
out the key challenges of policymaking in crisis situations. We draw attention to 
the  performative  effects  of  framing,  and  of  language  more  broadly:  how  we 
describe  a  problem  influences  how  we  think  about  solving  it,  and  what  ethical 
strategies and policy instruments we choose for this purpose. Calling something 
a  crisis,  rather  than  an  emergency  or  a  disaster,  opens  different  policymaking 
toolboxes.  In  Section 2,  we  turn  to  a  notion  that  is  frequently  mobilised  in 
strategic  crisis  management,  namely  public  interest.  Contrary  to  much  of  the 
political  discourse  at  present,  we  note  that  individual  rights  and  the  public 
interest (understood as a legal enshrinement of common goods) are not binary 
opposites.  They  are  complementary  and  often  cannot  be  realised  without  each 
other.  In  Section 3,  we  argue  that  the  notion  of  solidarity,  because  it  reflects 
the  close  connection  between  individual  interests  and  the  common  good,  is 
particularly  helpful  for  strategic  crisis  management.  Solidarity  acknowledges 
that  the  interests  and  identities  of  human  beings  are  shaped  by  their 
relationships  to  others.  It  draws  our  attention  to  concrete  questions  of  how  all 
groups  in  society  can  be  adequately  supported  and  how  such  attention  to  the 
needs of everyone can help to strengthen societal resilience in crisis situations, 
which  is  the  focus  of  Section 4.  Section 5  sketches  the  role  of  solidarity  in  EU 
and  international  law.  Section 6  uses  the  example  of  healthcare  and  public 
health  to  outline  the  role  of  values  in  the  prioritisation  of  scarce  resources  in 
crisis  contexts.  Section 7  then  underscores  the  importance  of  data,  good 
communication and public trust in strategic  crisis  management. We end with a 
set of recommendations directed at policymakers at all levels, and at a range of 
stakeholders. 

positively  act  (action),  i.e.  the  obligation  to  provide  special  protection;  the  second  is  a 
negative  one  (a  prohibition),  an  obligation  to  refrain  from  any  kind  of  interference 
(omission),  i.e.  the  obligation  to  show  respect,  to  acknowledge  or  to  take  into 
consideration  human  vulnerability  within  human  relationships.  The  most  vulnerable 
people  are  those  who  are  most  susceptible  to  being  negatively  affected  by  a  specific 
situation. 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 5 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                             
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

1. Policymaking in times of crisis 

A  crisis  is  always  disruptive.  The  fact  that  it  breaks  with  the  routines  of 
everyday life is part of what makes a crisis so threatening. Crises can be local, 
regional, or global. They can be triggered by an environmental emergency (e.g. 
floods, droughts, fires), a pandemic, an economic situation or a war, and can be 
compounded by other developments, such as climate change. At the same time, 
crises  can  also  be  opportunities  for  positive  transformation.  They  can  be 
catalysts  for  a  new  reality  that  benefits  from  the  knowledge  of  the  past,  and 
from successful solutions in the present, strengthening societies for the future. 
Ideally, all crises should convert difficulties into opportunities for improvement. 
Values could  and  should  play an  important role  in this  dynamic, with solidarity 
being the bond that helps us move in the same direction. 

As  the  United  Nations  Sustainable  Development  Goals  (SDGs)  and  the  work  in 
complexity  science  on  social  systems  has  made  clear,  many  issues  relating  to, 
for example, energy, food, water, health, education, security or the rule of law 
are  interconnected  and  cannot  be  dealt  with  in  isolation.  The  long  series  of 
crises  that  we  have  experienced  since  2008 –  including  economic,  health-
related,  social,  and  environmental  crises –  have  all  added  to  our  awareness  of 
the  connections  between  different  domains  of  practice  and  policymaking,  and 
also our interdependencies as humans and with other species and forms of life. 
Current  crises  are  ‘transboundary’  (Boin,  2019),  in  the  sense  that  they  cut 
across  geographical  borders,  fields  of  practice  and  policy,  and  fields  of 
expertise.  They  demand  assessment  and  responses,  not  in  isolation  but  with 
due regard to the different spatial and temporal scales of (often nested) crises – 
and of the cascading impacts, different 
and 
expressions 
of 
intractability,  and  often  also 
the 
unintended consequences of the policy 
responses  themselves.  One  of  the 
main 
responding 
adequately  to  a  crisis  is  to  be  mindful 
of  the  many  ways  in  which  issues, 
domains,  problems,  and  solutions  are 
related,  and  of  the  fact  that  the  fates 
of  groups  and  individuals  are  often 
intimately connected to each other.  

A  crisis  often  favours  utilitarian  policy  responses 
that  count  lives  or  aggregate  units  of  well-being, 
while  larger  values  such  as  equity,  dignity  and 
respect  for  people  temporarily  recede  into  the 
background.  Strategic  crisis  management  should 
resist these forms of reduction or tapering. In this 
respect,  making  explicit  the  values  that  give  rise 
to  particular  framings  and  solutions  can  also 
improve  the  transparency  and  quality  of  decision-
making. 

uncertainty 

challenges 

of 

What is required is a systems perspective that considers the well-being not only 
of those immediately  and obviously  affected, but also of those whose  lives will 
be affected further downstream, in distant places or in a distant future. In this 
context, a ‘crisis framing’ can be helpful – but it can also invite the opposite. A 
crisis is not merely ‘raw reality out there’. How we represent it and intervene in 
it  always  results  from  a  choice  of  what  is  foregrounded,  what  is  connected, 
what  is  part  of  the  picture –  and  what  is  left  out.  For  example,  if  flooding  is 
framed  as  a  weather-induced  crisis,  this  renders  invisible  the  larger  process  of 
climate change that has made such extreme weather events more likely, along 
with the economic, political, and social practices that have contributed to it.  

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 6 

 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

A  crisis  often  favours  utilitarian  policy  responses  that  count  lives  or  aggregate 
units  of  well-being,  while  larger  values  such  as  equity,  dignity  and  respect  for 
people  temporarily  recede  into  the  background.  Strategic  crisis  management 
should  resist  these  forms  of  reduction  or  tapering.  In  this  respect,  making 
explicit  the  values  that  give  rise  to  particular  framings  and  solutions  can  also 
improve the transparency and quality of decision-making (see also EGE, 2021). 
It  is  here  that  matters  of  trust  and  legitimacy,  of  public  participation  and 
communication,  of  co-construction  and  coordination  come  in.  The  best  answer 
will  not  always  come  from  the  highest  international  level:  with  due  regard  to 
subsidiarity,  different  levels  (from  the  local  to  the  international)  can  all 
contribute.  Here,  cooperation  and  coordination  are  of  key  importance.  This  is 
where  a  reinforced  European  governance  for  strategic  crisis  management  can 
bring the most added value (see also GCSA et al., 2020a).  

Individual rights and common goods: not a trade-off 

A  common  characteristic  of  all  crises  is  the  unequal  effects  they  produce  on 
various population groups. Some groups suffer more than others either because 
of  their  economic  status  or  for  other  reasons  that  shape  vulnerabilities,  which 
can be specific to specific crises. In times of crisis especially, care for others is a 
requirement for the functioning of a society. Individual rights and freedoms, on 
the  one  hand,  and  care  for  others  (expressed  in  moral  and  sometimes  legal 
duties), on the other, are not zero-sum games, where one needs to give for the 
other  one  to  gain.  Often,  the  protection  of  individual  rights  and  freedoms 
requires the protection of common goods, and vice versa (2). In a society where 
people  need  to  worry  about  getting  killed  in  the  street,  they  may  formally  be 
able  to  exercise  their  full  set  of  individual  rights,  yet  in  reality  they  cannot 
meaningfully exercise them. Similarly, when inadequate protections are in place 
to  prevent  the  spread  of  viruses  in  public  places  during  a  public  health 
emergency, people who  are afraid of  leaving their homes due to high  infection 
risks  cannot  exercise  their  individual  rights.  In  the  domain  of  health,  Mallia 
(2015)  argued  that  the  ‘health-of-the-public’  (HoP)  approach  is  a  good 
complement  to  the  concept  of  public  health,  with  the  latter  focusing  on  the 
health  of  people  as  a  collective  and  the  HoP  approach  directing  our  gaze 
towards  the  health  of  all  individual  people  in  our  societies.  The  HoP  approach 
thus draws attention to the importance of primary care, along with services that 
support individual people and families. Strengthening the health of the public in 
this  way  will  support  public  health  and  solidarity  in  crisis  situations,  and  vice 
versa. 

In  these  examples,  social  peace  and  public  health,  respectively,  are  common 
goods that enable the enjoyment of individual rights and freedoms and increase 

(2)  We  use  the  term  ‘common  goods’  as  a generic  term  to  refer  to  those  goods or  facilities 
that  serve  the  basic  needs of  all  members  of  a community  or  provide  benefits  to  all.  In 
Hussain’s (2018) words, “[t]he facilities that make up the common good serve a special 
class of interests that all citizens have in common, i.e., the interests that are the object of 
the civic relationship.” 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 7 

 
 
 
                                                
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

individual  well-being.  In  other  words,  to  respect  individual  rights  in  times  of 
crisis  we  need  to  be  aware  of  the  complementarity  of  individual  rights  and 
common goods ( 3). This  makes it imperative to fulfil our duties towards others 
and  towards  society  as  a  whole.  Strategic  crisis  management  should  be  an 
opportunity  to  complement  the  dominant  logic  of  rights  with  a  corresponding 
logic  of  duties.  In  crisis  circumstances,  an  ‘atomistic’  exercise  of  individual 
rights  may  not  only  deprive  others  of  their  rights,  but  also  eventually  limit 
every individual’s ability to exercise them. 

Balancing  competing  rights  and  interests  and  translating  the  outcome  of  this 
balancing  into  practices,  policies  and  technical  measures  is  a  complicated 
normative task at the best of times. It becomes even more complex under crisis 
conditions.  Traditionally,  when  balancing  individual  interests  in  the  protection 
and promotion of rights, their relative relationship to the rights and freedoms of 
others  is  analysed  in  the  context  of  the  broad  societal  interest  in  promoting 
values  and  achieving  a  high  standard  of  participation  and  welfare.  Crisis 
situations, however, are characterised by the fact that the relevant interests at 
stake  are  multiple  and  fragmented,  meaning  that  their  reconciliation  often 
cannot be achieved solely through opposing and balancing legal positions based 
on a condensation of singular dependencies. Moreover, in crises, public interest 
is  often  appealed  to  when  public  bodies  justify  limitations  of  individual  rights 
and  freedoms,  suggesting  that  public  interest  is  of  a  higher  order  than 
individual  rights  and  freedoms  as  such.  The  latter  view,  however,  is  mistaken. 
Instead of public interest or individual rights taking priority over the other, each 
one  requires  the  other.  The  notion  of  solidarity,  as  we  argue,  is  a  useful 
concept,  especially  for  strategic  crisis  management,  because  it  acknowledges 
and  accommodates  this 
interdependence  of  the 
individual  and  the  collective  level.  While,  as  we  will 
argue,  there  are  situations  in  which  individual  rights 
and  interests  can  be  in  opposition  to  public  interest 
and  the  broader  common  good,  they  are  not  in 
opposition  to  each  other  in  principle.  Recognising  this 
fact  moves  some  of  the  goalposts  of  strategic  crisis 
management:  rather  than  asking  how  we  should  ideally  ‘balance’  individual 
rights  and  the  public  interest,  it  makes  us  ask  how  we  can  make  sure  that 
everyone’s basic needs are met also in a crisis, and how everyone receives the 
best  support  possible.  Before  we  fully  unpack  this  argument,  we  will  take  a 
closer look at the role of the public interest.  

Instead  of  public  interest  or 
individual rights taking priority 
over 
the  other,  each  one 
requires the other. 

(3)  This intertwinement of individual and common interest is rooted in the foundational works 
of social contract theory, as exemplified by Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s call to “[f]ind a form 
of association that defends and protects the person and goods of each associate with all 
the common force” (Rousseau, 1949). 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 8 

 
 
 
 
                                                
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

2. The public interest 

The  interest  of  a  group  of  people  is  more  than  just  the  sum  of  the  individual 
interests or their common denominator; it elevates the interests to be assigned 
to  a  group.  These  interests  can  then  be  enshrined  in  law  and  become  legal 
goods  in  which  the  respective  society  is  deemed  to  have  an  interest  strong 
enough to be manifested through law. In this sense, the formulation of a public 
interest  aims  at  the  accomplishment  and  the  protection  of  common  goods  (4) 
and the underlying common values. 

The public interest also guides the balancing of competing rights and interests. 
In  that  sense,  it  is  used  to  legitimise  and  justify  relevant  decisions.  The  public 
interest  can  also  be  expressed  through  the  law  itself.  For  example,  human 
rights – including the right to the highest attainable standard of health and the 
right to share and receive information, including via a free press – can be seen 
as expressions of public interest. This is the case because a strong and effective 
healthcare  system  and  structures  that  facilitate  free  and  open  information 
sharing  and  deliberation  benefit  both  individuals  and  society  as  a  whole. 
Relatedly,  human  rights  spell  out  the  circumstances  in  which  it  may  be 
legitimate  for  their  scope  to  be  restricted  (i.e.  in  the  public  interest). 
Occasionally,  the  exercise  of  certain  rights,  such  as  the  right  to  movement  or 
the  right  to  private  life,  may  be  restricted  in  proportionate  and  lawful  ways  to 
protect  the  rights  and  freedoms  of  others,  to  ensure  public  health  or  national 
security. 

Free,  democratic  states  governed  by  the  rule  of  law  are  characterised  by  a 
multiplicity of common concerns that must be weighed against each other. In a 
crisis,  conflicts  between  different  common  concerns  and  between  individual 
interests  and  the  public  interest  regularly  intensify.  The  instruments  and 
methods for balancing them are often unclear, and the pursuit of an appropriate 
balance can become a time-consuming endeavour that hinders a quick response 
or  any  response  at  all.  Often  the  emphasis  is  on  ‘acting  first  and  assessing 
later’,  with  an  assumption  that  courts  and  tribunals  of  inquiry  will  adjudicate 
and rectify harms after the fact. 

Prioritisation  among  different  aspects  of  public  interest  presupposes  an 
integrated  approach  to  all  of  them  and  is  subject  to  specific  justification  by 
government authorities following transparent criteria. Citizens have the right to 
know  why,  in  urgent  situations,  some  aspects  of  the  overall  public  interest  (in 
the  economy,  public  health,  education,  public  security,  environment,  etc.)  are 
not  prioritised,  and  governments  are  accountable  for  providing  relevant 
reasons.  Precautionary  measures  to  prevent  crises,  and  post-crisis  resolution 
measures,  also  involve  a  challenging  balance  of  different  aspects  of  the  public 

(4) The ‘common good’ refers to the facilities – whether material, cultural or institutional – that 
the  members  of  a  community  provide  to  all  members  in  order  to  fulfil  a  relational 
obligation  they  all  have  to  care for  certain  interests  that  they  have  in  common. It  hence 
includes a range of facilities, from the road system to human rights to clean air and water. 
(https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/common-good/) 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 9 

 
 
                                                
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

in 

Involving  new 

interest,  for  example  in  the  context  of  risk-friendly  innovation  and  technology 
development. 
crisis-preventive  policies 
technology 
presupposes that we are aware not only of predictable risks for common goods 
(such  as  the  environment  or  privacy)  but  even  of  risk  uncertainty,  in  terms  of 
the extent of potential risks and their possibility of occurring. Both the likelihood 
and  the  extent  of  possible  harm  determine  the  intensity  of  the  potential 
interference  with  the  rights  and  freedoms  of  those  affected.  The  risk  of 
interference with rights must be included in the assessment of proportionality of 
the  measure  causing  that  risk.  Under  this  view,  the  precautionary  principle  (a 
notion developed in the context of international environmental law, referring to 
the  duty  to  refrain  from  acting  whenever  the  potential –  serious  and 
irreversible – consequences are not yet known; see also Schröder, 2014) needs 
to  be  taken  seriously  by  governmental  authorities 
in  decision-making 
procedures. When associated with risk uncertainty, innovative technologies may 
be  implemented  on  the  necessary  condition  that  reasonable  measures  for 
preventing  potential  risks  are  in  place.  In  this  approach,  the  precautionary 
principle  (to  the  extent  that  it  is  applicable  in  a  crisis  when  urgent  action  is 
needed)  and  the  risk-based  approach  must  go  hand  in  hand;  they  influence, 
condition, and complement each other. 

It  is  necessary  to  add  to  these  considerations  that  we  understand  humans  as 
relational  beings,  whose  interests  are  shaped  by  their  relationships  to  others. 
An approach guided by this understanding and by the principle of solidarity (see 
Sections  1  and  3)  can  help  to  overcome  false  dichotomies  between  the 
individual interest and the collective and the public interest. 

A  further  challenge  is  that,  in  a  crisis,  the  interpretation  of  the  public  interest 
can  be  thwarted  by  actors  without  any  democratic  legitimation,  but  that  are, 
nevertheless,  very  powerful.  We  must  bear  in  mind  that,  in  a  democratic 
society,  the  content  of  the  public  interest  is  necessarily  a  subject  of  public 
debate and deliberation. Even if there are general interests that are very widely 
(or even universally) accepted, there is always room for diverging opinions and 
interpretations  when  we  attempt  to  determine  their  specific  meaning  and 
implications  for  action  in  concrete  situations,  particularly  in  times  of  crisis. 
Nowadays,  with  the  development  of  new,  often  online-based  technological 
applications  (social  media,  etc.),  this  public  debate  could  ideally  be  facilitated. 
Instead,  however,  they  are  often  abused,  and  regularly  hinder  public 
deliberations rather than promoting them. 

At  the  same  time,  there  is  no  guarantee  or  evidence  that  these  networks 
provide valid information to determine the actual content of the public interest. 
On  the  contrary,  the  informal  nature  of  exchanges  on  social  media,  where  no 
specific  requirements  of  democratic  deliberation,  legitimacy  and  accountability 
exist  (other  than  the  fact  of  their  popularity),  allows  the  dissemination  of 
subjective opinions presented as ‘news’ or ‘facts’, and even of fabricated ‘facts’ 
(fake  news).  In  crisis  situations,  when  valid  information  could  help  to  engage 
the  public  in  urgent  policies  and  regulatory  measures,  this  uncertain  situation 
occurring between the freedom of expression, on the one hand, and the right to 
information,  on  the  other,  becomes  highly  problematic:  again,  striking  a 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 10 

 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

balance regarding the exercise of these two competing individual rights requires 
special attention by any democratic society. 

Moreover,  although  we  generally  see  the  law’s  procedural  and  substantive 
requirements  as  a  safeguard,  where  there  is  a  rush  to  create  new  legal 
measures  in  response  to  a  crisis,  the  crucial  task  of  filtering  public  values  into 
the  legally  protected  public  interest  can  be  incomplete  or  bypassed  altogether. 
Any  such  disruption  between  the  legally  protected  public  interest  and  public 
values is risky; it can cause instant and lasting damage to society, including to 
trust and even to democracy itself. Thus, even in times of crisis, any attempt to 
use the law to secure public interest must be based on the social validity of that 
interest that represents the common good and corresponds to the central goals 
of a state, including welfare obligations securing equality, justice, and fairness. 

An equally important issue refers to the extent of public interest when it comes 
to  cross-border  or  even  global  crises.  The  question  here  is  whether  national 
governments  may  determine  the  public  interest  and  the  measures  to  be  taken 
in  relation  to  the  crisis  effects  by  focusing  on  national  considerations 
exclusively,  leaving  aside  the  cross-border  effects  of  a  crisis  that  may  occur 
when  adopting  national-oriented  policies.  The  COVID-19  experience,  for 
instance,  has  demonstrated  poor  coordination  of  national  policies,  and  even 
highly  diverging  approaches  and  measures  in  relevance  (including  formal 
requirements  for  travelling,  compulsory  vaccination  adopted  in  some  EU 
Member  States  or  patient  prioritisation  in  access  to  essential  healthcare 
services).  This  indicates  the  need  to  foster  international  debates  on  shared 
values  and  introduce  a  more  comprehensive  concept  of  public  interest  that  is 
broader  in  terms  of  geographical  scope  but  also  actionable  within  that  scope. 
Here too, due to its focus on what people have in common across borders and 
other boundaries, solidarity can be helpful. 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 11 

 
 
 
 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

3. From atomistic rights to well-being for all: the value of solidarity 

Ethics  scholarship  is  not  unanimous  as  to  the  nature,  content,  and  scope  of 
solidarity.  Solidarity  has  been  considered  a  virtue,  a  moral  duty,  a  value,  an 
ideal  to  be  achieved  or  a  characteristic  of  institutions.  What  virtually  all 
conceptualisations  of  solidarity  have  in  common  is  that  they  signify  pro-social 
phenomena  that  express  or  increase  the  cohesiveness  of  groups  or  entire 
societies.  Most  conceptualisations  of  solidarity  have  three  features,  as  follows. 
First, they refer to some kind of support, to people standing up with, besides or 
for  each  other  (e.g.  Dawson  and  Jennings,  2012;  Brunkhorst,  2005).  Second, 
the  people  who  provide  support  have  something  in  common  with  those  who 
receive the support: a shared goal, a common characteristic, a common threat 
or –  in  the  most  general  sense –  the  recognition  of  our  shared  humanity. 
Despite  the  many  ways  in  which  actors  may  be  different,  in  the  case  of 
solidarity  it  is  the  similarities,  and  not  the  differences,  that  give  rise  to  action 
(Prainsack  and  Buyx,  2011,  2017).  Third,  solidarity  is  not  an  isolated,  one-off 
interaction, but is part of a social or political fabric. It can be the basis of social 
or  political  institutions.  As  such,  it  requires  some  level  of  (indirect)  reciprocity 
(e.g. Sternø, 2005; Molm et al., 2007; Ewuoso et al. 2022); it is stronger when 
the people who contribute to solidaristic arrangements in the present know that 
someone will have their back when they need support in the future. This is one 
of the features that sets solidarity apart from other values and practices such as 
altruism or charity: solidarity does not demand  selfless sacrifice or devotion to 
the  interests  of  others.  It  links  self
regarding  practice  with  the  interests  of 
others  within  a  collaborative  undertaking,  which  presupposes  recognition  of 
vulnerability and the mutuality of collaborators. 

‐

As noted, in a legal sense, solidarity generally denotes a sense of community in 
a group or society, from which a mutual identification arises (Federico, 2018, p. 
506).  This  mutual  identification  is  based  on  the  interconnectedness  and 
interdependencies  between  the  goals  of  the  actors  involved  in  solidaristic 
relations,  and  on  the  interdependencies  between  their  individual  goals  and  the 
fulfilment of common goals, especially common-good-oriented goals, which can 
only  be  meaningfully  achieved  in  cooperation  with  the  other  members  of  a 
community  (Koroma,  2012,  p.  103).  Between  the  individual  members  of  a 
community,  this  dependence  establishes  a  bond  and  can  form  the  normative 
legal  dimension  of  solidarity,  which  also  describes  related  duties  of  conduct 
(Calliess,  2022a,  Recital 2).  In  this  sense,  solidarity  is  not  only  an  individual 
virtue,  but  a  structural  and  structuring  principle  and  practice.  It  can  also 
manifest  itself  in  legal  obligations  or  in  the  formulation  of  legal  obligations,  in 
both a positive  and  a negative sense. This  is especially true for the solidaristic 
relations  of  formal  groups,  such  as  states  and  supranational  and  international 
communities  (Lahusen  and  Federico,  2018,  pp.  11,  15;  Durkheim,  1984). 
Furthermore,  this  means  that  an  analysis  of  existing  laws  and  regulations  is 
decisive  in  identifying  the  extent  to  which –  and  how –  solidarity  is  introduced 
and  implemented  in  these  communities  (see  Section 5).  It  also  means  that  in 
addition  to  recognising  solidarity  as  a  structural  principle,  it  also  needs  to  be 
introduced  and  realised  through  implementation  tools,  through  policy  and 
regulation,  and  through  jurisprudence  (Federico,  2018,  p.  535).  As  far  as  the 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 12 

 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

institutionalisation  of  solidarity  is  concerned,  law  itself  can  be  seen  as  one  of 
the most important media for it. 

Jürgen  Habermas’  famous  description  of  solidarity  as  ‘the  other  side  of  justice’ 
refers to the nature of solidarity as the ‘glue’ between the bricks that make up 
the architecture of our political  and social  institutions (Habermas, 1984, 1986; 
see also Scholz 2008). Within this architecture, solidarity cannot be prescribed; 
it  is  what  people  do  on  their  own  initiative  and  will.  Solidarity  does,  however, 
ground  obligations  that  can  bind  individuals  involved  in  the  activities  and 
institutions that deliver goods or services. Such obligations of solidarity include 
the obligation to provide, or contribute to the procurement of, a good or service 
that  is to be made available to others who need it; the obligation to share the 
good  or  service  according  to  a  standard  that  does  not  require  maximisation  of 
compensation  for  the  costs  or  burdens  of  its  production;  the  obligation  of 
support to provide for those in need of the good or service despite an absence 
of  prospects  for  reciprocation;  and  the  obligation  of  loyalty  to  sustain  the 
cooperative relationship between providers and recipients of the good or service 
(Tranow, 2021). 

Solidarity,  from  both  an  ethical  and  a  legal  perspective,  can  manifest  itself  at 
various levels: at the interpersonal level, at the group level and at the level of 
formal institutions and norms. When solidarity is enacted at the individual level, 
from  person  to  person,  we  can  speak  of  tier 1  solidarity.  When  actions  of 
mutual  support  become  so  common  that  they  turn  into  ‘normal’,  expected 
behaviour  in  some  groups  (organisations  and  states),  we  see  an  instance  of 
tier 2  solidarity.  When  solidarity  expresses  itself  at  the  institutional  level  in 
legal, administrative, and bureaucratic norms, regulations, and designs, we call 
it tier 3 solidarity. Tier 3 solidarity typically happens when individual and group-
level  practices  have  solidified  into  ‘harder’,  more  structural  forms  of  solidarity 
(Prainsack and Buyx, 2017; Lahusen and Federico, 2018, p. 17). The potency of 
solidarity  as  a  concept  manifests  itself  in  different  ways  in  each  of  these  tiers, 
with the tiers being highly interdependent. 

Contrary to popular misconception, the idea of solidarity does not imply that the 
needs  of  the  public  should  be  put  above  individual  rights  and  freedoms 
(Prainsack,  2022).  It  instead  bridges  the  two.  Solidarity  views  people  as 
relational  beings  whose  relationships  with  others  influence  their  interests  and 
identities.  People  are  autonomous  because  of  their  relationships  with  their 
human,  natural  and  artificial  environments,  not  in  spite  of  them  (see  e.g. 
Mackenzie  and  Stoljar,  2010).  The  degree  of  an  individual’s  autonomy  is  also 
determined  by  these  relationships.  Although  some  of  these  linkages  and  ties 
have  the  potential  to  be  exploitative  or  harmful  and  put  the  interests  of 
individuals  at  odds  with  those  of  the  group,  such  conflicts  are  not  the  default 
state of human existence. Individual and collective rights and interests are not 
a zero-sum game in which one must always give for the other one to gain. Our 
relationships  with  our  social  and  natural  contexts  are  crucial  in  shaping  our 
identities  and  interests.  The  concept  of  solidarity  effectively  expresses  this 
important aspect of human nature.  

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 13 

 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

formalised  group  and 

its  members.  Such  a 

While  solidarity  between  individual  people  may  be  inherently  anchored  in 
mutual  respect  for  individual  autonomy  and  freedom  as  its  very  virtual 
condition,  solidarity  at  the  group  level  operates  in  a  bidirectional  manner 
between  groups  and –  depending  on  the  degree  of  formalisation  of  a  group – 
between  a 
focus  on 
institutionalisation  of  solidarity  is  immediately  relevant  to  policymaking  during 
crises. People have been better protected from some of the harshest effects of 
crises  in societies with robust public infrastructures, especially those with well-
funded and inclusive healthcare. When people lose their employment or income, 
social support services can help them avoid losing their homes and livelihoods. 
The importance of solidaristic institutions – such as policies that support people 
according  to  their  needs  and  require  contributions  according  to  economic 
ability –  is  highlighted  again  in  these  ongoing  crises.  What  we  can  take  from 
this  is  a  different  way  of  thinking  about  crisis  preparedness,  one  that 
understands the creation and strengthening of solidaristic institutions as one of 
its core tasks, next to – and closely related to – the abolishment of poverty and 
the reduction of inequalities. Poverty and grave inequalities are the root causes 
of much of human suffering during any crisis, ranging from health crises to war 
or climate change (see also GCSA et al., 2020a). 

Normative  frameworks  that  are  effective  in  times  of  crisis  require  a  review  of 
horizontal  and  vertical  solidarity  relations  and  of  the  various  tiers  and  their 
interdependencies  to  distinguish  levels  of  cooperation  and  contribution  and  to 
achieve  coherence  and  consistency  of  policies.  In  both  vertical  and  horizontal 
solidarity relations, the procedural aspects of solidarity measures  are crucial in 
crisis  situations.  They  need  to  be 
further 
concretised  in  specific  policies  and  linked  to 
implementation  and  enforcement  measures. 
Accordingly,  solidarity  as  a  structural  principle 
should  be  brought  to  the  political  level  to 
become  a  practised  value  that  creates  concrete 
and  enforceable  shared  responsibilities  that 
contribute  to  a  better  operationalisation  of 
human rights in crisis and to the further levelling 
of solidarity as a human right. 

What  we  can  take  from  this  is  a 
different  way  of  thinking  about  crisis 
preparedness,  one  that  understands 
the  creation  and  strengthening  of 
solidaristic  institutions  as  one  of  its 
core  tasks,  next  to  –  and  closely 
related to – the abolishment of poverty 
and the reduction of inequalities. 

Furthermore,  it  is  important  not  only  to  identify  and  deal  with  obstacles  to 
solidarity  in  crises,  but  also  to  identify  which  other  principles  can  help  to 
manage those obstacles. Other goals and values that decision-making during a 
crisis should aim at include preparedness and response (requiring resources and 
training), prevention, accountability, auditing and public trust. Their relation to 
solidarity  and  the  connection  between  them  in  the  procedure  of  their 
operationalisation  need  to  be  further  clarified.  When  the  focus  is  on  the 
operationalisation  of  human  rights  through  public  policy,  the  monitoring  and 
review  of  past  (identified)  crises  becomes  crucial.  Making  the  results  of  such 
audits publicly available, understandable, and part of public debate can help to 
repair and strengthen public trust, which in times of crisis can become a source 
of  doubts  and  insecurities  and  needs  to  re-establish  its  role  as  a  basis  for 
stability, reliance and hope. Furthermore, the repair and strengthening of public 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 14 

 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

trust  emerge  from  contingency  plans  based  on  these  audits:  such  plans  such 
plans must build upon – and enable – learning from past errors. 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 15 

 
 
 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

4. Poverty and social inequalities 

Solidarity,  as  noted,  is  different  from  other  pro-social  practices  in  that  it  is 
based on what people have in common, and not what sets them apart. Despite 
all of the differences that inevitably exist between people and groups, solidarity 
is  based  on  what  people  have  in  common –  in  the  most  general  sense,  our 
shared humanity. This is evident when one sees  people rise to the occasion to 
help  and  comfort  each  other,  as  evidenced  during  COVID-19.  Conversely,  it 
may not be so evident between countries, where we witnessed competition for 
resources.  In  such  a  context,  a  merely  symbolic  reference  to  solidarity  can  do 
more harm than good (West-Oram, 2021). 

Political discourse that emphasises differences between people and groups – for 
example  that  ‘immigrants’  take  resources  from  ‘us’,  or  that  ‘we’  must  accept 
restrictions  of  our  freedoms  to  support  ‘those’  at  risk  during  a  pandemic – 
makes  it  harder  for  people  to  see  what  they  have  in  common  with  others.  It 
makes  it  harder  to  see,  and  act  upon,  the  fact  that  everyone  is  vulnerable  in 
certain respects and contexts, and that we all have in common that we want to 
be safe from poverty, disease, violence, and oppression. It is in this sense that 
solidarity  draws  attention  to  the  ways  in  which  poverty  and  inequalities  are 
problems  for  all  of  us  and  that  we  have  a  collective  responsibility  to  address 
them.  

Marginalised  groups  become 
even  more  disadvantaged  in 
crises,  both  within  a  country 
and between countries. 

One  of  the  most  important  lessons  that  previous  crises  have  taught  us  is  that 
the  improvement  of  social  determinants  is  an  essential  game  changer. 
Marginalised  groups  become  even  more  disadvantaged  in  crises,  both  within  a 
country  and  between  countries.  To  give  an  example  from  the  COVID-19 
pandemic,  research  across  the  globe  has  shown  that 
those  who  live  in  poor  economic  and  social  conditions 
have  been  particularly  strongly  affected  by  both  the 
direct  and  the  indirect  consequences  of  the  pandemic 
(e.g. Abedi et al., 2021; Agrawal, 2021; Bambra et al., 
2021; Delaporte et al., 2021). Poverty has been both a 
social  and  a  medical  risk  factor.  People  in  poor  social 
and  economic  conditions  have  had  fewer  opportunities  and  means  to  protect 
themselves  from  infection.  They  live  in  smaller  homes,  are  more  likely  to  hold 
jobs  with  higher  risk  exposure  (and  no  possibility  to  work  from  home),  use 
public  transportation  more  frequently,  and  have  less  money  to  buy  necessities 
such as disinfectants and masks. Poverty has also been a medical risk factor, in 
that the average health status of people in lower social and economic strata  is 
worse  than  that  of  more  economically  advantaged  groups.  Similarly,  in 
connection  with  the  climate  crisis,  so-called  frontline  communities –  that  is, 
groups  where  several  types  of  disadvantage  intersect  along  social,  economic, 
racialised and gendered lines – are the ‘first and worst’ affected. They often live 
in  the  poorest  areas  of  a  city  or  region  and  are  particularly  exposed  to  the 
fallout  from  climate  change,  such  as  fires,  flooding,  or  heat.  In  other  words, 
disadvantaged  groups  enter  any  crisis  in  worse  health  than  other  groups,  and 
therefore  their  risk  of  suffering  a  serious  disease  or  complications  or  being 
subject to long-term effects is higher. If no measures are undertaken to support 
people in difficult social and economic circumstances, their social and economic 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 16 

 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

disadvantage  can  become  compounded  by  crisis  management:  any  crisis-
related  measure  that  prioritises  people  with  better  health  or  better  prognosis 
exacerbates  discrimination  against  those  who  are  already  disadvantaged 
(Schmidt et al., 2022). 

Also  in  this  context,  solidarity  is  of  immediate  relevance.  As  the  next  section 
(Section 5)  will  show,  solidarity  is  not  merely  a  lofty  ideal,  but  is  enshrined  in 
EU  and  international  law.  It  is  both  a  structural  principle  and  an  emerging 
human  right,  one  that  increasingly  places  positive  duties  on  governments  to 
ensure  that  rights  and  freedoms  can  be  fully  exercised.  Equality  and  non-
discrimination lie at its core. It is also in this sense that solidarity has a strong 
connection to the reduction of poverty and social inequalities. Not only because 
a  life  in  poverty  makes  it  practically  impossible  for  people  to  exercise  their 
rights and freedoms, but also because grave inequalities cannot be justified by 
factors  that  affected  people  can  control;  they  are  thus  inequities,  i.e.  unfair 
injustices.  From  the  status  of  solidarity  as  a  human  right,  it  follows  that 
governments  have  a  positive  duty  to  reduce  poverty  and  inequalities  (e.g. 
Wester, 2018). 

Specific  to  strategic  crisis  management,  given  the  considerable  effects  of 
poverty  and  of  stark  social  inequalities  on  the  well-being  of  societies  (e.g. 
Wilkinson  and  Pickett,  2011;  Stiglitz,  2012;  Dorling,  2019),  and  in  particular 
during  crises  (e.g.  Mendoza,  2011),  the  abolishment  of  poverty  and  the 
reduction  of  inequalities  needs  to  be  part  of  any  crisis  preparedness  and 
management  plan.  These  goals  require  stable  and  affordable  housing,  good 
education  for  all,  and  strong  and  accessible  healthcare  (Wagenaar  and 
Prainsack, 2021). We have a collective responsibility to make this happen (see 
also GCSA et al., 2020a). 

It  should  be  emphasised  here  that  poverty  and  social  inequalities  are  not 
inevitable  facts  of  nature.  They  are  part  of  a  political  and  economic  order  that 
is, itself, the outcome of decisions of political, business, and financial decision-
makers. From an ethical perspective, it is of the utmost importance not only to 
try to improve policymaking within existing institutional arrangements, but also 
to submit these very arrangements to ethical scrutiny. Great social inequalities 
make  some  social  groups  more  vulnerable  during  crises  and  make  it  more 
difficult for disadvantaged populations to recover once the worst of the crisis is 
over.  Grave  social  inequalities  may  also  weaken  the  system  in  other  ways,  for 
example by reducing the number of essential workers. 

In  this  context,  resilience  is  a  concept  that  is  often  mobilised.  Resilience  is  an 
important  concept  at  the  systemic  and  policymaking  levels,  where  it  refers  to 
the  way  that  societies  adapt  to  and  recover  from  crises  due  to  latent 
vulnerabilities  and  neglected  threats.  It  “needs  to  be  understood  within  the 
constantly  changing  dynamics  of  complex  adaptive  systems”  (SAPEA,  2022, 
p. 41).  Societal  resilience  is  closely  linked  to  solidarity  in  several  ways.  First, 
solidarity can strengthen societal resilience in the sense that where people trust 
and  support  each  other,  societies  are  stronger  in  crises.  This  applies  both  to 
person-to-person  solidarity  and  to  institutionalised  solidarity.  Second,  some  of 
the  same  measures  that  arise  from  the  normative  principle  of  solidarity – 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 17 

 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

namely  that  governments  need  to  make  sure  that  everyone’s  basic  needs  are 
met, and that vulnerable people receive special support – also support societal 
resilience.  

is  also  an  established  concept 

From  an  ethical  perspective,  the 
frame  of  resilience,  applied  to 
individuals,  is  problematic  as  it 
can  lend  itself  to  social  control, 
or even victim blaming. 

in 
Resilience 
psychology,  where 
it  denotes  the  capacity  of 
individuals to constructively deal with, and overcome, 
adversity.  The  American  Psychological  Association, 
for  example,  defines  it  as  “the  process  and  outcome 
of successfully adapting to difficult or challenging life 
experiences,  especially  through  mental,  emotional,  and  behavioural  flexibility 
and adjustment to external and internal demands” (APA, 2022). From an ethical 
perspective,  the  frame  of  resilience,  applied  to  individuals,  is  problematic  as  it 
can  lend  itself  to  social  control,  or  even  victim  blaming  (Joseph,  2013,  p. 40): 
When individuals who struggle in a crisis are seen as not resilient enough, this 
draws  attention  away  from  structural  and  collective  solutions  that  are  the 
preconditions  for  the  ability  of  individual  people  to  get  through  a  crisis.  In  the 
words of the sociologist Jonathan Joseph (2013, p. 40), resilience: 

fits with a social ontology that urges us to turn from a concern with the 
outside  world  to  a  concern  with  our  own  subjectivity,  our  adaptability, 
our  reflexive  understanding,  our  own  risk  assessments,  our  knowledge 
acquisition and, above all else, our responsible decision-making. … [T]he 
way resilience works … is to move fairly swiftly from thinking about the 
responsibility, 
to  emphasising 
dynamics  of  systems 
adaptability and preparedness. 

individual 

Resilience  thinking  applied  to  individuals  should  be  avoided.  When  used  at  the 
societal  level,  and  especially  when  it  is  understood  as  a  call  to  build 
‘redundancies’  into  the  system  by  strengthening  public  infrastructures  and 
systems  of  economic  and  social  support,  it  can  strengthen  solidarity,  and  vice 
versa.  Understood  in  this  sense,  resilience  thinking  can  play  an  important  role 
in strategic crisis management. 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 18 

 
 
 
 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

5. Solidarity in law and policy in the EU and beyond 

Solidarity  is  an  important  value  that  is  also  enshrined  in  the  EU  treaties  and 
within  the  framework  of  international  law.  In  this  context  it  describes 
interdependence  within  the  European  constitutional  network  in  a  broad  sense, 
on  which  both  the  EU  and  the  Member  States  rely,  and  which  thus  forms  the 
basis  for  both  internal  integration  and  external  cooperation  (Terhechte,  2017, 
Recital 28, 29). In this sense, it focuses strongly on solidarity between Member 
States  and  can  be  seen  as  a  system-relevant  guiding  value  within  the  EU’s 
alliance of states, laws, and values (Lenaerts and Gerard, 2014, p. 316). In this 
alliance,  solidarity  becomes  the  central  prerequisite  for  the  transition  to 
cooperation  between  states  in  law-making  for  a  European  common  good.  The 
importance  of  solidarity  is  underlined  by  the  treaties  themselves,  which 
explicitly  refer  to  the  concept  a  total  of  15  times.  Even  where  solidarity  is  not 
explicitly  mentioned  in  the  treaties,  it  is  often  a  guiding  value  in  a  variety  of 
provisions  and  mechanisms  (Calliess,  2022a,  Recital 6).  Horizontal  solidarity  is 
established  both  as  a  general  principle  for  internal  cooperation  to  achieve  the 
overall  objective  of  the  EU  and  as  a  specific  provision  in  strategic  policy  areas 
(e.g.  asylum,  immigration,  energy,  foreign  policy,  and  natural  or  human-made 
disasters).  A  number  of  provisions  standardise  solidarity  between  EU  Member 
States  (e.g.  Articles 80,  122,  194  and  222  of  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of 
the European Union). 

The vertical dimension of solidarity focuses on the relationship between the EU 
and  its  Member  States,  on  the  one  hand,  and  between  the  EU  and  individual 
people,  on  the  other.  In  the  supranational  construct  of  cooperation,  the 
cornerstones are legally manifested in the distribution of competences between 
the EU  and  its Member  States (di Napoli  and Russo, 2015, p. 207). Procedural 
aspects  of  solidarity  obligations  (Wellens,  2005,  p. 13;  Calliess,  2022b, 
Recital 5,  6)  in  the  form  of  rules  addressing  mutual  information  and 
coordination measures are also typical of solidaristic relations in a supranational 
community. 

The  realisation  of  solidarity  in  its  vertical  dimension  by  the  state  and  its 
institutions  vis-à-vis  individuals  ties  in  with  the  understanding  of  constitutional 
and  fundamental  rights  as  guarantees  of  the  state  for  its  citizens  and  for  all 
people. The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (the Charter) 
refers to this guarantee in its preamble. Moreover, the entirety of Title IV of the 
Charter (Articles 27–38) is devoted to solidarity (as the title suggests) ( 5). 

(5)  This section of the Charter contains provisions on the fundamental rights of workers such 
as the right to information and consultation within the undertaking (Article 27), access to 
placement  services  (Article 29),  protection  in  the  event  of  unjustified  dismissal 
(Article 30),  the  prohibition  of  child  labour  and  the  protection  of  young  people  at  work 
(Article 32), and the right to a family and professional life (Article 33), to name but a few. 
Social  security  and  social  assistance  (Article 34),  environmental  protection  (Article  37), 
and consumer protection (Article 38) are also fundamental rights defined in this section. 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 19 

 
 
                                                
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

By  opening  up  public  space  to  citizens’  engagement  in  the  realisation  of 
fundamental rights two insights emerge. On the one hand, it becomes clear that 
the  duty  to  participate  and  social  cohesion  are  of  key  importance  for  the 
implementation  of  solidarity.  On  the  other  hand, the  close  connection  between 
the  vertical  and  horizontal  dimensions  of  solidarity  becomes  clear  (Federico, 
2018, p. 514). In addition to solidarity, which is presupposed as a value in the 
second  sentence  of  Article 2  of  the  Treaty  on  European  Union  (TEU),  and 
solidarity  between  its  members,  which  is  guaranteed  by  Articles 27  et  seq.  of 
the  Charter,  Article 3(5)  TEU  recognises  mutual  respect  among  peoples  and 
Article 21(1) TEU recognises external solidarity. 

As  a  principle  at  the  international  level,  solidarity  itself  is  less  a  concrete 
obligation  than  a  foundational  structural  principle  from  which  concrete  rights 
and obligations can arise (Wolfrum, 2010, pp. 227 et seq.; Wellens, 2005). It is 
the  cornerstone  of  the  responsibility  to  protect  people  and  defend  their  rights 
(Slaughter, 2005) ( 6). In this sense, solidarity is a basic prerequisite for human 
dignity  (Human  Rights  Council,  A/HRC/12/27,  p. 16)  and  the  realisation  or 
fulfilment of human rights (Beyer, 2010, p. 102), being a key instrument for the 
implementation  and  interpretation  of  human  rights  (for  references  in  the 
context  of  sustainable  development  and  humanitarian  aid,  refugee  law,  the 
responsibility to protect and the international law of disaster relief, to name but 
a few, see Koroma, 2012, pp. 104 et seq.). The related rights of solidarity and 
the  right  to  international  solidarity ( 7)  (‘third  generation  human  rights’,  see 
Sanders,  1981)  serve  to  maintain  order  and  the  survival  of  an  international 
society, which should be based on mutual assistance, especially when a country 
is faced with a natural disaster, poverty and/or terrorism, or is in a post-conflict 
situation.  In  particular,  the  similarities  between  the  concept  of  solidarity  and 
that of the responsibility to protect have led to the view that the responsibility 
to  protect  can  be  seen  as  an  institutionalised  form  of  international  solidarity 
(Campanelli, 2011, Recital 22). 

The United Nations (UN) General Assembly has explicitly referred to the concept 
of  solidarity  on  multiple  occasions  (e.g.  Resolutions  55/2  and  56/151).  It  has 
also  been  referenced  in  the  context  of  the  UN’s  commitment  to  ‘unconditional 
solidarity  that  sets  disaster  aid  provision  apart’  in  times  of  acute  crisis.  The 
individuals and institutions that engage in endeavours of solidarity in such times 

(6)  Cf. UN Resolution A/RES/59/193 of 18 March 2005 on the promotion of a democratic and 
equitable international order, paragraph 4(f) which states that such an order requires the 
realisation  also  of  “[s]olidarity,  as  a  fundamental  value,  by  virtue  of  which  global 
challenges  must  be  managed  in  a  way  that  distributes  costs  and  burdens  fairly,  in 
accordance with basic principles of equity and social justice, and ensures that those who 
suffer  or  benefit  the  least  receive  help  from  those  who  benefit  the  most”.  Furthermore, 
paragraph 4(o)  states  “[t]he  shared  responsibility  of  the  nations  of  the  world  for 
managing worldwide economic and social development as well as threats to international 
peace  and  security  that  should  be  exercised  multilaterally”.  The  resolution  was  adopted 
on 20 December 2004. 

(7)  Draft declaration on the right to international solidarity, annex to report A/HRC/35/35 of 

the Independent Expert on Human Rights and International Solidarity, Virginia Dandan. 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 20 

 
 
                                                
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

are considered donors, who work ‘on the basis of needs, without any regard to 
political or other situations’ (Moonen, 2021. p. 5). Solidarity encourages that – 
especially during an acute crisis – difference and disagreement be put aside so 
that  people,  communities,  and  countries  can  work  together  and  help  each 
other.  Current  crises  underscore  the  need  to  develop  public  policies  grounded 
on solidarity, while promoting and strengthening it at the same time. 

As  an  emerging  human  right,  solidarity  is  based  on  equality  and  non-
discrimination  to  meaningfully  participate  in,  contribute  to,  and  enjoy  a  social 
and  international  order  in  which  all  human  rights  and  fundamental  freedoms 
can  be  fully  realised  (Scholz,  2014,  p. 54).  It  triggers  strong  procedural  rights 
that  compel  governments  to  share  information  with  civil  society,  thereby 
reducing  the  likelihood  of  human  rights  violations  (with  regard  to  procedural 
rights generally, see Minnerop et al., 2018, Recital 26). 

In the following section, we will turn again to the tangible role of solidarity as a 
moral  principle.  To  demonstrate  this,  we  take  the  example  of  prioritisation  of 
scarce  resources  in  healthcare,  which  has  been  of  particular  importance  in  the 
current COVID-19 pandemic. Our argument about how prioritisation should take 
place in light of scarce resources is applicable to all crisis contexts. 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 21 

 
 
 
 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

6. Prioritisation of healthcare resources: ethical requirements 

The  allocation  of  scarce  healthcare  resources  has  been  at  the  centre  of 
bioethical debate during COVID-19. At the macro level, it has focused on health 
services  and  their  organisation  and  availability;  at  the  micro  level,  it  has 
focused on patients and their prioritisation in access to medical care. 

including  by  strengthening  societal 

The need for an efficient and ethical macro and micro allocation is not limited to 
the current pandemic or to other crises. In crisis contexts, however, it becomes 
most  urgent  and  challenging,  as  the  chronic  shortage  of  health  resources 
deepens and the pressure on the healthcare system increases. The best way to 
prevent  these  situations  or  to  minimise  their  impact  is  by  implementing 
preparedness  measures, 
resilience 
(Section 4).  These  measures  should  include  contingency  plans  (i.e.  plans  that 
are  designed  to  take  account  of  possible  future  events  or  circumstances) 
relating  to  the  reorganisation  of  space  and  the  redistribution  of  resources. 
Preparedness plans – along with resource allocations in healthcare – and public 
policies  in  general  should  be  based  on  scientific  evidence,  also  acknowledging 
when  there  is  no  available  or  robust  science  (see  also  GCSA  et  al.,  2020b; 
GCSA,  2019).  They  should  also  comply  with  core  ethical  principles,  those  that 
structure  the  organisation  of  our  societies  and  identify  our  common  morality, 
also corresponding to an ‘ethics of minima’, i.e. the minimum set of obligations 
and  duties  with  which  everyone  should  comply.  This  obligation  also  emerges 
from  the  principle  of  solidarity,  which  implies  a  collective  responsibility  for 
everyone’s  basic  needs  being  met.  Next  to  solidarity,  preparedness  measures 
should  also  refer  to  fundamental  values  within  the  EU,  namely  respect  for 
human  rights  and  the  dignity  of  every  human  being;  commitment  to  social 
justice and the promotion of equity, as specifications of the principle of justice, 
acknowledging the moral duty to act for the common good; and transparency of 
criteria  as  basis  for  decision-making  and  of  procedures  concerning  public 
policies. 

When  confronted  with  scarce  resources  in  the  healthcare  sector,  two  different 
strategies can be employed: rationing and rationalisation (Patrão Neves, 2020). 
Rationing broadly refers to restrictions on accessing goods or services, either in 
principle  or  in  a  certain  quantity  or  time  frame.  Rationing  either  occurs  in  a 
(formally)  egalitarian  way  or  limited  resources  are  distributed  to  people 
following  specific  criteria  (e.g.  profession,  age,  gender,  nationality,  severity  of 
health  condition,  treatment  alternatives,  or  prognosis).  People  can  be  included 
or  excluded  based  on  these  characteristics.  Depending  on  the  criteria,  non-
egalitarian rationing might lead to an equitable distribution based on needs, but 
it  can  also  interfere  with  respect  for  human  dignity,  justice,  equality,  and 
equity, and e.g. lead to undue discrimination. 

Rationalising,  in  contrast,  broadly  refers  to  the  most  efficient  use  of  limited 
resources;  i.e.  to  the  optimisation  of  the  limited  resources  available  under  the 
single  criterion  of  efficiency.  Instead  of  selecting  people  to  be  prioritised 
according  to  specific  characteristics,  it  seeks  to  contribute  to  the  health  and 
well-being  of  as  many  people  as  possible  with  the  resources  available,  giving 
these resources to those who are likely to benefit the most, regardless of social 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 22 

 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

or  demographic  characteristics  (Patrão  Neves,  2020).  Because  of  this, 
rationalisation – i.e. the prudent, efficient use of scarce (public) resources – is a 
moral (and often legal) requirement. If rationalisation goes wrong it can lead to 
implicit rationing, which is to be avoided. 

In  all  cases,  guidelines  for  prioritisation,  for  example  in  intensive  care  triage, 
need to be developed based on scientific evidence and grounded in fundamental 
ethical  principles,  rejecting  the  use  of  social  determinants  (e.g.  ethnicity  and 
economic  status)  to  discriminate  against  people,  and  with  particular  attention 
paid not only to direct but also to indirect discrimination (e.g. structural ageism 
and  ableism)  (e.g.  Joebges  and  Biller-Andorno,  2020;  Joebges  et  al.,  2020; 
Vinay et al., 2021). 

When faced with the choice of who is to be included and who is to be excluded 
from  access  to  scarce  healthcare  resources,  criteria  that  deepen  inequities  will 
not be ethically acceptable, such as prioritising (programmatically or practically) 
those  who  can  pay  for  services  over  those  who  cannot,  or  giving  preferable 
treatments to individuals who hold important social positions or who are seen to 
have  contributed  more  to  society,  or  to  those  with  the  highest  likelihood  of 
returning to productive life. In the spirit of solidarity, we are challenged to put 
forward  prioritisation  criteria  that  acknowledge  the  obligation  to  contribute  to 
the  good  of  society  as  a  whole  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  help  the  weakest  or 
most vulnerable, while aiming to neglect no one. Any prioritisation needs to be 
preceded  by  a  well-established  indication  for  the  treatment  in  question  and  a 
clearly  stated  will  on  the  part  of  the  patient  (by  the  patient,  an  advance 
directive  and/or  a  legal  representative)  that  the  patient  in  fact  prefers  this 
treatment (e.g. intensive care) over other options (such as palliative care). 

Although  the  principles  and  criteria  for  priority  setting  are  the  subject  of 
ongoing  debate,  decisions  made  on  prioritisation  of  patients  need  to  be 
grounded  in explicit moral values and communicated transparently (Sahlin and 
Schwaag  Serger,  2022).  Clear  and  succinct  information  should  be  available  to 
all  citizens,  and  (time  permitting)  everyone  should  have  the  possibility  to 
in  priority  setting  through  community  consultation.  Ideally, 
participate 
individuals  should  be  enabled  to  understand  why  hard  choices  must  be  made, 
and  what  is  expected  of  them.  This  is  the  only  way  to  ensure  trusted,  shared 
practices,  founded  in  an  interdisciplinary  dialogue  involving  science,  ethics, 
politics, and society. 

We  expand  on  the  importance  of  public  trust,  of  transparent,  dialogical,  good 
communication, and of data in the next section.  

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 23 

 
 
 
 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

7. Data, communication, and public trust 

The  accessibility  of  data  to  build  evidence  for  crisis  management  interventions 
is  of  great  importance  in  any  crisis.  In  a  pandemic,  for  example,  it  may  be 
necessary  to  minimise  the  individual  and  social  impact  of  crisis  management 
measures,  such  as  through  a  better  understanding  of  the  risk  factors  and  the 
severity of illness (World Health Organization, 2020). To achieve this, it is often 
necessary to process people’s data that are subject to data protection rules. In 
addition, responsible data sharing between different sectors, such as healthcare 
and  research,  and  between  different  actors,  such  as  the  public  and  private 
sectors, can be crucial to provide the necessary insights for policymaking (Peek, 
2020).  Different  sectors  may  have  to  comply  with  different  data  processing 
rules, which hinders the free flow of data between them. Furthermore, to obtain 
datasets that are large and detailed enough to provide the necessary evidence, 
data  from  different  jurisdictions  may  need  to  be  merged,  which,  in  turn,  too 
often  leads  to  a  confrontation  with  different  conditions  for  data  access  and 
sharing (RDA, 2020). For example, the GloPID-R Roadmap for Data Sharing in 
Public  Health  Emergencies  highlights  the  need  to  comply  with  national  and 
international  regulations,  to  use  preapproved  approaches  and  to  use 
anonymisation  (GloPID-R,  2019).  Anonymisation  of  data  is  not  always  a 
solution,  as  it  can  lead  to  a  decrease  in  the  richness  of  data  that  can  diminish 
its  value  and  affect  the  quality  of  evidence,  and  thus  the  conclusions  that  can 
be meaningfully drawn. It is necessary to develop new technical and normative 
infrastructures  for  data  sharing  for  the  purpose  of  crisis  management  and 
containment  that  also  allow  the  sharing  of  sensitive  information  where 
necessary  and  have  adequate  safeguards  in  place  to  avoid  harm  to  individuals 
and  groups.  If  anyone  is  harmed  nevertheless,  they  need  to  have  easy  access 
to effective remedies. 

Next  to  having  good  data  and  evidence,  having  suitable  communication 
strategies  and  channels  in  place  is  key  to  crisis  prevention,  preparedness, 
response, and resilience (Wernli et al., 2021). When people are confronted with 
contradicting messages, then confusion, panic, and anger may result, and trust 
in  public  authorities  and  people’s  willingness  to  adhere  to  measures  will 
typically  decrease (see also GCSA et  al., 2020b). In the context of the  current 
COVID-19  pandemic,  this  phenomenon  has  been  referred  to  as  an  ‘infodemic’, 
and  its  potential  negative  impact  on  public  health  can  be  significant  (World 
Health Organization, n.d.). At the same time, it  is important to note that good 
communication  is  not  a  replacement  for  good  crisis  management  and  good 
policy  measures.  Whether  or  not  people  ‘comply’  with  measures  to  prevent, 
contain, and mitigate crises depends not only on their willingness to do so, but 
also on whether they have the financial, social, and psychological means to do 
so (see SAPEA, 2019; Fiske et al., 2022; Spahl et al. 2022). When measures for 
crisis  management  are 
fair,  consistent  and  effective,  however,  good 
communication  can  help  to  convey  the  importance  of  supporting  and  adhering 
to these measures. 

Risk  and  crisis  communication  in  democratic  societies  seems  to  be  facing  an 
ethical  dilemma:  if  communication  is  to  happen  effectively  and  fast,  top-down 
approaches appear to be the method of choice – telling people what they need 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 24 

 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

to  do,  best  done  in  three-word  sentences  that  are  easy  to  understand  and  to 
remember.  Although  this  communicative  strategy  can  be  considered  an 
imposition  for  some  citizens,  it  works  if  there  is  societal  consensus  about  the 
urgency  and  the  content  of  the  messages,  along  with  public  trust  in  the 
institutions sending them. However, in crises, particularly in protracted or even 
chronic  ones,  matters  often  become  more  complex.  Assessments  of  the 
situation  and  of  the  appropriateness  of  chosen  measures  can  be  expected  to 
differ,  and  societies  concerned  about  democratic  values  and  about  civil  and 
human  rights  will  respect  freedom  of  expression,  and  in  fact  encourage  public 
discourse. Feedback from citizens – including those who belong to less-vocal or 
harder-to-reach  groups –  will  be  decisive  for  performing  the  difficult  task  of 
iteratively  adjusting  crisis  management  strategies  and  measures  in  a  volatile 
situation and in the light of continuously emerging new information. 

information 

Individuals or groups that feel that their voice is not heard may be tempted to 
withdraw  into  closed  circles,  where  content  is  not  challenged  but  continuously 
repeated and confirmed by like-minded conversation partners. In social media, 
automated  filters  are  known  to  enhance  this  effect,  leading  to  ‘filter  bubbles’ 
and  ‘echo  chambers’.  Mistrust  of  authorities  and  societal  polarisation  may 
result,  as  has  been  seen  in  the  context  of  COVID-19  vaccination  policies  (e.g. 
Germani  and  Biller-Andorno,  2021).  Another  danger  comes  from  ‘fake  news’, 
by 
including 
algorithms  or  by 
is 
misleading  and  deceitful,  yet  can  appear  as 
completely  reliable  and  truthful  information. 
In  some  contexts,  it  is  very  difficult  to 
distinguish 
from 
algorithm-generated 
Moreover, 
human  beings  are  often  more  likely  to  trust 
information  that  confirms  their  beliefs  and 
opinions.  

Feedback  from  citizens  –  including  those 
who  belong  to  less-vocal  or  harder-to-
for 
reach  groups  –  will  be  decisive 
performing  the  difficult  task  of  iteratively 
adjusting  crisis  management  strategies 
and measures in a volatile situation and in 
the  light  of  continuously  emerging  new 
information. 

information 
fakes. 

individuals 

generated 

truthful 

that 

Such developments can  undermine public risk and crisis communication efforts 
and limit their effectiveness. There is a range of possible ways to address this. 
One  is  to  respond  in  a  top-down  manner,  employing  methods  such  as  the 
removal  or  sanctioning  of  problematic  content,  or  the  ‘deplatforming’  of 
individuals  or  organisations  known  to  share  misleading  information.  Another 
strategy  is  to  use  social  engineering  techniques,  possibly  including  artificial-
intelligence-based  predictions,  to  nudge  or  manipulate  people  into  compliance, 
adopting  similar  means  to  those  who  are  spreading  misinformation  on  social 
media  and  elsewhere.  Finally,  more  participatory  approaches  would  rely  on 
engaging  citizens,  offering  platforms  that  provide  targeted,  group-specific, 
needs-based  information,  while  at  the  same  time  providing  opportunities  for 
citizens  to  give  feedback  to  decision-makers  and  empowering  especially  those 
who find it difficult to make themselves heard to participate in public discourse 
(Spitale  et  al.,  2021).  Reaching  out  to  all  groups  in  society  is  of  prime 
importance,  not  only  to  understand  how  information  needs  to  be  delivered  to 
reliably reach all groups, but also to grasp how measures affect them and what 
is needed to ensure everyone is well supported. From an ethical point of view, 
those approaches to information and communication, which seek to manipulate 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 25 

 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

people  into  compliance,  are  clearly  problematic.  Whereas  different  situations 
may  require  a  different  mix  of  strategies,  risk  and  crisis  communication  needs 
to be shaped in such a way that it strengthens rather than undermines not only 
people’s physical health but also social cohesion and democratic values. 

Given the key role of communication in crisis management and its potential for 
harm  in  case  of  failure,  a  systematic  evaluation  and  review  of  communication 
strategies  would  seem  appropriate.  Principles  such  as  openness,  transparency, 
inclusivity,  intelligibility,  and  privacy  can  be  expected  to  be  at  the  centre  of 
such appraisals (Spitale  et al., 2022). A solid normative framework can  inform 
risk  and  crisis  communication  strategies  that  are  both  effective  and  fair, 
fostering trust, critical thinking, and constructive engagement.  

Crisis  management  that  values  solidarity  needs  to  ensure  sufficient  data  are 
available on how a crisis and its management affects different populations, and 
it  needs  to  provide  an  opportunity  for  individuals  and  social  groups  to 
participate in the constant re-evaluation and readjustment of crisis response by 
sharing  experiences  and  arguments.  Good  crisis  communication  can  therefore 
be  considered  a  key  procedural  requisite  of  realising  solidarity  in  crisis 
management. 

scientific 

Crisis  communication  involves  different  actors,  among  them  policymakers, 
scientists,  and  the  public.  Data  and  evidence  play  a  key  role  in  developing, 
assessing,  explaining,  and  justifying  measures  in  response  to  a  crisis.  The 
science  of  science  communication  has  taught  us  several  important  things 
(SAPEA,  2019;  see  also  GCSA  et  al.,  2020b;  GCSA,  2019).  First,  for  example, 
we know that there is no ready-made strategy for conveying information about 
science,  risks,  and  uncertainty.  Each  communication  strategy  must  be  tailored 
to the purpose it serves (Fischhoff and Davis, 2014). These purposes need to be 
aligned with ethical and legal norms and, in the case of state action, subject to 
political  legitimation.  Second,  communication  needs  to  target  groups  based  on 
their specific informational needs and background knowledge. A one-size-fits-all 
approach  is  of  limited  value.  Third,  science  communication  will  be  greatly 
facilitated  by  science  literacy.  If  a  society  is  prepared  to  process  and  engage 
with 
conveyed,  and 
misunderstandings  avoided.  Part  of  such  educational  efforts  needs  to  be  an 
understanding  of  how  science  works.  We  cannot  ‘follow  the  science’  if  there  is 
no science to follow, or if the science that we have points in many directions or 
is  unclear.  Fourth,  empirical  studies  have  also  taught  us  what  kind  of 
information people want and need during a crisis such as a pandemic. Research 
shows that people want facts, even if they make them anxious (Fischhoff et al., 
2018).  People  also  want  science  to  be  presented  accurately.  People  expect 
‘facts, not spin’ from trustworthy information sources (Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, 
2020).  Fifth,  it  is  not  enough  to  tell  citizens  what  to  do.  Good  information 
should be provided on why certain kinds of action are necessary. People need to 
have  the  opportunity  to  voice  their  dissent  in  an  appropriate  manner  and  to 
engage  in  a  discourse  on  how  crisis  response  could  be  improved.  Finally, 
communication  strategies  can  be  dangerous  tools.  Our  communication 
approaches  must  be  tested  and  evaluated,  and  risks  must  be  assessed  and 
mitigated. We have a moral obligation to ensure that the chosen strategy is fit 

information,  more 

can  be 

content 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 26 

 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

for  the  (democratically  legitimated  and  ethically  justified)  purpose  we  want  to 
achieve.  These  insights  should  be  heeded  in  the  design  and  deployment  of 
communication strategies. 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 27 

 
 
 
 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

All public policies are shaped by moral values. Even when these values remain 
implicit,  they  can  frame  how  problems –  such  as  managing  a  crisis –  are 
described  and  which  policies  are  designed  to  address  them.  Making  the  values 
that underlie  public policy explicit  is  important for several reasons: to  increase 
transparency,  to  improve  deliberation  and  communication,  and  to  build  trust 
between  parties.  It  also  helps  to  enhance  citizens’  engagement  and  public 
support for policies. 

The  EGE  emphasises  the  important  role  that  the  value  of  solidarity  can  and 
should play in the context of strategic crisis management and puts forward the 
following recommendations. 

1.  Solidarity is a key European value that should be a guiding principle 
for  strategic  crisis  management.  Insofar  as  it  is  grounded  in  an 
understanding  of  humans  as  relational  beings,  whose  interests  are  shaped 
by  their  relationships  to  others,  the  value  of  solidarity  overcomes  false 
dichotomies  between  the  individual  and  the  collective,  and  between  the 
individual and public interest, which often seem to be in conflict, especially 
in  times  of  crisis.  Above  all,  it  shows  and  enhances  our  shared  human 
identity  and the bond that unites humanity  across borders and boundaries. 
In  light  of  the  transnational,  and  often  global,  nature  of  crises,  the  saying 
that  ‘nobody  is  safe  until  everyone  is  safe’  is  empirically  accurate,  in  the 
sense that problems and risks related to complex crises such as pandemics, 
climate  change,  and  violent  conflict  cannot  be  addressed  only  at  the 
national  level.  Solidarity  means  that  those  in  more  advantaged  positions 
should  be  willing  to  accept  some  costs –  in  economic  terms,  or  in  terms  of 
giving  up  some  privilege,  status  of  power,  or  comfort –  to  alleviate  the 
suffering of others if needed, within and across countries. 

(a) Solidaristic  institutions  at  the  national,  supranational,  and 
international 
levels  should  be  strengthened.  Solidaristic 
systems are those to which people contribute their abilities and from 
which  they  receive  support  as  they  need  it.  Taking  solidarity 
seriously  as  a  guiding  principle  for  crisis  management  means 
directing  financial  and  other  resources  to  solidaristic  systems  of 
social  and  economic  support.  This  is  important  for  several  reasons. 
First, in societies with strong public infrastructures, people are better 
insulated  from  some  of  the  worst  burdens  of  crises.  Second,  while 
interpersonal  acts  of  solidarity  can  be  expected  at  the  onset  of 
crises,  these  tend  not  to  persist  in  the  long  run  and  should  not  be 
relied  on  as  a  crisis  management  strategy.  Robust  institutional 
support, including policies that help people who lose their homes or 
livelihoods  in  times  of  crisis  or  that  facilitate  access  to  childcare  for 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 28 

 
 
 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

frontline  workers,  also  bolster  people’s  ability  and  willingness  to 
enact  solidarity  with  others.  Importantly,  this  may  also  increase 
trust in governments. 

(b) Policymakers at the national, supranational, and international 
levels  should  actively  strengthen  all  aspects  of  solidarity, 
including  horizontally  through  communication  and  coordination 
measures  among  themselves  that  lead  to  the  implementation  of 
coherent and consistent crisis management strategies, and vertically 
through 
implementation  and  strengthening  of  people’s 
procedural  rights  (such  as  the  rights  to  access  information  and 
public  participation).  The  latter  requires  that  policymakers  and 
stakeholders  share  information  with  civil  society  and  provide 
opportunities for feedback. This contributes to strengthening human 
and fundamental rights and to strengthening public trust. 

the 

(c) Designing and deploying actions that express solidarity needs 
to rest on a solid understanding of how individuals and social 
groups  are  affected  by  crises.  Harnessing  participatory 
approaches  that  empower  citizens,  and  particularly  underprivileged 
groups, to articulate their experiences, concerns, and priorities helps 
provide the necessary information for this purpose. Public authorities 
and  political  decision-makers  should  establish  suitable  opportunities 
for individuals from as many social groups as possible to share their 
experiences and perceptions. 

2.  Human dignity and solidarity should also guide the macro and micro 
allocation  of  scarce  resources.  Policymakers  at  all  levels  should  ensure 
that  guidance  for  the  prioritisation  of  access  to  healthcare  and  other 
resources  respects  the  equal  worth  of  all  human  beings.  Attempts  to 
maximise resource efficiency should take care to avoid undue discrimination 
and  ensure  that  the  needs  of  disadvantaged  people  receive  special 
consideration. 

3.  Governments  have  a  duty  to  combat  poverty  and  inequities,  to 
ensure  that  everyone  receives  the  economic,  social,  health-related, 
and  psychological  support  that  they  need.  Numerous  studies  have 
shown that societies with lower levels of social and economic inequality are 
better prepared to respond to crises. When  people are economically safe  it 
is also easier for them to support others. 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

4.  Policymakers  and  the  media  should  apply  resilience  thinking  at  the 
systemic,  societal  level  but  not  at  the  level  of  individuals.  When 
applied to individuals, the frame of resilience lends itself to victim blaming: 
Those who struggle in a  crisis are seen  as not resilient enough. This draws 
attention  away  from  structural  and  collective  solutions  that  are  the 
preconditions for the ability of individual people to get through a crisis. More 
broadly, structural problems cannot be addressed solely by trying to change 
individual  behaviour,  but  they  require  structural  solutions.  Changing 
individual  behaviour  can  only  ever  be  one  element  in  a  larger  set  of 
measures. 

5.  Policymakers  and  funders  at  all  levels  should  strengthen  the 
technical  and  normative  infrastructure  for  data  sharing  for  the 
purpose  of  crisis  management  and  containment,  including  sensitive 
data subject to legal protection, with adequate protections in place. 

depends 

6.  Strategic  crisis  management  can  require  difficult  measures.  Their 
effectiveness 
dialogical 
significantly 
communication.  During  a  crisis,  when  there  are  many  uncertainties  and 
considerable  knowledge  gaps,  communicating  policies  and  their  underlying 
scientific  evidence  is  particularly  difficult.  In  addition  to  clear  and 
transparent  communication,  honesty  is  critical  to  building  trust.  Also  with 
regard  to  Recommendation 7,  a  European  code  of  science  communication, 
along  with  making  science  communication  an  integral  part  of  research 
programmes, would contribute to this goal. 

good, 

on 

7.  When 

take 

agencies 

government 

issue 
recommendations,  the  values  upon  which  these  decisions  and 
recommendations  are  based  must  be  made  clear.  Public  decision-
making always involves a combination of evidence and values. Values need 
to  be  made  explicit  to  be  open  to  public  scrutiny  and  appeal.  Value 
transparency  is  a  prerequisite  for  an  ethically  justified  crisis  management 
framework, based on solidarity, equality, trustworthiness, and participation. 

decisions 

or 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

References 

Abedi, V., Olulana, O., Avula, V., Chaudhary, D., Khan, A., Shahjouei, S., Li, J. and Zand, R. 
(2021), ‘Racial, economic, and health inequality and COVID-19 infection in the United States’, 
Journal of Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities, Vol. 8, No 3, pp. 732–742. 

Agrawal,  S.,  Cojocaru,  A.,  Montalva,  V.,  Narayan,  A.,  Bundervoet,  T.  and  Ten,  A.  (2021), 
‘COVID-19 and inequality: How unequal was the recovery from the initial shock?’, World Bank, 
Washington DC, https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/35867. 

American  Psychological  Association  (2022),  ‘Resilience’,  https://www.apa.org/topics/resilience 
(accessed 5 September 2022). 

Arguedas,  A. R.,  Robertson,  C. T.,  Fletcher,  R.  and  Nielsen,  R. K.  (2022),  ‘Echo  Chambers, 
Filter  Bubbles,  and  Polarisation:  A  literature  review’,  Reuters  Institute  for  the  Study  of 
Journalism, 
https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/2022-
01/Echo_Chambers_Filter_Bubbles_and_Polarisation_A_Literature_Review.pdf. 

Oxford, 

Bambra, C., Lynch, J. and Smith, K. E. (2021), ‘The Unequal Pandemic: COVID-19 and health 
inequalities’, Policy Press, Bristol. 

Beyer,  G. J.  (2010),  ‘Recovering  Solidarity –  Lessons  from  Poland’s  unfinished  revolution’, 
University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame. 

BIOMED  II  Project  (1998),  ‘The  Barcelona  Declaration  on  Policy  Proposals  to  the  European 
Commission 
Biolaw’, 
http://hrlibrary.umn.edu/instree/barcelona.html. 

Principles 

Bioethics 

Ethical 

Basic 

and 

on 

in 

Boin,  A.  (2019),  ‘The  transboundary  crisis:  Why  we  are  unprepared  and  the  road  ahead’, 
Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, Vol. 27, No 1, pp. 94-99. 

Boin,  A.,  McConnell,  A.  and  ’t  Hart,  P.  (2021),  ‘Governing  the  Pandemic –  The  politics  of 
navigating a mega-crisis’, Springer Nature. 

Brunkhorst,  H.  (2005),  ‘Solidarity:  from  civic  friendship  to  a  global  legal  community’,  MIT 
Press, Cambridge. 

Calliess, C. (2022a), in: Calliess, C. and Ruffert, M. (eds),  EUV/AEUV – Das Verfassungsrecht 
der  Europäischen  Union  mit  Europäischer  Grundrechtecharta  (“TEU/TEUF  –  The  Constitutional 
Law of the European Union including the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights”), Kommentar. 6. 
Aufl., C.H. Beck, Munich, Art. 222 TFEU, Recital 2. 

Calliess, C. (2022b), in: Calliess, C. and Ruffert, M. (eds), EUV/AEUV – Das Verfassungsrecht 
der Europäischen Union mit Europäischer Grundrechtecharta, Kommentar, 6. Aufl., C.H. Beck, 
Munich, Art. 194 TFEU, Recital 5, 6. 

Campanelli, D. (2011), ‘Principle of solidarity’, in: Wolfrum, R. (Ed.), Max Planck Encyclopedia 
Press,  
of 
https://opil.ouplaw.com/view/https://doi.org/10.1093/law:epil/9780199231690/law-
9780199231690-e2072?rskey=mUxydQ&result=1&prd=MPIL. 

International 

University 

Oxford 

Public 

Law, 

Daniels, N. (2000), ‘Accountability for reasonableness’, The BMJ, Vol. 321, No 7272, pp. 1300–
1301. 

Dawson,  A.  and  Jennings,  B.  (2012),  ‘The  place  of  solidarity  in  public  health  ethics’,  Public 
Health Reviews, 34(1), pp.1-15. 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 31 

 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

Delaporte,  I.,  Escobar,  J.  and  Peña,  W.  (2021),  ‘The  distributional  consequences  of  social 
distancing  on  poverty  and  labour  income  inequality  in  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean’, 
Journal of Population Economics, Vol. 34, No 4, pp. 1385–1443. 

European  Group  on  Ethics  in  Science  and  New  Technologies  (EGE)  (2021),  ‘Values  for  the 
Future:  The  role  of  ethics  in  European  and  global  governance’,  Publications  Office  of  the 
European Union, Luxembourg, https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/595827. 

EGE (2020), ‘Statement on European solidarity and the protection of fundamental rights in the 
COVID-19 
pandemic’,  
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/research_and_innovation/ege/ec_rtd_ege-
statement-covid-19.pdf.   

Dorling, D. (2019), ‘Inequality and the 1%’, Verso, London. 

Durkheim, E. (1984), ‘The division of Labour in Society’, Macmillan, New York. 

Ewuoso, C., Obengo, T. and Atuire, C. (2022), ‘Solidarity, Afro-communitarianism, and COVID-
19 vaccination’, Journal of Global Health, 12. 

Federico, V. (2018), ‘Conclusion: Solidarity as a Public Virtue?’, in: Federico, V. & Lahusen, C. 
(Eds.), Solidarity as a Public Virtue? Law and Public Policies in the European Union, Nomos, pp. 
495-541. 

Fischhoff,  B.  and  Davis,  A. L.  (2014),  ‘Communicating  scientific  uncertainty’,  Proceedings  of 
the 
pp. 13664–13671. 
https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1317504111. 

Sciences, 

Academy 

Suppl. 4, 

Vol. 111, 

National 

of 

Fischhoff,  B.,  Wong-Parodi,  G.,  Garfin,  D. R.,  Holman,  E. A.  and  Silver,  R. C.  (2018),  ‘Public 
understanding  of  Ebola  risks:  Mastering  an  unfamiliar  threat’,  Risk  Analysis,  Vol. 38,  No 1, 
pp. 71–83. 

Fiske,  A.,  Galasso,  I.,  Eichinger,  J.,  McLennan,  S.,  Radhuber,  I.,  Zimmermann,  B.  and 
Prainsack,  B.  (2022),  ‘The  second  pandemic:  Examining  structural  inequality  through 
reverberations  of  COVID-19  in  Europe’,  Social  Science  &  Medicine,  Vol. 292,  Elsevier, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2021.114634. 

Group  of  Chief  Scientific  Advisors  of  the  European  Commission  (GCSA)  (2019),  ‘Scientific 
advice  to  European  policy  in  a  complex  world’,  Scientific  Opinion  No 7,  Publications  Office  of 
the European Union, Luxembourg, https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/80320. 

GCSA,  EGE  and  Piot,  P.  (2020a),  ‘Improving  Pandemic  Preparedness  and  Management – 
Lessons  learned  and  ways  forward’,  Publications  Office  of  the  European  Union,  Luxembourg, 
https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/370440. 

GCSA,  EGE  and  Piot,  P.  (2020b),  ‘Statement  on  scientific  advice  to  European  policymakers 
during  the  COVID-19  pandemic’,  Publications  Office  of  the  European  Union,  Luxembourg, 
https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/854269. 

GCSA  (2022),  ‘Strategic  Crisis  Management  in  the  EU’,  Scientific  Opinion  No  13,  Publications 
Office of the European Union, Luxembourg. 

Germani, F. and Biller-Andorno, N. (2021), ‘The anti-vaccination infodemic on social media: A 
behavioral analysis’, PLOS ONE, Vol. 16, No 3, https://doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0247642. 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 32 

 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

Global Research Collaboration for Infectious Disease Preparedness (GloPID-R) (2019), ‘GloPID-
R  roadmap  for  data  sharing  in  public  health  emergencies’,  https://www.glopid-r.org/wp-
content/uploads/2019/06/glopid-r-roadmap-for-data-sharing.pdf. 

Habermas,  J.  (1990),  ‘Discourse  ethics:  Notes  on  philosophical  justification’,  in:  Moral 
Consciousness  and  Communicative  Action,  trans.  Lenhardt,  C.  and  Weber  Nicholson,  S.,  MIT 
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 

Hassoun,  N.  (2021),  ‘Against  vaccine  nationalism’,  Journal  of  Medical  Ethics,  Vol. 47,  No 11, 
pp. 773–774. 

Jonas,  H.  (1979),  ‘The  Imperative  of  Responsibility –  In  search  of  an  ethics  for  the 
technological age’, University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 

Hussain,  W.  (2018),  ‘The  common  good’,  The  Stanford  Encyclopedia  of  Philosophy  (spring 
2018 
(ed.), 
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2018/entries/common-good  (accessed  20  September 
2022). 

edition), 

Zalta, 

E. N. 

Joebges,  S.  and  Biller-Andorno,  N.  (2020),  ‘Ethics  guidelines  on  COVID-19  triage –  An 
emerging 
No 201, 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13054-020-02927-1. 

international 

consensus’, 

Vol. 24, 

Critical 

Care, 

Joebges,  S.,  Vinay,  R.,  Luyckx,  V.  and  Biller-Andorno,  N.  (2020b),  ‘Recommendations  on 
COVID-19  triage –  International  comparison  and  ethical  analysis’,  Bioethics,  Vol. 34,  No 9, 
pp. 948–959, https://doi.org/10.1111/bioe.12805. 

Joseph,  J.  (2013),  ‘Resilience  as  embedded  neoliberalism:  A  governmentality  approach’, 
Resilience, Vol. 1, No 1, pp. 38–52, https://doi.org/10.1080/21693293.2013.765741. 

Koroma,  A.G.  (2012),  ‘Solidarity:  Evidence  of  an  emerging  international  legal  principle’,  in: 
Hestermeyer,  H.P.  et  al.  (eds),  Coexistence,  Cooperation  and  Solidarity, Vol. 1, Nijhoff 2012, 
pp. 103-131, p. 103. 

Lahusen,  C.  and  Federico,  V.  (2018),  ‘Introduction’,  in:  Federico,  V.  and  Lahusen,  C.  (Eds.). 
Solidarity as a Public Virtue? Law and Public Policies in the European Union, Nomos, pp. 11-32. 

Levinas, E. (1974), ‘Humanisme de l’autre homme’, LGF – Livre de Poche. 

Levinas, E. (1974), ‘Autrement qu’être ou au-delá de l’essence’, Livre de Poche. 

Lenaerts, K. and Gerard, D. (2004), ‘The structure of the Union according to the Constitution 
of Europe: The emperor is getting dressed’, European Law Review, Vol. 29, No 3, pp. 289–322. 

Mackenzie,  C.  and  Stoljar,  N.  (eds)  (2000),  ‘Relational  Autonomy:  Feminist  perspectives  on 
autonomy, agency, and the social self’, Oxford University Press. 

Mallia, P. (2015), ‘Towards an ethical theory in disaster situations’, Medicine, Health Care and 
Philosophy, Vol. 18, pp. 3–11. 

Marks, S. P. (1981), ‘Emerging human rights: A new generation for the 1990s?’, Rutgers Law 
Review, Vol. 33. 

Marmot,  M.,  Allen,  J.,  Goldblatt,  P.,  Herd,  E.  and  Morrison,  J.  (2021), ‘Build  Back  Fairer:  The 
COVID-19 Marmot Review – The pandemic, socioeconomic and health inequalities in England’, 
Institute of Health Equity, London. 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 33 

 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

Mendoza, R. U. (2011), ‘Crises and inequality: Lessons from the global food, fuel, financial and 
economic crises of 2008–10’, Global Policy, Vol. 2, No 3, pp. 259–271. 

Minnerop,  P.,  Roht-Arriaza,  N.  and  Aminzadeh,  S. C.  (2018),  ‘Solidarity  rights  (development, 
peace,  environment,  humanitarian  assistance)’,  in:  Max  Planck  Encyclopedia  of  Public 
International Law, Oxford University Press, pp. 825–836. 

Molm,  L.,  Collett,  J.  L.  and  Schaefer,  D.  R.  (2007),  ‘Building  Solidarity  through  Generalized 
Exchange: A Theory of Reciprocity’, American Journal of Sociology, 113(1), p. 205-242. 

Moonen,  G.  (2021),  ‘Solidarity  in  the  face  of  a  clear  and  present  danger’,  in:  Disasters  and 
Crisis Management – Journal No 3, European Court of Auditors, pp. 5–6. 

Napoli, E. di and Russo, D. (2015), ‘Solidarity in the European Union in times of crisis: Towards 
“European solidarity”?’, in: Federico, V. and Lahusen, C. (eds), Solidarity as a Public Virtue? – 
Law and public policies in the European Union, Nomos, pp. 195–248. 

Patrão  Neves,  M.  (2020),  ‘Ethical  health  resources  allocation:  Why  the  distinction  between 
“rationing”  and  “rationalization”  matters’,  Revista  de  Bioética  y  Derecho,  pp.  63-79, 
https://doi.org/10.1344/rbd2020.50.32044. 

Peek, N., Sujan, M. and Scott, P. (2020), ‘Digital health and care in pandemic times: Impact of 
COVID-19’, BMJ Health & Care Informatics, Vol. 27, No 1. 

Pittsburgh  Post-Gazette  (2020),  ‘CMU  expert:  In  times  of  crisis,  people  want  facts,  not  spin’, 
https://www.post-gazette.com/news/health/2020/03/08/CMU-expert-In-times-of-crisis-
people-don-t-want-spin-they-want-facts/stories/202003080075 (accessed 7 July 2022). 

Prainsack, B. and Buyx, A. (2011), ‘Solidarity: reflections on an emerging concept in bioethics’, 
Nuffield Council on Bioethics, London, p. 63. 

Prainsack,  B.  and  Buyx,  A.  (2017),  ‘Solidarity  in  biomedicine  and  beyond’,  Cambridge 
University Press, Vol. 33. 

Prainsack,  B.  (2022),  ‘Beyond  vaccination  mandates:  Solidarity  and  freedom  during  COVID-
19’, American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 112, No 2, pp. 232–233. 

RDA  COVID-19  Working  Group  (2020),  ‘Recommendations  and  guidelines  on  data  sharing’, 
Research Data Alliance, https://doi.org/10.15497/rda00052.  

Rittel,  H. W. J.  and  Webber,  M. M.  (1973),  ‘Dilemmas  in  a  general  theory  of  planning’,  Policy 
Sciences, Vol. 4, No 2, pp. 155–169. 

Rousseau,  J.-J.  (1949),  ‘The  social  contract’,  in:  Arnhart,  L.,  Political  Questions –  Political 
philosophy from Plato to Pinker, Northern Illinois University, Chicago. 

Sahlin, N.-E. and Schwaag Serger, S. (2022), ‘Decision-making in a time of spin and unspoken 
values’,  in:  Benner,  M.,  Marklund,  G.  and  Schwaag  Serger,  S.  (eds),  Smart  Policies  for 
Societies  in  Transition:  The  innovation  challenge  of  inclusion,  resilience  and  sustainability, 
Edward Elgar, Cheltham, pp. 228–244. 

Sanders D. (1991), ‘Collective rights’, Human Rights Quarterly, Vol. 13, No 3, pp. 368–386. 

Schmidt,  H.,  Roberts,  D. E.  and  Eneanya,  N. D.  (2022),  ‘Rationing,  racism  and  justice: 
Advancing the debate around “colourblind” COVID-19 ventilator allocation’, Journal of Medical 
Ethics, Vol. 48, No 2, pp. 126–130, https://doi.org/10.1136/medethics-2020-106856. 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 34 

 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

Scholz,  S. J.  (2014),  ‘Solidarity  as  a  human  right’,  Archiv  des  Völkerrechts,  Vol. 52,  No 1, 
pp. 49-67. 

Schröder, M. (2014), ‘Precautionary Approach/Principle’, in: Max Planck Encyclopedia of Public 
International Law, Oxford University Press. 

Schwarz,  S.  (2018),  ‘Resilience  in  psychology:  A  critical  analysis  of  the  concept’,  Theory  & 
Psychology, Vol. 28, No 4, pp. 528–541. 

Science Advice for Policy by European Academies (SAPEA) (2019), ‘Making sense of science for 
policy  under  conditions  of  complexity  and  uncertainty’,  Evidence  Review  Report  No 6, 
https://doi.org/10.26356/MASOS. 

SAPEA  (2022),  ‘Strategic  crisis  management  in  the  European  Union’,  Evidence Review Report 
No 11. 

Scientific  American  (anon.)  (2022),  ‘Get  ready  for  the  next  one –  Contagions  worse  than 
COVID  will  prevail  if  neglect  of  global  public  health  continues’,  Scientific  American,  special 
issue, p. 8. 

Silverstein,  S.  (2021),  ‘What  do  we  learn  from  past  pandemics?’,  invited  lecture  at  the 
Pandemic 
https://www.meduniwien.ac.at/web/en/ueber-
uns/events/2021/pandemic-forum-2021/ (accessed 15 June 2022). 

Forum 

2021, 

Slaughter,  A. M.  (2005),  ‘Security,  solidarity  and  sovereignty:  The  grand  themes  of  UN 
reform’, American Journal of International Law, Vol. 99, No 3, pp. 619–631. 

Spahl, W., Pot, M. and Paul, K. T. (2022), ‘Understanding compliance as multi-faceted: Values 
and  practices  during  the  COVID-19  pandemic  in  Austria’,  Critical  Public  Health  (online), 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09581596.2022.2039379. 

Spitale,  G.,  Merten,  S.,  Jafflin,  K.,  Schwind,  B.,  Kaiser-Grolimund,  A.  and  Biller-Andorno,  N. 
(2021),  ‘A  novel  risk  and  crisis  communication  platform  to  bridge  the  gap  between  policy 
makers  and  the  public  in  the  context  of  the  COVID-19  crisis  (PubliCo):  Protocol  for  a  mixed 
methods study’, JMIR Research Protocols, Vol. 10, No 11, https://doi.org/10.2196/33653. 

Spitale,  G.,  Germani,  F.  and  Biller-Andorno,  N.  (2022),  ‘An  ethical  framework  for  planning, 
governing,  and  evaluating  risk  and  crisis  communication  in  the  context  of  public  health 
emergencies’, manuscript under review. 

Sternø, S. (2005), ‘Solidarity in Europe. The History of an Idea’, Cambridge University Press. 

Terhechte,  J.P.  (2017),  in:  Pechstein,  M.,  Nowak,  C.  and  Häde,  U.  (eds),  Frankfurter 
Kommentar EUV/GRC/AEUV, Art. 2 EUV, Recital 28, 29, Mohr Siebeck, Tübingen. 

Tranow,  U.  (2012),  ‘Das  Konzept  der  Solidarität:  Handlungstheoretische  Fundierung  eines 
soziologischen Schlüsselbegriffs’, Springer VS. 

UNESCO, 
Universal 
http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-
URL_ID=31058&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html. 

Declaration 

Bioethics 

and 

on 

Human 

Rights, 

2005, 

UN  Human  Rights  Council,  ‘Human  rights  and  international  solidarity’,  note  by  the  United 
Nations 
July 
for 
2009, A/HRC/12/27, https://www.refworld.org/docid/4a9d1bec0.html. 

Commissioner 

Human 

Rights, 

High 

22 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 35 

 
 
Values in times of crisis: Strategic crisis management in the EU 

United  Nations  General  Assembly,  Resolution  55/2  (2000),  ‘United  Nations  Millennium 
Declaration’, A/RES/55/2, paragraph 6, http://undocs.org/en/A/RES/55/2. 

United  Nations  General  Assembly,  Resolution  56/151  (2001),  ‘Promotion of  a  democratic  and 
equitable 
paragraph 3(f), 
http://undocs.org/en/A/RES/56/151. 

A/RES/56/151, 

international 

order’, 

Vinay, R., Baumann, H. and Biller-Andorno, N. (2021), ‘Ethics of ICU triage during COVID-19’, 
British Medical Bulletin, Vol. 138, No 1, pp. 5–15, https://doi.org/10.1093/bmb/ldab009. 

Stiglitz,  J. E.  (2012),  ‘The  Price  of  Inequality –  How  today’s  divided  society  endangers  our 
future’, W. W. Norton & Company, New York. 

Have, H. ten (2016), ‘Vulnerability – Challenging bioethics’, Routledge, London. 

Wagenaar,  H.  and  Prainsack,  B.  (2021),  ‘The  Pandemic  Within –  Policy  making  for  a  better 
world’, Policy Press, Bristol. 

Wallin, A. (2021), ‘Okunskap och riskkommunikation. Att knuffa eller ge en karta’ (Ignorance 
and risk communication – To nudge or to provide a map), Statsvetenskaplig tidskrift. 

Wellens,  K.  (2005),  ‘Solidarity  as  a  constitutional  principle:  Its  expanding  role  and  inherent 
limitations’, 
(eds),  Towards  World 
Consitutionalism –  Issues  in  the  legal  ordering  of  the  world  community,  Martinus  Nijhoff, 
Leiden, Boston. 

in:  Macdonald,  R. St. J.  and 

Johnston,  D. M. 

Wernli,  D.,  Clausin,  M.,  Antulov-Fantulin,  N.,  Berezowski,  J.,  Biller-Andorno,  N.,  Blanchet,  K., 
Böttcher, L., Burton-Jeangros, C., Escher, G., Flahault, A., Fukuda, K., Helbing, D., Jaffé, P. D., 
Jørgensen,  P. S.,  Kaspiarovich,  Y.,  Krishnakumar,  J.,  Lawrence,  R. J.,  Lee,  K.,  Léger,  A., 
Levrat,  N.,  Martischang,  R.,  Morel,  C. M.,  Pittet,  D.,  Stauffer,  M.,  Tediosi,  F.,  Vanackere,  F., 
Vassalli,  J. D.,  Wolff,  G.  and  Young,  O.  (2021),  ‘Building  a  multisystemic  understanding  of 
societal  resilience 
the  COVID-19  pandemic’,  BMJ  Global  Health,  Vol. 6,  No 7, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmjgh-2021-006794. 

to 

Wester,  G.  (2018),  ‘When  are  health  inequalities  unfair?’,  Public  Health  Ethics,  Vol. 11,  No 3, 
pp. 346–355. 

West-Oram,  P.  (2021),  ‘Solidarity  is  for  other  people:  Identifying  derelictions  of  solidarity  in 
responses to COVID-19’, Journal of Medical Ethics, Vol. 47, No 2, pp. 65–68. 

Wilkinson, R. and Pickett, K. (2011), ‘The Spirit Level – Why greater equality makes societies 
stronger’, Bloomsbury Publishing, New York. 

Wolfrum, R. (2010), ‘Concluding remarks’, in: Wolfrum, R. and Kojima, C. (eds), Solidarity: A 
structural principle of international law, Springer, pp. 225–228. 

World Health Organization (2020), ‘Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) – Events as they happen’, 
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/events-as-they-happen 
(accessed 8 July 2022). 

World  Health  Organization  (n.d.),  ‘Health  topics –  Infodemic’,  https://www.who.int/health-
topics/infodemic#tab=tab_1 (accessed 8 July 2022). 

European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies 36 

 
 
GETTING IN TOUCH WITH THE EU

In person
All over the European Union there are hundreds of Europe Direct centres. You can find the address of the 
centre nearest you online (european-union.europa.eu/contact-eu/meet-us_en).

On the phone or in writing
Europe Direct is a service that answers your questions about the European Union.  
You can contact this service: 

– by freephone: 00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11 (certain operators may charge for these calls), 
– at the following standard number: +32 22999696, 
– via the following form: european-union.europa.eu/contact-eu/write-us_en.

FINDING INFORMATION ABOUT THE EU

Online
Information about the European Union in all the official languages of the EU is available on the Europa  
website (european-union.europa.eu).

EU Publications
You can view or order EU publications at op.europa.eu/en/publications. Multiple copies of free publications 
can be obtained by contacting Europe Direct or your local documentation centre (european-union.europa.eu/
contact-eu/meet-us_en).

EU law and related documents
For access to legal information from the EU, including all EU law since 1951 in all the official language 
versions, go to EUR-Lex (eur-lex.europa.eu).

EU open data
The portal data.europa.eu provides access to open datasets from the EU institutions, bodies and agencies. 
These can be downloaded and reused for free, for both commercial and non-commercial purposes. The portal 
also provides access to a wealth of datasets from European countries.

Values play an important role in how we understand, make sense of, 
and tackle crises. They influence how we frame the problems that crisis 
management is supposed to address, and how we choose the instruments 
for that. 

The EGE points to the importance of human dignity and solidarity being at 
the core of crisis management, with processes of deliberation that make 
values explicit. It shows how public, common and individual interests are 
intertwined; it outlines how values should direct the prioritisation of scarce 
resources; and it highlights the importance of data, good communication, 
and public trust. From these considerations the EGE draws a set of 
recommendations for policy makers and other stakeholders.

Research and Innovation policy

