EUROPEAN GROUP ON ETHICS IN SCIENCE AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES 

Statement 
in support of Ukraine and the people of Ukraine 
and 
in support of peace, solidarity, and fundamental rights. 

We stand with Ukraine in the face of Russia’s appalling and unacceptable military aggression. 

These testing times call upon us all to give meaning to the values we hold dear. 
We stand with the refugees and with all those who extend a helping hand to others in times of need. 
We stand with the people of Ukraine. May their courage inspire courage in others. 

____ 

The European Union is a union of values. The European project is a project of peace. This is our 
strength.  Now  it  is  not  only  Ukraine  that  is  under  attack,  but  also  these  values  and  this  project: 
democracy  and  the  rule  of  law,  human  dignity  and  human  rights,  the  very  notion  of  a  rules-based 
international  order.1  The  current  moment  is  a  reminder  of  the  fragility  of  these  values  and  this 
project – and of the need to protect them and to stand alongside all those who uphold them.  
We stand with the people of Ukraine. We stand with the refugees – of this and all other conflicts – and 
with those who offer them support and warmth and welcome. We stand with all those who suffer the 
consequences of autocratic regimes. 

Democracy  is  intimately  linked  to  freedom  of  expression,  and  to  matters  of  information  and 
disinformation. A wider reckoning is in order in that regard and this war is an additional wakeup call. 
As to the evolving hybrid nature of warfare today and the importance of digital technologies therein. 
As  to the need to  continue to  develop a  coherent  policy  framework  concerning  the  responsibility  of 
platforms and also concerning the regulation of technological sanctions.2  
Democracy  is  also  linked  to  academic  freedom,  the  autonomy  of  science  and  research,  and  the 
possibilities of research cooperation. Science and ethics are a cooperative endeavour. Such is the task 
ahead  and  the  history  of  the  EGE  and  its  sister  organisations  at  international  and  national  levels: 
advancing together the ethics and governance of science and technologies,  across  borders, under the 
headings of ethics diplomacy and science diplomacy.  
This war reminds us that we should seek to actively shape our future on the foundation of the values 
we hold dear.  
We need to work together, now more than ever, to address pressing global challenges, from pandemics 
to climate change. 

This  tragedy  has  thrown  into  sharp  relief  Europe’s  fraught  reliance  on  Russian  fossil  fuels 
exports – and, more fundamentally, Europe’s dangerous dependence on fossil fuels. This conflict has 
made the need to proceed to a wise energy transition even clearer. A sustainable approach considering 
all ins and outs and focusing on environmentally-friendly alternatives, on renewable energy sources.3  
Nuclear  disarmament  is  also  starkly  at  stake  here.  The  tragedy  unveiled  on  24  February  2022  is  a 
crucial reminder of the need to move resolutely beyond the remnants of the Cold-War era’s “mutually 
assured destruction” deterrence regime.  
Ours is a substantive call for peace, peace building, diplomacy and engagement, not just in times of 
war but as an ongoing duty of care. 

1 See EGE Statement Values for the future: The role of ethics in European and global governance. 

2 See EGE Statement The ethics of artificial intelligence, robotics and 'autonomous' systems. 

3 See EGE Opinion An ethical framework for assessing research, production and use of energy. 

The European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies (the EGE) is the independent body appointed by the President of the European Commission that advises on  
all aspects of Commission policies and legislation where ethical, societal and fundamental rights dimensions intersect with the development of science and new technologies. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
