Defending  
DEMOCRACY in Europe
Addressing the threat of 
authoritarian populism and 
reinforcing democratic practice

European Group  
on Ethics in Science and
New Technologies

#EthicsGroup_EU

May 2024

This EGE Statement analyses factors that put democracy at risk and develops recommendations for 
the strengthening of a pluralistic European civic space.

Democracy is not merely a formal regime consisting of 
periodic free elections. It is committed to protecting and 
promoting fundamental rights and values, as well as 
practices of lived democracy. Our democratic ethos, 
situated in relations of reciprocity and solidarity among 
citizens, needs to be nurtured, through dialogue between 
politicians and citizens, and by strong and meaningful 
participation of citizens in civic and political life.

Authoritarian  populism  is  incompatible 
with  this  conception  of  democracy.  It  is 
characterised by antagonism against civil society 
organisations, media, and other entities that stand 
up for the rule of law and the interests of the 
people and minorities.

SO WHAT IS NEEDED NOW?

 ‣ We need an understanding of identity which is 
not  defined  by  exclusionary  categories  such 
as territory, nation, ethnicity or religion – but which 
transcends these, appreciates plurality, and creates 
a sense of (transnational, European) belonging by 
building on values and their translation into civic 
practices.
This could help to strengthen  people’s  partici-
pation in society and their appreciation of the 
European endeavour.

 ‣ We  need  a  reorientation  of  Europe  to  its  social 
roots – understood as a commitment to providing 
a dignified life for everyone, avoiding grave levels of 
social and economic inequality.
This would also help to provide protection against 
the rise of far-right authoritarianism.

© European Union, 2024  
Image & icons: © pronoia # 412001654, © KP Arts # 373675152, © spiral media 
#123852944, 2024. © SkyLine #550096463, © Yurii  #302175964, 2020.  
Source: stock.adobe.com.  
Publications Office of the European Union, 2024. 
KI-09-24-305-EN-N  |  ISBN 978-92-68-15675-9  |  doi:10.2777/738935

RECOMMENDATIONS

Renewing  our  understanding  of  democracy  and  making 
substantive participatory democracy real, which involves 
ongoing public consultation and deliberation.

Strong and sufficiently funded public infrastructures (for 
housing, health, education etc.) as a precondition for civic and 
political engagement.

Support  for  European  public  spaces,  such  as  (non- 
commercial) deliberative platforms, including digital social 
spaces,  that  encourage  citizen  involvement  in  European 
decision-making.

Active encouragement of intermediary structures, including 
associative democracy – the self-organisation of citizens in 
grass-roots associations that identify and solve problems at 
local and regional levels.

Encouragement of a strong administrative and civic ethos 
in public administration that works with civic associations; 
indeed  a  transformed  interplay  between  citizens  and  the 
existing institutions of decision-making – on the basis of a 
pluralistic Europe as a community of values.

Analysing how law, including legal processes, are at risk of 
being hollowed out and repurposed by authoritarian populist 
leaders – and resisting this.

Reinforcing mechanisms that secure and support fact and 
value-based collective memory of our European history; 
recognising the contribution of the research community to 
strengthen democracy; measuring the wellbeing of societies 
in a more comprehensive sense.

This is a summary of a Statement by the European Group on Ethics in Science 
and New Technologies (EGE). The EGE is the independent multidisciplinary body 
appointed by the President of the European Commission that advises on all aspects 
of Commission policies and legislation where ethical, societal and fundamental rights 
dimensions intersect with the development of science and new technologies.

Read the EGE Statement here.

Research andInnovation